MARX & ENGELS
COLLECTED WORKS
VOLUME 14
Marx and Engels 1855-56    
=====第1页=====
file:///G|/Temp/menewisbns/intros/meint_14.htm [31/08/2011 18:35:28]KARL MARX
FREDERICK ENGELS
Volume
14 
Marx and Engels 1855-56
2010
Lawrence & Wishart
Electric Book
=====第2页=====
file:///D|/Temp/menewisbns/me14.htm [09/12/2010 14:56:12]Editorial commissions:
GREAT BRITAIN: Jack Cohen, Maurice Cornforth, MauriceDobb, E. J. Hobsbawm, James Klugmann, Margaret Mynatt.USA: James S. Allen, Philip S. Foner, Dirk J. Struik, William W.Weinstone.USSR: N. P. Karmanova, V. N. Pavlov, M. K. Shcheglova, T. Y.
Solovyova, Y. V. Yeremin, P. N. Fedoseyev, L. I. Golman, A. I.
Malysh, A. G. Yegorov, V. Y. Zevin.
Digital Edition Copyright © Lawrence & Wishart 2010Digital production: Electric BookISBN 978-1-84327-958-7 All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of
private study, research, criticism or review, no part of thispublication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, electrical,
chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner.
=====第3页=====
V 
Contents 
Preface XIII 
KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
February 1855-April 1856 
1. F. Engels. The Struggle in the Crimea 3 
2. K. Marx and F. Engels. Palmerston. —The Army 8 
3. K. Marx. From Parliament.—Gladstone at the Dispatch-
Box 12 
4. K. Marx. Lord Palmerston 14 
5. K. Marx. Herbert's Re-election.—The First Measures of the 
New Ministry.—News from India 21 
6. K. Marx. Parliament 24 
7. K. Marx. The Coalition between Tories and Radicals 29 
8. F. Engels. The War That Looms on Europe 32 
9. K. Marx and F. Engels. Parliamentary and Military Affairs 40 
10. K. Marx. On the New Ministerial Crisis 43 
11. K. Marx. Joseph Hume 47 
12. K. Marx. Palmerston 49 
13. K. Marx. The British Constitution 53 
14. K. Marx. Layard 57 
15. K. Marx. The Crisis in England 59 
16. K. Marx. The Buying of Commissions.—News from Aus­
tralia 63 
17. K. Marx. The English Press on the Late Tsar 67 

=====第4页=====
VI Contents 
18. K. Marx. On the History of the French Alliance 69 
19. K. Marx. The Committee of Inquiry 73 
20. K. Marx. The Brussels Memoire  76 
21. K. Marx. Ireland's Revenge 78 
22. F. Engels. The Results in the Crimea 81 
23. F. Engels. Fate of the Great Adventurer 86 
24. K. Marx and F. Engels. Criticism of the French Conduct of 
the War 90 
25. K. Marx. Agitation against Prussia.—A day of Fasting 94 
26.. K. Marx. A Meeting 98 
27. K. Marx. Reports from the English Press 102 
28. K. Marx. From Parliament 104 
29. F. Engels. Napoleon's Last Dodge 109 
30. F. Engels. A Battle at Sevastopol 113 
31. K. Marx. Some Observations on the History of the French 
Alliance 118 
32. K. Marx. Napoleon and Barbes. — The Newspaper Stamp 121 
33. K. Marx. The Committee of Inquiry 124 
34. K. Marx. The British Army 128 
35. F. Engels. Progress of the War 132 
36. F. Engels. The Situation in the Crimea 136 
37. K. Marx. A Scandal in the French Legislature.—Drouyn de 
Lhuys' Influence.—The State of the Militia 139 
38. K. Marx. Prospect in France and England 141 
39. F. Engels. Napoleon's Apology 146 
40. F. Engels. The Siege of Sevastopol 151 
41. F. Engels. Germany and Pan-Slavism 156 
42. F. Engels. The European Struggle 163 
43. K. Marx. On the History of Political Agitation 166 
44. F. Engels. From Sevastopol 170 
45. K. Marx. Pianori.— Dissatisfaction with Austria 177 
46. F. Engels. The New Move in the Crimea.. 180 
47. K. Marx. The Morning Post versus Prussia.—The Character 
of the Whigs and Tories 186 
48. K. Marx. A Sitting of the House of Lords 189 
49. K. Marx. The Agitation Outside Parliament 194 
50. K. Marx. Questions of Finance 198 
51. F. Engels. The Crimean War 201 
52. K. Marx. On the Reform Movement 208 

=====第5页=====
Contents VII 
53. K. Marx. A Critique of the Crimean Affair.—From Parlia­
ment 211 
54. F. Engels. The New French Commander 215 
55. K. Marx and F. Engels. Prologue at Lord Palmerston's.— 
Course of the Latest Events in the Crimea 218 
56. K. Marx. Parliamentary Reform.—The Break-off and Con­
tinuation of the Vienna Conference.—The So-Called War of 
Annihilation 222 
57. K. Marx. Disraeli's Motion 227 
58. K. Marx. From Parliament 231 
59. K. Marx. A Critique of Palmerston's Latest Speech 237 
60. K. Marx.The Association for Administrative Reform.— People's 
Charter 240 
61. K. Marx. Parliamentary 245 
62. F. Engels. From the Crimea 249 
63. F. Engels. A Critique of the Events in the Crimea 253 
64. K. Marx. The Great Parliamentary Debate 257 
65. F. Engels. Sevastopol 260 
66. F. Engels. Napoleon's War Plans 267 
67. K. Marx. Napier's Letters.—Roebuck's Committee 273 
68. K. Marx and F. Engels. The Debate on Layard's Motion.— 
The War in the Crimea 277 
69. K. Marx. Prince Albert's Toast.—The Stamp Duty on News­
papers 280 
70. K. Marx. Eccentricities of Politics 283 
71. K. Marx and F. Engels. The Local War.— Debate on Admi­
nistrative Reform.— Report of the Roebuck Committee, 
etc 287 
72. K. Marx. Announcement Concerning the Taking of Sevas­
topol.— From the Paris Bourse.—On the Massacre at Hangö 
in the House of Lords 292 
73. K. Marx. The Mishap of June 18.— Reinforcements 297 
74. K. Marx. Anti-Church Movement.— Demonstration in Hyde 
Park 302 
75. K. Marx. Miscellaneous Reports 308 
76. F. Engels. From Sevastopol 313 
77. K. Marx. Miscellaneous Reports 320 
78. K. Marx. Agitation over the Tightening-up of Sunday 
Observance 323 
79. F. Engels. The Late Repulse of the Allies 328 
80. K. Marx and F. Engels. Clashes between the Police and the 
People.—The Events in the Crimea 333 

=====第6页=====
VIII Contents 
81. K. Marx. From Parliament.—Roebuck's and Bulwer's Mo­
tions 337 
82. K. Marx. From the Houses of Parliament.—Bulwer's Mo­
tion.—The Irish Question 340 
83. F. Engels. The Great Crimean Blunder 344 
84. K. Marx and F. Engels. Russell's Resignation.—The Events in 
the Crimea 348 
85. K. Marx. Russell's Dismissal 352 
86. K. Marx. From Parliament 355 
87. F. Engels. War Prospects 358 
88. K. Marx and F. Engels. From Parliament.— From the Theatre 
of War 363 
89. K. Marx. Palmerston.—The Physiology of the Ruling Class 
of Great Britain 367 
90. K. Marx. Lord John Russell 371 
91. K. Marx. The Late Birmingham Conference 394 
92. F. Engels. The Armies of Europe 401 
93. K. Marx. General Simpson's Resignation.— From Parlia­
ment 470 
94. K. Marx. Commentary on the Parliamentary Proceedings 472 
95. K. Marx. The Military Forces against Russia 476 
96. K. Marx. The Poland Meeting 477 
97. K. Marx. On the Critique of Austrian Policy in the Crimean 
Campaign 481 
98. K. Marx and F. Engels. The Anglo-French War against Rus­
sia 484 
99. K. Marx. Events at the Theatres of War 490 
100.  K. Marx. Napier's Letter 493 
101.  K. Marx. Austria and the War 495 
102.  K. Marx and F. Engels. The Punishment of the Ranks 501 
103.  F. Engels. The Battle of the Chernaya 504 
104.  K. Marx. Another British Revelation 513 
105.  F. Engels. The Fall of Sevastopol 519 
106.  K. Marx. O'Connor's Funeral 524 
107.  F. Engels. Crimean Prospects , 525 
108.  K. Marx and F. Engels. Events in the Crimea 531 
109.  K. Marx. The Commercial and Financial Situation 534 
110.  F. Engels. The State of the War 537 
111.  K. Marx and F. Engels. The Reports of Generals Simpson, 
Pélissier and Niel 542 
112.  F. Engels. The Great Event of the War 546 

=====第7页=====
Contents IX 
113.  K. Marx. A Diplomatie Impropriety 553 
114.  K. Marx The Officiai Financial Report  554 
115.  K. Marx. The Bank of France. —Reinforcements to the 
Crimea.—The New Field Marshals 557 
116.  K. Marx. The Committee at Newcastle-upon-Tyne 560 
117.  F. Engels. Progress of the War 563 
118.  F. Engels. Aspects of the War 569 
119.  F. Engels. The Russian Army 575 
120.  K. Marx. Big Meeting in Support of Political Refugees 581 
121.  K. Marx. Traditional English Policy 584 
122.  F. Engels. The War in Asia 588 
123.  F. Engels. The European War 595 
124.  K. Marx. The American Difficulty.—Affairs of France 599 
125.  K. Marx. The Fall of Kars 605 
126.  K. Marx. The France of Bonaparte the Little 615 
127.  K. Marx. The Fall of Kars 621 
128.  K. Marx. Speech at the Anniversary of The People's Paper. 
Delivered in London, April 14, 1856 655 
129.  K. Marx. Prussia 657 
130.  K. Marx. The House of Lords and the Duke of York's 
Monument 662 
131.  K. Marx. To the Editor of The Free Press 672 
132.  K. Marx. Kars Papers Curiosities 673 
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 
133.  F. Engels. Crimean War 685 
APPENDICES 
134.  Austria's Weakness 689 
135.  Progress of the War 694 
NOTES AND INDEXES 
Notes 705 
Name Index 764 
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 795 
Index of Periodicals 816 
Subject Index 820 
Glossary of Geographical Names 832 

=====第8页=====
X Contents 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
Crimean War 1853-56. The Crimean Theatre 204-05 
Crimean War 1853-56. The siege of Sevastopol 330-31 
Chart of the Battle of the Chernaya (August 16, 1855) made by 
Engels  505 
Crimean War 1853-56. The general course of war 598-99 
Fragment of the first page of Marx's notes for his articles on the 
fall of Kars  607 
Engels' summary "Crimean War" 683 

=====第9页=====
TRANSLATORS: 
SUSANNE FLATAUER: 17, 18, 19, 20, 24, 25 
HUGH RODWELL: 89, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 102, 106, 108, 
109, 111, 114, 115 
PETER and BETTY ROSS: 4, 55, 82, 98, 133 
BARBARA RUHEMANN: 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 16, 26, 27, 
28, 31, 32, 33 
SALO RYAZANSKAYA: 21, 80, 84, 90 (I, II), 100, 113, 
116, 120 
BARRIE SELMAN: 37, 41, 43, 45, 47, 48, 49, 52, 53, 56, 
57, 58, 59, 61, 63, 64, 67, 68, 69, 71, 90 (III, IV, V, 
VI), 99 
CHRISTOPHER UPWARD: 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 
JOAN and TREVOR WALMSLEY: 36, 50, 72, 73, 75, 77, 
78, 81, 85, 86, 88 

=====第10页=====

=====第11页=====
XIII 
Preface 
Volume 14 of the Collected Works of Marx and Engels contains 
articles and newspaper reports written between February 9, 1855 
and April 25, 1856. Most of these items were published in the 
American newspaper the New-York Daily Tribune (and often 
reprinted in its special issues—the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune 
and the New-York Weekly Tribune), and also in the German 
democratic newspaper, the Neue Oder-Zeitung. As in previous years 
some items were published in the Chartist weekly The People's 
Paper. In the spring of 1856 Marx began to write occasionally for 
periodicals published by David Urquhart and his supporters— The 
Free Press (London) and The Sheffield Free Press. 
Writing for the comparatively progressive bourgeois press was 
the only effective means available to Marx and Engels at that time 
to communicate with a mass readership, and to influence public 
opinion in favour of proletarian communist ideas. Since a properly 
working-class and revolutionary democratic press was still so weak, 
they attached great importance to this channel of communication. 
The possibility of addressing the German reader through the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, the most radical of all the newspapers that remained 
in Germany in the mid-1850s, was particularly important. Marx 
wrote for the Neue Oder-Zeitung from December 1854 (the relevant 
section of his articles for this newspaper is published in Volume 13 
of the present edition) until November 1855, when due to serious 
financial difficulties and pressure from the censorship the editorial 
board was compelled to reduce the number of foreign correspon­
dents and later to cease publication of the newspaper entirely. He 
also sent to the Neue Oder-Zeitung military reviews written at his 
request by Engels for the New-York Daily Tribune, translating them 

=====第12页=====
XIV Preface 
into German and often shortening them and adapting them to the 
requirements of the German reader. In a number of cases Marx 
included the texts of the military reviews in his own contributions, 
supplementing them with other material (reviews of international 
and domestic events, parliamentary debates, etc.). 
The editorial board of the Neue Oder-Zeitung printed the 
material Marx sent them in its authentic form. On the other hand, 
the interference of the New-York Tribune editors with the text of 
articles by Marx and Engels, including arbitrary cuts and insertion 
of passages which contradicted the original content, became 
particularly frequent during this period. Thus, Marx's pamphlet 
Lord John Russell was published in the Tribune in an abridged 
form, one of Engels' articles on Pan-Slavism was arbitrarily 
revised, and many articles were supplemented with introductory, 
and sometimes also concluding, paragraphs to give them the 
appearance of having been written in the United States 
of Northern America (all these cases of editorial interference 
are indicated in the notes). Eventually the editorial board 
of the Tribune ceased almost entirely publishing articles by Marx 
under his name, printing them instead in the form of its own 
editorials. Although angered by such cavalier treatment, Marx 
and Engels nevertheless continued to write for the Tribune. They 
could not renounce the opportunity of contributing to this 
widely circulated newspaper, read not only in America but also 
in Europe. 
The present volume is largely a continuation of Volumes 12 and 
13 of the present edition. Among the numerous events which 
attracted the attention of Marx and Engels in 1855 and early 
1856,  the central place was still held by the Crimean War, which 
had entered its final stage and was accompanied, as in the 
preceding stages, by a bitter diplomatic struggle. They continued 
to analyse in their articles the economic condition of the European 
countries—England in particular—the domestic and foreign 
policy of the ruling classes, the state of the working-class and 
democratic movements, and the prospects for their development. 
Marx's and Engels' journalistic activity in this period was also 
closely intertwined with their theoretical researches, in particular, 
with Marx's studies in both political economy and foreign policy 
and diplomacy, and Engels' in military science, the history of the 
Slavonic peoples, and linguistics. At the same time, through their 
journalistic activities they accumulated new facts and observations 
which were then generalised in their scientific writings. Thus, the 
material Engels used in his regular reports on the Crimean War 

=====第13页=====
Preface XV 
was summarised by him in important works on military theory, 
like his series of articles, The Armies of Europe written for the 
American journal Putnam's Monthly and published in the present 
volume. Reports by factory inspectors and information on agrarian 
relations in Ireland, quoted in Marx's articles for the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, were later incorporated by him in Capital. 
Marx's and Engels' journalistic work played an important part in 
crystallising their sociological views. By analysing current events in 
their articles, they acquired an increasingly profound understand­
ing of the interconnection between historical processes, the laws of 
social development and class struggle. This is well illustrated by 
the contents of the present volume. Its articles and reports present 
a broad panorama of European social and political life during the 
mid-1850s against the background of continuing political reaction. 
They give a clear idea of the class structure of society at that time, 
the domestic and international conflicts of the day, the characteris­
tic features of the state and its various forms, the position of the 
political parties, of various organs of the press as their ideological 
mouthpieces, and the customs and morals of the ruling classes. 
Serious attention is devoted in these articles to the working-class 
and national liberation movements. 
The main aim of Marx's and Engels' journalistic writings during 
this period, as in previous years, was to provide the theoretical 
basis for the strategy and tactics of proletarian revolutionaries on 
cardinal questions of domestic and international policy, taking into 
account that in a large part of Europe the transition from the 
feudal system to capitalism had by no means been completed. The 
over-riding task was to effect the abolition of the vestiges of 
feudalism, the unification of politically divided countries, the 
liberation of oppressed nationalities. And this meant the revolution­
ary overthrow of the counter-revolutionary regimes which stood 
in the way of these transformations, and principally the Austrian, 
Prussian and Russian monarchies, the Bonapartist Second Empire, 
and the British bourgeois-aristocratic oligarchy. This was the way, 
in the opinion of Marx and Engels, to prepare for the working 
class winning political power in the capitalist countries. 
The revolutionary approach to current events is seen clearly in 
those articles by Marx and Engels in which they continued to 
analyse the causes of the outbreak and the true character of the 
Crimean War. The final stage of the war confirmed the 
conclusions of their previous articles and reports, during the 
period when the conflict between the European powers was 

=====第14页=====
XVI Preface 
coming to a head, and in the early stages of the military 
operations against Russia by the Anglo-Franco-Turkish coalition, 
which was later joined by Piedmont. Marx and Engels became 
even more firmly convinced of the falseness of the official attitude 
of the West European governments and press, which was that the 
war of England and France against Russia was being waged in the 
"national interest" to defend "freedom" and "civilisation" against 
the encroachments of "despotism". They showed convincingly in 
their articles that the war was the result of a clash of economic and 
military interests of the ruling classes of the states engaged in 
it—the struggle for the partition of the Ottoman Empire and for 
dominion in the Balkans and the Black Sea straits. Marx and 
Engels came to the conclusion that the counter-revolutionary 
standpoint and class self-interest of the West European 
bourgeoisie made it increasingly incapable of expressing and 
defending any national interests. "As soon as the effects of the 
war should become taxable upon their pockets," Marx wrote 
in the article "Prospect in France and England", "mercantile 
sense was sure to overcome national pride, and the loss of 
immediate individual profits was sure to outweigh the certainty 
of losing, gradually, great national advantages" (see this volume, 
p. 143). 
Marx and Engels concluded that bourgeois-aristocratic England 
and Bonapartist France, while striving to weaken Tsarist Russia as 
a rival in the Near East and the Balkans, to capture Sevastopol, to 
take the Crimea and the Caucasus away from Russia, and to 
destroy the Russian navy, had no interest whatever in the collapse 
of Tsarism. The conservative forces in Europe, headed by the 
governments of the West European states, needed the Tsarist 
autocracy as an instrument for repressing popular movements and 
so as one of the bulwarks of the system of capitalist exploitation. 
Above all, Western politicians feared the revolutionary conse­
quences of the collapse of the Russian autocracy, which would lead 
to the destruction of the foundation of the political system in Europe 
laid down by the Congress of Vienna in 1815. The Crimean War, 
Marx stressed in the article "Eccentricities of Politics", "is 
undertaken with a view not to supersede but rather to consolidate 
the Treaty of Vienna by the introduction, in a supplementary way, 
of Turkey into the protocols of 1815. Then it is expected 
the conservative millennium will dawn and the aggregate force 
of the Governments be allowed to direct itself exclusively 
to the 'tranquillization' of the European mind" (see this volume, 
p. 284). 

=====第15页=====
Preface XVII 
In the articles "From Parliament", "Napoleon's War Plans", 
"The Debate on Layard's Motion.— The War in the Crimea", "The 
Local War.—Debate on Administrative Reform.—Report of the 
Roebuck Committee" and others Marx and Engels showed that 
these counter-revolutionary aspirations of the ruling circles in 
Britain and France had left a profound imprint on their 
diplomacy, military plans and methods of warfare. Seeking to 
avoid any revolutionary consequences, the Allied states had 
launched military operations in one of Russia's outlying areas, 
away from the possible centres of the revolutionary and national 
liberation struggle. Marx and Engels revealed the hidded purpose 
behind the plan of "local war for local objects" put forward by 
the French Government and supported by the British Government 
(see this volume, p. 272). They showed that this strategy was by no 
means prompted by the desire to reduce the number of casualties 
and scale of destruction. The "local" Crimean War had inflicted 
enormous losses and bitter tribulations on the armies and peoples 
of the belligerents. The Anglo-French strategic plan was aimed at 
preventing the Crimean War from turning into a war of the 
peoples against Tsarism, a war which would have threatened the 
very existence of the anti-democratic system of government in 
Western Europe. 
To change the character of the war, and turn it into a war for 
the democratic reconstruction of Europe and the liberation of the 
oppressed nationalities, including the peoples of the Balkans who 
were under Turkish rule, depended on the level of activity of the 
proletarian and revolutionary-democratic masses. In place of 
anti-popular governments, Marx wrote, "other powers must step 
on to the stage" (see this volume, p. 289). In the articles "The 
Crisis in England", "Prospect in France and England" and others, 
Marx and Engels continued to show the working class and the 
revolutionary democrats how advantage could be taken of the 
military conflict to develop the movement against the existing 
counter-revolutionary regimes. Marx hoped that a revolutionary 
turn of events would "enable the proletarian class to resume that 
position which they lost, irt France, by the battle of June, 1848, 
and that not only as far as France is concerned* but for all Central 
Europe, England included" (see this volume, p. 145). 
Marx and Engels placed special hopes on the initiative of the 
French working class. In the article "Fate of the Great Adven­
turer" Engels wrote openly about the possibility of "the fourth 
and greatest French revolution" capable of producing an outbreak 
of powerful revolutionary and national liberation movements all 

=====第16页=====
XVIII Preface 
over the continent of Europe. "Germans, Hungarians, Poles, 
Italians, Croats are loosened from the forced bond which ties 
them together, and instead of the undetermined and haphazard 
alliances and antagonisms of today, Europe will again be divided 
into two great camps with distinct banners and new issues. Then 
the struggle will be only between the Democratic Revolution on 
one side and the Monarchical Counter-Revolution on the other" 
(see this volume, p. 89). 
The idea that the way out of the war lay in a popular revolution 
was the theme running through many articles by Marx and 
Engels. They sought to show the real instability not only of the 
domestic, but also of the foreign-policy positions of the counter­
revolutionary ruling circles, the contradictions between them 
in the international arena, and the vulnerability of their diplo­
macy. 
In particular, Marx and Engels revealed deep splits in the 
coalition of the European powers opposing Tsarist Russia. They 
noted the constant friction between its main participants, Britain 
and France, both in the conduct of military operations and in 
diplomatic talks (see the articles "Some Observations on the 
History of the French Alliance", "A Critique of the Crimean 
Affair.— From Parliament", "From the Crimea", "Another British 
Revelation", "The Reports of Generals Simpson, Pélissier and 
Niel", "The American Difficulty.—Affairs of France" and others). 
The collapse of the Anglo-French Alliance predicted by them soon 
took place, during the Congress of Paris in 1856, at which Russian 
diplomacy skilfully exploited the differences between the Western 
powers. 
Marx's article "Palmerston.—The Physiology of the Ruling Class 
of Great Britain", his pamphlet The Fall of Kars and Engels' military 
review "The War in Asia" revealed the colonialist aims underlying 
the policies of the Western powers, and their treachery in relation to 
their junior coalition partner—Turkey. Taking advantage of 
Turkey's backwardness, Marx noted, the governments of Britain and 
France, under the guise of defending the unity of the collapsing 
Ottoman Empire, had taken a new step towards its colonial 
subjection. They had set up effective control over its foreign policy, 
intervened in its internal affairs, and were laying a hand on Turkish 
finances (see this volume, p. 368). In The Fall of Kars, which has 
survived in several versions, Marx showed on the basis of facts and 
diplomatic material how frequently the Western statesmen — the 
British, in particular—took decisions concerning Turkey behind the 
back of the Turkish Government, using the weak Turkish army at 

=====第17页=====
Preface XIX 
their discretion and exposing it to attack. The moves of Western 
diplomacy in relation to the Ottoman Empire, Marx noted, 
constituted a web of intrigue and provocation aimed at using Turkey 
as small change in the diplomatic game of the great powers and 
increasing even more its dependence on the West. 
A number of articles in the present volume ("The European 
War" and others) were written by Marx and Engels when the 
outcome of the Crimean War was already predetermined. They 
could already sum it up to a certain extent: "The Anglo-French 
war against Russia will undoubtedly always figure in military 
history as 'the incomprehensible war'. Big talk combined with 
minimal action, vast preparations and insignificant results, caution 
bordering on timidity, followed by the foolhardiness that is born 
of ignorance, generals who are more than mediocre coupled with 
troops who are more than brave, almost deliberate reverses on the 
heels of victories won through mistakes, armies ruined by 
negligence, then saved by the strangest of accidents—a grand 
ensemble of contradictions and inconsistencies. And this is nearly 
as much the distinguishing mark of the Russians as of their 
enemies" (see this volume, p. 484). 
Marx's and Engels' hopes that the Crimean War would be 
turned into a war for revolutionary change in Europe were not 
realised. Apart from its influence on the internal development of 
Russia, it brought about no significant changes in the social and 
political structure of the European states. The question of the 
national independence of the peoples subject to the Ottoman 
Empire also remained unsolved. Nor did the war resolve the contra­
dictions which existed between the European powers on the 
Eastern and other questions. The Treaty of Paris in 1856 not only 
failed to settle the points of dispute, but engendered new, even 
more bitter conflicts. Marx called it a "sham peace" (see this 
volume, p. 623). 
Many of the journalistic works of Marx and Engels dealt with the 
effect of the war on the economic and social life in the main 
European countries. Participation in this large-scale military conflict, 
they noted, had put the existing anti-popular regimes to a serious 
test, which revealed their defects and inability to meet the new social 
requirements. War "puts a nation to the test", wrote Marx in the 
article "Another British Revelation". "As exposure to the atmos­
phere reduces all mummies to instant dissolution, so war passes 

=====第18页=====
XX Preface 
supreme judgment upon social organisations that have outlived their 
vitality" (see this volume, p. 516). 
Marx's main attention was devoted to capitalist Britain, where 
the contradictions between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat 
were more developed than in any other country at the time. In the 
articles "Questions of Finance", "The Commercial and Financial 
Situation", "The Crisis in England" and others, Marx analysed the 
state of the British economy. It provided, he stressed, a striking 
example of the operation of the general economic laws of capitalist 
society, in particular, the cyclical nature of capitalist production, the 
inevitable alternation of phases of prosperity and crisis. Marx 
showed that even within the limits of a given cycle the capitalist 
economy develops unevenly, in fits and starts, and is subject to the 
emergence of crisis phenomena. Thus, the period of economic 
prosperity which began at the end of the 1840s was repeatedly 
interrupted by stagnation in certain branches of industry and 
commerce in England, particularly in the textile industry. Marx 
noted an economic decline in late 1853 and early 1854 and another 
one in 1855. Analysing the tendencies which he had discovered in 
the economic life of Britain, and also on the world market, Marx 
predicted that in the near future Britain would undergo a more 
serious economic crisis than it had ever experienced before. This 
prediction was fully borne out in 1857, when the first world 
economic crisis broke out. 
Marx's articles "Palmerston", "The British Constitution", "The 
Morning Post versus Prussia.—The Character of the Whigs and 
Tories", "The House of Lords and the Duke of York's Monu­
ment" and a number of others contain an accurate description of 
Britain's traditional two-party system under which power was held in 
turn by the Whigs and Tories. "The British Constitution," Marx 
wrote, "is indeed nothing but an antiquated, obsolete, out-of-date 
compromise between the bourgeoisie, which rules not officially but in 
fact in all decisive spheres of civil society, and the landed aristoc­
racy, which governs officially" (see this volume, p. 53). 
One of the main supports of the regime of the bourgeois-
aristocratic oligarchy, Marx pointed out, was the aristocracy's 
monopoly of the key state offices. In many of his articles Marx 
showed that the oligarchical political system was an obstacle to the 
country's progressive development. The debates held in both houses 
of Parliament on various questions, which Marx closely analysed, 
showed clearly enough what was the class essence of the British 
Parliament. He revealed the hypocrisy and cupidity of the 
representatives of both the main political groupings, the obstacles 

=====第19页=====
Preface XXI 
they raised to the exposure of the scandalous abuses in the various 
departments of the state machine and to progressive reforms. 
Ah important contribution to his vivid description of the ruling 
oligarchy was the pamphlet Lord John Russell (see this volume, 
pp. 371-93). It provided an addition to Marx's gallery of portraits of 
leading nineteenth-century British politicians. In this pamphlet 
Marx showed that Russell's false, ostentatious liberalism, his political 
wiliness and time-serving, were fully in keeping with the whole 
character of the Whigs, that party of careerists who, like the Tories, 
were striving to strengthen the oligarchical regime, but in doing so 
showed greater flexibility and a readiness to make certain 
concessions to the industrial bourgeoisie. The struggle between the 
Whigs and Tories, Marx pointed out, was merely a quarrel between 
the two ruling factions of the aristocratic upper crust of the 
exploiting classes; the differences in their policies were becoming less 
and less marked. Bitter attacks on the government by one or other 
party when it was in opposition were a means of removing the rival 
party from power. Once in power, however, each party continued to 
follow the political course of its predecessor. 
Marx discovered more and more signs of the political disintegra­
tion of both the Whig and Tory parties, which he had noted when he 
first began to write for the Neue Oder-Zeitung (see present edition, 
Vol. 13). It was manifest in the bankruptcy of the political doctrines 
of these old aristocratic parties, their division into separate 
groupings, the increasing need to resort to manoeuvres and 
parliamentary alliances. Political instability was giving rise to the 
tendency to strengthen the personal power of the head of the 
government, which Marx noted, in particular, in the policy of 
Palmerston during the formation of his ministry in 1855 and in 
following years. In the article "Palmerston" Marx drew attention to 
the way in which this leader of the Right wing of the Whigs had 
assured by skilful manoeuvring such a composition of his Cabinet as 
left all the most important threads of government in his own hands. 
"This time we have not a Cabinet at all, but Lord Palmerston in lieu 
of a Cabinet" (see this volume, p. 50). 
The phenomena detected by Marx reflected a process that had 
begun under the influence of the drawing together of the interests of 
industrial capital and of the landed aristocracy and the commercial 
and financial magnates—the transformation of the Tories into the 
party of the big bourgeoisie, the Conservatives, and of the Whigs, 
around whom the middle and petty bourgeoisie were grouped, into 
the Liberal party. The latter were soon joined by representatives of 
the bourgeois opposition—the Free Traders. 

=====第20页=====
XXII Preface 
In his articles of this period Marx continued his trenchant criticism 
of the ideology and political positions of the Free Traders, using 
them to expose the class limitations of bourgeois liberalism as a 
whole. He again showed the illusions of the Free Traders' argument 
that capitalism could develop without crises, and exposed their 
hypocritical protestations about love of peace which concealed the 
striving of the British bourgeoisie to dominate the world market. 
The Manchester School, Marx stressed, was striving for peace "in 
order to wage industrial war at home and abroad" (see this volume, 
p. 258). Cobden, Bright and the other leaders of the Free Traders, 
he pointed out, while proclaiming themselves "champions of liberty" 
and "defenders" of the interests of the masses, in fact supported the 
cruel exploitation of the working class. Evidence of this was their 
encroachments on the institution of factory inspectors, who to a 
certain extent restrained the arbitrariness of employers, and their 
attempts to repeal the laws which limited the working day for 
women and children. 
In contrast to the false statements of the Free Traders about the 
"prosperity" of the English workers, Marx made use of reports by 
factory inspectors to show the terrible working conditions at 
capitalist factories and the constant growth in the number of 
industrial accidents, particularly among women and children. 
"The industrial bulletin of the factory inspectors," he wrote, "is 
more terrible and more appalling than any of the war bulletins 
from the Crimea. Women and children provide a regular and 
sizeable contingent in the list of the wounded and killed" (see this 
volume, p. 370). 
Bourgeois-aristocratic Britain was confronted by the working 
masses, first and foremost, the English industrial proletariat. Marx 
followed carefully every manifestation of discontent and revolution­
ary ferment among the masses both in Britain itself and in its 
colonies. Thus, in the article "The Buying of Commissions.— News 
from Australia" he noted that in the Australian state of Victoria 
resistance had been "initiated by the workers against the monopolists 
linked with the colonial bureaucracy" (see this volume, p. 65). 
Marx, who never ceased to take an interest in the fate of the 
oppressed Irish people, regarded Ireland, which was the arena of 
bitter social antagonism, as one of the permanent centres of popular 
discontent (see the article "Ireland's Revenge"). 
Opposition tendencies among the various social strata in Britain, 
including the working class, were also being promoted by David 
Urquhart and his supporters, who, despite their conservative world 
outlook, criticised the foreign policy of the ruling oligarchy. Marx 

=====第21页=====
Preface XXIII 
continued to attack Urquhart's views in the press. But nevertheless 
he thought it expedient to devote attention in his articles to the 
comparatively progressive activity of the committees on foreign 
affairs set up by Urquhart and his followers, which also included 
representatives of the workers ("The Late Birmingham Confer­
ence",  "The Committee at Newcastle-upon-Tyne"). 
Marx's main attention was directed to the English working-class 
movement—first and foremost, to the continuing attempts, despite 
the general decline of Chartism, of the leaders of its revolutionary 
wing to revive mass political agitation under the banner of the 
People's Charter. In the articles "Anti-Church Movement.— 
Demonstration in Hyde Park", "Clashes between the Police and the 
People.—The Events in the Crimea" Marx noted that the Chartists 
had succeeded in reviving to a certain extent the political activity of 
the working class, which found expression in mass popular 
demonstrations in London in the summer of 1855 against the 
parliamentary ban on Sunday trading. Marx praised the refusal of 
Ernest Jones and other Chartists to follow the lead of the bourgeois 
radicals, instead of which they continued to defend the independent 
positions of the working class and retain its political progamme in 
full, in spite of the radicals' intentions to replace the latter with 
"moderate" demands for administrative and other reforms. 
In the article "The Association for Administrative Reform.— 
People's Charter" Marx explained the historical significai.ee of the 
Chartist programme, the central point of which was the demand for 
universal suffrage. Adopting a historical approach to political 
slogans, he showed that whereas in France and on the Continent in 
general the demand for universal suffrage did not extend beyond 
the framework of bourgeois democracy, it had a different 
significance in England. "There it is regarded as a political question 
and here, as a social one," Marx noted. In England, where the 
working class constituted the majority of the population, he pointed 
out that the implementation of this and other points of the People's 
Charter could lead to a radical democratic transformation of the 
whole parliamentary system and the country's political structure by 
the proletarian masses, which would mean "the assumption of 
political power as a means of satisfying their social needs" (see this 
volume, pp. 242, 243). From these arguments it is clear that Marx at 
that time admitted the possibility of the English proletariat coming to 
power by peaceful means, unlike the countries on the Continent 
where, in his opinion, the working class could triumph only as a 
result of the forcible destruction of a military-bureaucratic state 
machine. 

=====第22页=====
XXIV Preface 
The Chartists' attempts to instil revolutionary energy in the 
English proletarian masses could not, however, arrest the decline 
of the Chartist movement, which was increasingly on the wane. 
This was due to the peculiarities of the development of British 
capitalism. The British bourgeoisie had succeeded by means of 
colonial conquests and profits and monopolies on the world market 
in chaining a significant section of the higher-paid skilled workers 
to the capitalist system, thereby splitting the working class 
and strengthening reformist tendencies in the British working-
class movement. Nevertheless right up to the end Marx never 
tired of encouraging his Chartist friends and urging them not to 
give way to difficulties and to keep faith in the coming proletarian 
revolution. 
On April 14, 1856 at a banquet in honour of the fourth 
anniversary of the publication of The  People's  Paper Marx delivered a 
speech full of revolutionary optimism. He spoke of the inevitable 
collapse of capitalism and the world historic mission of the working 
class as the social force called upon to overthrow the exploiting 
system. "History is the judge—its executioner, the proletarian" (see 
this volume, p. 656), 
Continuing to regard the struggle against Bonapartism as one of 
the most important tasks of the working class and revolutionary 
democracy, Marx and Engels sought to expose in their articles the 
close connection between the Bonapartist state's foreign and 
domestic policy. "It would be easy to demonstrate," we read in the 
article "Criticism of the French Conduct of the War" by Marx and 
Engels, "that the pretentious mediocrity with which the Second 
Empire is conducting this war is reflected in its internal 
administration, that here, too, semblance has taken the place of 
essence, and that the 'economic' campaigns were in no way any more 
successful than the military ones" (see this volume, p. 93). In this 
article, and also in the articles "Fate of the Great Adventurer", 
"Napoleon's Last Dodge", "The Local War.—Debate on Adminis­
trative Reform.—Report of the Roebuck Committee", "The 
American Difficulty.—Affairs of France" and others, Marx and 
Engels stressed that military adventurism was an intrinsic feature of 
Bonapartist policy, that conquest and aggression were one of the 
principles on which the political rule of the Bonapartist circles in 
France itself rested. 
Marx's article "The France of Bonaparte the Little" revealed the 
glaring contrast between official France, which was recklessly 
squandering the nation's wealth, and the France of the people, to 
whom the Bonapartist regime had brought poverty and police 

=====第23页=====
Preface XXV 
repression. In the heart of this France of the people, Marx 
emphasised, revolutionary ferment was maturing against the 
Bonapartist dictatorship, which betokened "the downfall of the 
Empire of Agio" (see this volume, p. 620). In the articles "The 
Reports of Generals Simpson, Pélissier and Niel" and "The Bank of 
France.—Reinforcements to the Crimea.—The New Field-
Marshals", Marx and Engels noted the deterioration of the political 
situation in France, drawing attention to the signs of growth in the 
revolutionary mood of the working class, the students and other 
strata of the population, and to the discontent displayed by a 
certain section of the bourgeoisie and even of the army, which had 
up till then served as a bulwark of the Second Empire. 
Marx and Engels continued to analyse in the press the events in 
Prussia, Austria and Tsarist Russia. The Crimean War had 
exposed the profound contradictions between these states and at 
the same time confirmed the common counter-revolutionary aims of 
their ruling circles, united by the attempt to preserve intact the 
reactionary systems within each of these countries and the 
corresponding pattern of international relations. Thus, as Marx 
repeatedly pointed out, the neutrality in the war proclaimed by the 
Prussian Government was dictated by fear of the revolutionary 
consequences of transferring the theatre of military operations to 
Central Europe. In the article "Prussia", Marx dealt with the political 
system of the Prussian monarchy, in which the formally proclaimed 
constitution served merely as a cover for the continuation of 
absolutism and its product-—an all-powerful bureaucracy. He notes 
the lack of rights of the majority of the population, the oppression of 
the peasantry which remained, as before, "under the direct yoke of 
the nobility", both administratively and judicially (see this volume, 
p. 661). At the same time Marx pointed to the rapid growth of 
industry and commerce, and the unprecedented wealth of the 
Prussian propertied classes—the Junkers and the bourgeoisie. But 
the latter remained, as always, politically passive and servile, which 
confirmed the opinion expressed by Marx and Engels as early as 
1848-49 that the German bourgeoisie was incapable of playing a 
leading role in the struggle for radical bourgeois-democratic 
demands. 
As to the ruling circles in the Austrian Empire, they were 
striving to obtain Turkish possessions in Europe, and so adopted a 
hostile attitude towards Russia as their main rival in the Balkans. In 
his reports "On the Critique of Austrian Policy in the Crimean 
Campaign" and "Austria and the War" Marx quoted documents 
that revealed the duplicity of the Austrian government's foreign 

=====第24页=====
XXVI Preface 
policy. Marx and Engels saw the cause of this in the internal 
weakness of the reactionary Habsburg Empire, which stemmed not 
only from the backwardness of its social system, but also from 
profound national antagonisms. Reaping the fruits of the centuries-
old oppression of the peoples who made up the Empire and fanning 
national enmity between them, the rulers of the Austrian Empire 
were in constant fear of an upsurge of the national liberation 
movements. It was these fears that held them back from open 
intervention in the military conflict. 
Quoting information in their articles about the situation in Russia, 
Marx and Engels drew attention to the difficulties experienced by 
the Tsarist autocracy in the course of the war, the exhaustion of its 
material resources, which were in any case limited by the serf system 
and the economic backwardness it engendered (see Engels' article 
"The State of the War" and other items). As Marx and Engels soon 
realised, the consequences of the Crimean War had a serious effect 
on the internal development of the Russian Empire. The defeat 
sustained by Tsarism, which showed, in the words of Lenin "the 
rottenness and impotence of feudal Russia" (V. I. Lenin, Collected 
Works, Vol. 17, p. 121), created the prerequisites for the maturing of 
a revolutionary situation in the country, which compelled the ruling 
classes to introduce reforms. "The Russian war of 1854-55," Marx 
remarked in a letter to Engels of October 8, 1858, "...has ... obviously 
hastened the present turn of events in Russia" (see present edition, 
Vol. 40). Later, in 1871, in a draft of The Civil War in France Marx 
again emphasised the connection between the abolition of serfdom 
in Russia in 1861 and other transformations. The Crimean War 
revealed the profound crisis of the whole social and political system 
of Tsarist Russia, even though it had "saved its honour by the 
defence of Sevastopol and dazzled foreign states by its diplomatic 
triumphs in Paris". 
Marx and Engels continued throughout the final period of the war 
to point out that, despite numerous military defeats, Tsarist 
despotism still represented a serious threat to the European 
working-class and democratic movement. As one might have 
expected, they remarked, the changes on the Tsarist throne did not 
lead to any substantial changes in the foreign policy of the Russian 
autocracy. Nicholas I's successor Alexander II and his government 
did not renounce aggressive intentions—in particular, the attempts 
to exploit Pan-Slavist propaganda as an instrument of aggrandize­
ment. 
Engels' article "Germany and Pan-Slavism", together with its 
English versions, "The European Struggle" and "Austria's Weak-

=====第25页=====
Preface XXVII 
ness",  showed how reactionary were current Pan-Slavist ideas, and 
Alexander IFs Pan-Slavist sentiments. The dissemination of these 
ideas by the monarchistic elements of certain Slavonic national 
movements, Engels noted, played into the hands of the Habsburg 
monarchy and Russian Tsarism in their struggle against the 
revolution in Germany and Hungary in 1848-49. 
Marx and Engels resolutely attacked all nationalistic ideology, 
whatever form it took, whether Pan-Germanism, Pan-Slavism, or any 
other form. They stressed that this ideology fanned national 
differences, that it was deeply alien to the interests of democratic 
development and the national and social liberation of all peoples, 
including the Slav peoples. 
In his polemic with Pan-Slavism, however, Engels repeated certain 
theses which have not been borne out by history, about the alleged 
loss by a number of Slav peoples who formed part of the Austrian 
Empire (Czechs, Slovaks, and others) of the ability to lead an 
independent national existence—theses which were expressed by 
him earlier in the works "Democratic Pan-Slavism" and Revolution 
and Counter-Revolution in Germany (on this see the prefaces to 
Volumes 8 and 11 of the present edition). The process of social 
development, which up to the 1860s was dominated by tendencies 
towards centralisation, the creation of large states, had not yet 
provided sufficient objective evidence for revising this mistaken 
view. It was only subsequently that another historical tendency 
manifested itself fully, namely, the striving of oppressed small 
peoples, including the Slav peoples of the Austrian Empire, for 
national independence, and their ability not only to create their own 
states but also to march in the van of social progress. 
The present volume contains a large number of military articles by 
Engels, who regularly analysed the whole course of the Crimean 
War, and also his military survey The Armies of  Europe.  These works 
constitute an important part of his studies on military theory. 
Although based on contemporary reports primarily in the English 
and French press, which contained many omissions and inaccuracies, 
Engels' military reviews show great insight and a profound 
understanding of the nature of the military operations in the various 
theatres of the war—the Caucasus, the Crimea and the Baltic—and 
of the decisive role of the siege and defence of Sevastopol in the 
overall course of the military operations, which by then had reached 
culmination point. Engels found increasing confirmation in the 
development of the military events of his basic propositions on the 
theory of warfare, the dependence of warfare on the social and 

=====第26页=====
XXVIII Preface 
political system, the interconnection between military strategy and 
the policy of the ruling classes, and the influence of the general state 
of the organisation of the armed forces on the mode of waging war. 
He held that the organisation of the army was an integral part of the 
system of state administration and reflected its characteristic class 
features. 
Thus in the articles "The Struggle in the Crimea", "The War 
that Looms on Europe", "The Punishment of the Ranks" and 
others Engels shows the connection between the crude blunders of 
the British military command, the wretched state of the British 
expeditionary forces and the conservatism of the British military 
system as such. He noted the routine nature of the organisation of 
the British army, the caste spirit and favouritism that prevailed in 
the War Office, the quartermaster service and the officer corps, 
the practice of selling commissions and other defects engendered 
by the oligarchical political regime. The article "The Reports of 
Generals Simpson, Pélissier and Niel" by Marx and Engels states 
openly that "the miserable leadership of the British Army is the 
inevitable result of rule by the antiquated oligarchy" (this volume, 
p. 542). 
In many articles Engels points to the pernicious consequences for 
the French and Allied armed forces of interference by the ruling 
clique of the Second Empire and Emperor Napoleon III himself in 
the conduct of military operations, and also of the effect of the 
counter-revolutionary aims for which the Bonapartist circles sought 
to use the army. Under pressure from Paris the operations by the 
Allied troops were often determined not by military, but by totally 
unrelated political and dynastic considerations (see the article "From 
Sevastopol" and others). 
Describing the armed forces of Tsarist Russia, in the article "The 
Russian Army", the relevant section of The Armies of Europe and in 
other works, Engels noted the weakness of the economic base and 
the archaic nature of the social base of the Tsarist military system. 
The technological backwardness of the Tsarist army, he emphasised, 
the almost total absence of modern means of transport, the 
old-fashioned methods of recruiting and training troops, the 
substitution of parade-ground drilling for proper military training, 
the length of military service, the corruption and embezzlement of 
public funds in the military and civilian administration—all this 
was the product of the social and political order of the Russia of 
autocracy and serfdom. 
At the same time Engels constantly emphasised the military 
qualities of the rank and file participants in the armed struggle. He 

=====第27页=====
Preface XXIX 
paid tribute to the initiative and élan of the French officers and men, 
and the stamina and resolve of the English in battle. He invariably 
spoke with respect of the traditional courage of the Russian soldier. 
"The Russian soldier is one of the bravest men in Europe", he wrote 
in The Armies of Europe (see this volume, p. 444). 
However, the description of the Russian army which Engels gave 
in these and other works, for all the aptness of his assessment of the 
state of the army in the Russia of serfdom, was influenced by his 
sources of information at that time, the anti-Russian bias of the 
West European press and the tendentious works of Western 
historians. This, and to a certain extent also the political slant of his 
articles against Russian Tsarism, explains the presence in his works 
at that time of certain exaggerations and one-sided opinions, which 
he revised to a large extent in his later works (Po and Rhine, see this 
edition, Volume 16, and others). Such opinions include, in 
particular, his statements on the passivity of Russian soldiers, the 
special role of foreigners in the Russian army due to a lack of native 
talent, and that Russia in the past had triumphed only over 
weak opponents and suffered defeat from those equal to it in 
strength. 
It must be said, however, that even though he possessed biased 
information, Engels assessed the operations of the belligerent 
powers objectively in the overwhelming majority of cases. This is 
demonstrated most strikingly by his many articles on the heroic 
eleven-month defence of Sevastopol by Russian troops. In the 
articles "The Siege of Sevastopol", "A Battle at Sevastopol" and 
others, the brilliant operations of the defenders, the skill of the 
military engineers of the Sevastopol garrison, including the head of 
the engineering service Todtleben, and the excellent arrangement of 
the line of fire are contrasted by Engels with the Allied siege 
operations. He rates the latter very low, emphasising that "not a 
single siege can be shown in the annals of war, since that of Troy, 
carried on with such a degree of incoherence and stupidity" (see this 
volume, p. 155). 
Noting the heroism and military fervour of the defenders of the 
Russian fortress, Engels praised their successful sorties in which 
they acted "with great skill combined with their usual tenacity" 
(see this volume, p. 116). He regarded as unprecedented in the 
history of warfare the creation by the besieged garrison during the 
defence of new fortifications which they set up in front of the first 
line,  and commented most favourably on the Russians' use of a 
tiered arrangement of batteries which enabled them to make good 
use of the terrain. 

=====第28页=====
XXX Preface 
In the article "Progress of the War" Engels sums up his 
assessments of the operations by the organisers of and participants 
in the defence of Sevastopol as follows. "The justness and rapidity 
of glance—the promptness, boldness, and faultlessness of execu­
tion, which the Russian engineers have shown in throwing up their 
lines around Sevastopol—the indefatigable attention with which 
every weak point was protected as soon as discovered by the 
enemy—the excellent arrangement of the line of fire, so as to 
concentrate a force, superior to that of the besiegers, upon any 
given point of the ground in front—the preparation of a second, 
third and fourth line of fortifications in rear of the first—in short, 
the whole conduct of this defense has been classic" (see this volume, 
pp. 134-35). Later Engels often returned to the analysis of the 
Sevastopol campaign (in his articles on the national liberation 
uprising in India of 1857-59 and in his "Notes on the War" in 
1870-71), regarding it as an outstanding example of active defence. 
The experience of the defence of Sevastopol enabled Engels to 
make important generalisations in his articles on the art of warfare, 
especially with respect to the significance of fortresses in nineteenth-
century warfare and their use in conjunction with field armies. From 
his analysis of other battles of the Crimean War and its general 
lessons he drew conclusions concerning the advantages of an 
offensive strategy and the concentration of forces in inflicting the 
main blow on the enemy's principal groupings, and on the often 
ephemeral nature of the surprise factor in cases when the 
consolidation and development of successes achieved in such a way 
are not ensured by corresponding means, etc. 
In short, Engels in his work The Armies of Europe gave a broad 
picture of the level of development of warfare and the state of the 
armed forces in the middle of the nineteenth century. He analysed 
the equipment, recruiting method and special tactics of the armies of 
the different states to show the operation in this sphere of the basic 
laws of social development. This was to apply the basic principles of 
historical materialism by showing how the fighting efficiency of an 
army is determined primarily by the economy and the social and 
political system of the given country. Thus Engels pointed out that in 
the Prussian army, for example, the promising principle of 
recruiting and training of troops by means of a comparatively short 
period of military service for all those capable of it was frustrated by 
the representatives of the reactionary political system in order to 
have a "disposable and reliable army to be used, in case of need, 
against disturbances at home" (see this volume, p. 433). Again, 
Engels stressed that the fanning of national strife characteristic of 

=====第29页=====
Preface XXXI 
the Habsburg monarchy was also reflected in the Austrian army and 
had an adverse effect on its fighting efficiency. Engels similarly 
noted the influence of the surviving feudal relations on the armies of 
Russia, Turkey and a number of other states. Stressing that the 
general laws of the evolution of the armed forces manifest 
themselves in each country in a specific form, Engels showed the 
importance of national characteristics and traditions in the 
development of each army. At the same time he pointed out that the 
general progress of military technology and improvements intro­
duced into warfare induce each army to take into account and use 
the experience of all the others. An important place in his work is 
occupied by criticism of the nationalistic tendencies in the treatment 
of military history by the ruling classes, in particular, in the thesis 
about the invincibility of this or that army at all times. 
* * * 
The present volume contains 135 works by Marx and Engels. 
Seventy-six of the articles are published in English for the first 
time (six of them have been published in English in part). These 
include the great majority of articles published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, among them versions of items in the New-York Daily 
Tribune which Marx adapted for the German newspaper, and also 
the rough draft of Engels' "Crimean War", which is included in 
the section "From the Preparatory Materials". Thirty-seven of the 
articles contained in the present volume have not been reproduced 
in English since their first publication in English and American 
newspapers. Previous English publications of individual articles by 
Marx and Engels, in particular in The Eastern Question, London, 
1897,  are indicated in the notes. 
In the absence of Marx's notebook for this period with entries 
concerning the dispatching of items to New York, authorship of 
articles by Marx and Engels in the New-York Tribune, which were 
usually printed anonymously, has been established mainly on the 
basis of information contained in correspondence, simultaneous 
publication in the European and American press, and peculiarities 
of content and style. During preparation of the articles the date 
when they were written was checked and most of the sources used 
by the authors were established. 
Discrepancies of substance between the Versions of the articles 
published simultaneously in the New-York Daily Tribune and the 

=====第30页=====
XXXII Preface 
Neue Oder-Zeitung are indicated in the footnotes. The same applies 
to other parallel publications (in the New-York Daily Tribune and 
The People's Paper, Engels' work The Armies of Europe which 
was published in Putnam's Monthly and the extracts from it that 
were translated into German by Marx for the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
and other items). When the versions differ considerably, their 
texts are given in full. In quoting, Marx sometimes gives a free 
rendering rather than the exact words of the source. In the present 
edition quotations are given in the form in which they occur in 
Marx's text. 
Misprints in quotations, proper names, geographical names, 
figures, dates, etc., discovered during the preparation of the present 
volume have been corrected (usually silently) on the basis of the 
sources used by Marx and Engels. 
In the case of newspaper articles without a title, or of a number of 
those which formed part of a series, a heading or number has been 
provided by the editors in square brackets. 
The volume was compiled, the text prepared and the preface 
and notes written by Stanislav Nikonenko and edited by Lev Golman 
(Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the CC CPSU). The name index, 
the index of periodicals and the glossary of geographical names were 
compiled by Natalia Martynova, the subject index by Marien 
Arzumanov, and the index of quoted and mentioned literature by 
Yevgenia Dakhina (Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the CC CPSU). 
The translations were made by Susanne Flatauer, Hugh 
Rodwell, Peter and Betty Ross, Barbara Ruhemann, Barrie 
Selman, Christopher Upward, Joan and Trevor Walmsley (Law­
rence and Wishart) and Salo Ryazanskaya (Progress Publishers), 
and edited by Nicholas Jacobs, Frida Knight, Sheila Lynd 
(Lawrence and Wishart), Salo Ryazanskaya, Tatyana Grishina, 
Natalia Karmanova and Victor Schnittke (Progress Publishers), and 
Vladimir Mosolov, scientific editor (Institute of Marxism-Leninism 
of the CC CPSU). 
The volume was prepared for the press by the editors 
Yelena Kalinina, Alia Varavitskaya and Lyudgarda Zubrilova 
(Progress Publishers). 

=====第31页=====
KARL MARX 
and 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
February 1855-April 1856 

=====第32页=====

=====第33页=====
V«»- XIV N° 4.323  NEW-YORK. MONDAY: FEBRUABV 26. 1855.  PRICE TWO CENTS. 
Frederick Engels 
THE STRUGGLE IN THE CRIMEA 1 
Immediately after the battle of the Alma,2 and the march of the 
Allies on Balaklava, we expressed the opinion that the ultimate 
result of the Crimean campaign must depend on which of the 
contending parties should first bring up new forces sufficient to 
render it superior to its antagonist in numbers and efficiency.3 
The aspect of affairs has, since then, greatly altered, and many 
illusions have been destroyed; but, throughout the whole time, 
both the Russians and the Allies have been engaged in a sort of 
steeple-chase at reenforcements, and, in this effort, we are 
compelled to say that the Russians have the advantage. In spite of 
all the boasted improvements in mechanical skill and the means of 
transport, three or five hundred miles of road are still far easier 
traversed by an army of Russian barbarians than two thousand 
miles of sea by an army of highly-civilized French and English— 
especially when the latter make it a point to neglect all the 
advantages which their high civilization places at their disposal, 
and when the Russian barbarians can afford to lose two men to 
the Allies' one, without impairing their ultimate superiority. 
But what can be in store for the Allies when one of their 
armies—the British—despairing of being destroyed by the Rus­
sians,  deliberately sets about destroying itself with a systematic 
consistency, an eagerness, and a success which beat all its former 
achievements in any line whatever? Yet such is the case. The 
British force, we are now informed, has ceased to exist as an army. 
There are a few thousand men left, under arms, out of 54,000, 
a See Engels' article "The Battle of the Alma" (present edition, Vol. 13, pp. 
492-97).— Ed. 
2* 

=====第34页=====
4 Frederick Engels 
but they themselves are reported "fit for duty" merely because 
there is no hospital-room for them to die in. Of the French, some 
50,000 may be still under arms, out of twice that number; and, at 
all events, they have managed to keep in a serviceable state at least 
five times as many, in proportion, as the British. But what are fifty 
or sixty thousand men to hold the Heracleatic Chersonese the 
winter through; to keep Sevastopol blockaded on the south side; 
to defend the trenches, and—what may be left of them—to take 
the offensive in spring? 
For the present, the British have ceased to send reenforcements. 
In fact Raglan, despairing of his army, does not appear to wish for 
any, not knowing how to feed, house and employ even what is left 
to him. The French may be preparing a fresh set of divisions for 
embarkation in March, but they have plenty to do to prepare 
against the eventuality of a great continental spring campaign, and 
there are ten chances to one that what they send will either be too 
weak or come too late. To remedy this state of things two steps 
have been taken, both of which denote the utter helplessness of 
the Allies to avert the fate which seems inevitably, though slowly, 
to approach their armies in the Crimea. First, in order to redress 
the colossal blunder of having attempted this expedition four 
months too late, they commit the incommensurably greater 
blunder of sending to the Crimea, four months after their own 
arrival, and in the depth of winter, the only remnant of a decent 
army which Turkey still possesses. That army which was already 
being ruined and dissolving itself at Shumla under the neglect, 
incapacity and corruption of the Turkish Government, once 
landed in the Crimea, will melt away, by cold and hunger, at 
a ratio which will put to the blush even the achievements of 
the English War-Office in this branch—that is, if the Russians have 
the sense to leave the Turks, for a time, to themselves, without 
attacking them. If the weather permits an attack they will be 
destroyed at once, though at a greater cost to the Russians, and 
with hardly any advantage, except a moral one. 
Then the Allies have taken into their pay—for that is the only 
way to express it—fifteen to twenty thousand Piedmontese,3 who 
are to fill up the thinned ranks of the British army, and to be fed 
by the British Commissariat. The Piedmontese showed themselves 
brave and good soldiers in 1848 and '49. Being mostly moun­
taineers, they possess an infantry which, for skirmishing and 
fighting in broken ground, is naturally adapted in even a higher 
degree than the French, while the plains of the Po furnish cavalry 
soldiers whose tall, well-proportioned stature reminds one of the 

=====第35页=====
The Struggle in the Crimea 5 
crack regiments of British horse. They have, besides, not passed 
through the severe campaigns of the revolution without profit. 
There is no doubt that these two Piedmontese divisions will turn 
out as good a "foreign legion" as will figure in this war. But what 
are these light-footed, agile, handy little fellows to do under the 
command of an old British martinet,3 who has no idea of 
maneuvering, and who expects nothing from his soldiers but the 
dogged stubbornness which is the glory and at the same time the 
only military quality of the British soldier? They will be placed in 
positions unsuited to their mode of fighting; they will be 
prevented from doing what they are fit for, while they will be 
expected to do things which no sensible man would ever set them 
to. To lead a British army in that senseless, point-blank, stupid 
way to the slaughter-house, as was done at the Alma, may be the 
shortest way to make them settle the business before them. The 
old Dukeb generally took matters quite as easy. German troops 
may be made to do the same thing, although the high military 
education of German officers will not stand such want of 
generalship in the long run. But to attempt such things with a 
French, Italian or Spanish army—with troops essentially fitted for 
light-infantry duty, for maneuvering, for taking advantage of the 
ground—with troops whose efficiency, in a great measure, is 
made up by the agility and quick glance of every individual 
soldier—such a clumsy system of warfare will never do. The poor 
Piedmontese, however, will probably be spared the trial of fighting 
in the English way. They are to be fed by that notorious body, the 
British Commissariat, which could never feed anybody but 
themselves. Thus they will share the fate of the fresh arrivals of 
British troops. Like them, they will die at the rate of a hundred a 
week, and furnish three times that number to the hospitals. If 
Lord Raglan thinks that the Piedmontese will stand his and his 
Commissaries' incapacity as quietly as the British troops, he will 
find himself sadly mistaken. There are none but British and 
Russians who would remain in submission under such cir­
cumstances; and, we must say, it is not to the credit of their 
national character. 
The probable development of this melancholy campaign—as 
melancholy and bleak as the muddy plateau of Sevastopol—will be 
this: The Russians, when fully concentrated, and when the 
weather permits, will probably attack the Turks of Omer Pasha 
a Raglan.— Ed. 
b Wellington.— Ed. 

=====第36页=====
6 Frederick Engels 
first. This is expected by British, French and Turks, so well aware 
are they of the unenviable position assigned to the latter; it shows, 
at all events, that the Turks are sent to the North with open eyes; 
and no better proof of the desperate condition of the Allies can be 
conceived than is contained in this involuntary admission of their 
own Generals. That the Turks will be beaten may be taken for 
certain. Then what will be the fate of the allied and Piedmontese 
armies? The bluster about an assault on Sevastopol is now pretty 
much abandoned. On this head we find in the London Times of 
Feb. 6, a letter from Col. E. Napier, to the effect that if the Allies 
attack the south side of Sevastopol, they will most likely get into it; 
but they will be pounded into dust by the overwhelming fire of 
the north forts and batteries, and at the same time besieged by the 
Russian army in the field. That army, he says, should first have 
been defeated, and then both the north and south sides of the 
place invested. As an instance in point, he recalls the fact that 
the Duke of Wellington twice raised the siege of Badajoz, in 
order to march against a relieving army.4 Col. Napier is quite 
right, and the Tribune said quite as much, at the time of the famous 
flank march to Balaklava.3 As to the Allies getting into Sevastopol, 
however, he appears to overlook the peculiar nature of the Rus­
sian defenses, which make it impossible to carry the place at 
one single assault. There are first, outworks, then the main 
rampart, and behind this the buildings of the town converted into 
redoubts; streets barricaded, squares of houses loopholed; and, 
finally, the loopholed rear walls of the strand-forts, every one 
of which, in succession, will require a separate attack—perhaps a 
separate siege, and even mining operations. But beside all this, the 
successful sorties of the Russians of late have sufficiently proved 
that the town has been approached to a point where the forces of 
the opponents are fully balanced, and the attack deprived of any 
superiority except in point of artillery. As long as sorties cannot be 
made impossible, all idea of an assault is preposterous; the 
besieger who cannot confine the besieged to the space of the 
actual fortress, is much less able to take that fortress by a 
hand-to-hand encounter. 
Thus,  the besiegers will continue to vegetate in their camp. 
Confined to it by weakness and the Russian army in the field, they 
will continue to melt away, while the Russians are bringing up 
Presumably a reference to Engels' article "The Siege of Sevastopol" published 
in the New-York Daily Tribune on November 15, 1854 (see present edition, Vol. 13, 
pp. 505-09).— Ed. 

=====第37页=====
The Struggle in the Crimea 7 
fresh forces; and unless the new British Ministry brings into play 
some quite unexpected resources, the day must come when 
British, French, Piedmontese and Turks are swept from Crimean 
soil. 
Written about February 9, 1855 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No.  4323,  February 26, 
1855 as a leading article 

=====第38页=====
Slate  £>ftfl>3eUtittfl. 
nn*.ii y« j. SiMlnhalirfedtUM M*«Afj»u 3« |)r»j«  kri alkn  fern»- m,» ^« 
autiiuguiuii« l State joejr. »o«l«j. kit 12. grtrnar 185». «3b.Ur ^ w •" 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
PALMERSTON.—THE ARMY 5 
London, February 9. Following their acceptance of new mi­
nisterial posts, Palmerston and Sidney Herbert have to submit 
to the formality of re-election to their parliamentary seats. For this 
reason both Houses were yesterday adjourned for a week. The 
statements by Lord Derby and the Marquis of Lansdowne in the 
House of Lords concerning the secret history of the ministerial 
crisis merely retold an oft-told tale.a The sole item of importance 
was a remark by Derby which contained the key to Lord 
Palmerston's position. Palmerston is known to have no parliamen­
tary party behind him, or any clique masquerading under that 
name. Whigs, Tories and Peelites6 regard him with equal 
suspicion. The Manchester School7 is in open conflict with him. 
His personal supporters among the Mayfair Radicals8 (as distinct 
from the Manchester Radicals) number a dozen at the most. Who 
and what, then, enables him to impose himself on the Crown and 
on Parliament? His popularity? No more so than unpopularity 
prevented Gladstone, Herbert, Graham and Clarendon from again 
seizing the helm of state. Or is the man who never belonged to a 
party, served all of them alternately, deserted them all in turn and 
invariably held the balance between them, is he the natural leader 
of defunct parties which seek to stem the tide of history by 
forming a coalition? This fact proves nothing at the present 
moment, since it was insufficient to put Palmerston rather than 
Aberdeen at the head of the coalition in 1852. 
Derby has supplied the answer to the riddle. Palmerston is 
evidently Bonaparte's friend. His premature recognition of the 
Derby's and Lansdowne's speeches in the House of Lords on February 8, 1855 
were reported in The Times, No. 21973, February 9,  1855.—  Ed. 

=====第39页=====
Palmerston.—The Army 9 
coup d'etat in December 1851 was then ostensibly the reason for his 
expulsion from the Whig Ministry.9 Bonaparte therefore regards 
him as persona grata, and a trustworthy man. The alliance with 
Bonaparte is therefore decisive at the moment. Palmerston has 
thus used foreign affairs to tip the balance of ministerial 
groupings—and not for the first time, as closer examination of 
the history of British ministries between 1830 and 1852 would 
show. 
Since at present the situation of the Crimean army can no 
longer be exploited for the purpose of cabinet intrigues, Lord 
John Russell went back on his pessimistic opinion in yesterday's 
sitting in the Commons, allowed the strength of the British army 
to grow by some 10,000 men and exchanged congratulations with 
the God-fearing Gladstone.3 Despite this "parliamentary resurrec­
tion" of the British army, there can be no doubt that at the 
present moment it has ceased to exist as an army. Some few 
thousand are still listed as "fit for service" because there is no 
room in the hospitals to receive them. Out of 100,000 the French 
still number some 50,000, but what are 50,000 or 60,000 men to 
hold Heracleatic Chersonese through the winter, to blockade the 
south side of Sevastopol, to defend the trenches and to take the 
offensive in the spring with those who are left? The French may hold 
in readiness fresh divisions for embarkation in March, but they are 
busy preparing for a spring campaign on the continent, and there is 
every probability that their shipments will be too few or will arrive 
too late. 
That the English and French governments are helpless, indeed 
have given up the army in the Crimea for lost, is apparent from 
the two measures to which they have resorted in order to remedy 
their misfortunes. 
In order to make good the error of having undertaken the 
expedition four months too late, they are committing the 
incomparably greater error of sending to the Crimea, the only 
remnants of the Turkish army that are still serviceable, four 
months after their own arrival and in mid-winter. This army, already 
broken and in the process of disintegration at Shumla as a 
consequence of the neglect, incompetence and corruption of the 
Turkish government, will in the Crimea melt away with cold and 
hunger to an extent which will even surpass British achievements 
in this field. 
a Lord John Russell's speech in the House of Commons on February 8, 1855. 
The Times, No. 21973, February 9, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第40页=====
10 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
As soon as the Russians have attained their full concentration 
and the weather permits field operations, they will probably first 
attack the Turks under Omer Pasha. This is expected by the 
British and French. Thus conscious are they of the unenviable 
position they have assigned to them. Thus clearly do they show 
that the strategic error of now throwing the Turks in on the 
northern side was committed with open eyes. The Turks would 
only be able to save themselves from ultimate destruction by the 
most incomprehensible errors on the part of the Russians. 
Secondly, the Anglo-French have hired 15,000 Piedmontese for 
the purpose of swelling the sparse ranks of the British; they are to 
be fed by the British Commissariat. In 1848 and 1849 the 
Piedmontese showed themselves to be brave and good soldiers. 
For the most part mountain-dwellers, their infantry surpasses even 
the French in skirmishing, sniping and fighting on broken terrain. 
The plains of the Po on the other hand have produced a cavalry 
which bears comparison with the British Horse Guards. Finally, 
they have had a hard schooling in the most recent revolutionary 
campaigns. These fleet-footed, mobile, adroit little fellows are fit 
for anything, but not to be British soldiers, which is what they are 
to be turned into, nor for the direct, ponderous frontal attacks 
which are the only tactics Raglan knows. And on top of that, to be 
fed by a British Commissariat whose only previous experience was of 
feeding  itself!  The 15,000 Piedmontese will therefore probably 
prove to be a further blunder. 
British reinforcements have been suspended for the present. 
Raglan himself appears to be refusing them, as he cannot even 
cope with the remnants he still has. It is hardly believable that the 
more the British camp is afflicted with disease, overwork and lack 
of rest, the more prevalent becomes the admirable practice of 
corporal punishment. Men who are fit only to be sent to hospital, 
who for weeks have slept and been on duty in wet clothes and on 
wet ground and have borne all this with almost superhuman 
tenacity—if these men are caught dozing in the trenches, they are 
treated to the cat-o'-nine-tails and the birch. "Fifty strokes for 
every vagabond!"—that is the only strategic order that Lord 
Raglan occasionally issues. Is it any wonder then that the soldiers 
of the perpetrator of the famous "flanking-march" to Balaklava 
follow suit and evade the birch with a "flanking-march" to the 
Russians? Desertions to the Russian camp are becoming more 
numerous every day, as The Times correspondent reported.3 
a Report by W. H. Russell in The Times, No.  21971,  February 7, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第41页=====
Palmerston.—The Army 11 
All the big talk about storming Sevastopol has of course ceased. 
The Russian army would first have to be beaten in the field. Thus 
Wellington twice raised the siege of Badajoz to march against a 
relief army. We have furthermore already seen that the newly-
erected Russian defence works make it impossible for the place to 
be taken by storm.3 Finally, the most recent Russian sorties prove 
that the allied army is at present superior to the Russians only in 
artillery. As long as sorties cannot be prevented, any idea of 
storming is absurd; besiegers who are incapable of confining the 
besieged to the area of the actual fortress are even less capable of 
seizing the fortress in hand-to-hand combat. Thus the besiegers 
will continue to vegetate, confined to their camp by their own 
weakness and by the Russian army in the field. They will continue 
to melt away, whilst the Russians bring up fresh forces. The 
prelude to the European war being enacted in the Crimea will end 
with the destruction of the allied troops unless some completely 
unexpected resources, which cannot be foreseen, are discovered. 
Written on February 9, 1855 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 71, February 12, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 
a A reference to Engels' article "Critical Observations on the Siege of Sevastopol" 
(see present edition, Vol. 13, pp. 593-95).— Ed, 

=====第42页=====
12 
Karl Marx 
FROM PARLIAMENT. 
[—GLADSTONE AT THE DISPATCH-BOX] 
London, February 10. Gladstone, Chancellor of the Exchequer of 
dogmatism and Duns Scotus of finance, has provided a further 
demonstration of the old saying that faith moves mountains. By 
faith, Gladstone has resurrected the dead, and by faith increased 
the strength of the British army in the Crimea from 11,000 to 
30,000 men.3 He is demanding the same faith from Parliament. 
Unfortunately the report from Dr. Hall, head of the medical 
department in the camp at Sevastopol, has just arrived.b Not only 
has the 63rd Regiment entirely vanished, according to this report, 
and of the 46th, which left Britain last November 1,000 men 
strong, only 30 are still fit for service, but Dr. Hall declares that 
half of the troops still on active service should be in hospital and 
that there are at most 5,000-6,000 men really fit for service in 
camp.  Anyone who is familiar with the tricks performed by pious 
apologists will not doubt that, like  Falstaff,  Gladstone will turn 
6,000 rogues in buckramc into 30,000. Has he not already told us 
in last Thursday's sitting that the two estimates arose from 
different points of view, e.g. the minimisers of the army in the 
Crimea were not counting the cavalry as he was, as though there 
had been any cavalry worth mentioning since the battle of 
Balaklava.10 For Gladstone it is a simple matter to count in those 
who are "not there". It would be hard to outdo the unction with 
which in last Thursday's sitting he concluded his "budget" on the 
Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on February 8, 1855. The 
Times, No. 21973, February 9, 1855.— Ed. 
b Published in The Times, No. 21972, February 8,  1855.—  Ed. 
Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, Act II, Scene 4.— Ed. 

=====第43页=====
From Parliament 13 
strength of the army—in which every debit figures as credit and 
every deficit as surplus—saying that "he forgave the opponents of 
the government their exaggerations". It would be equally hard to 
outdo the tone and posture with which he exhorted the Members 
of Parliament not to let themselves be carried away by "emotions". 
To bear the woes of others with humility and equanimity—so runs 
the God-fearing Gladstone's motto. 
Written on February 10, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zettung, 
No. 73, February 13, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign x 

=====第44页=====
14 
Karl Marx 
LORD PALMERSTON11 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 79, February 16, 1855] 
London, February 12. Lord Palmerston is incontestably the most 
interesting phenomenon of official England. Although an old 
man, and almost uninterruptedly upon the public stage since 
1807,  he has contrived to remain news and to keep alive all the 
hopes commonly associated with promising and untried youth. 
With one foot in the grave, he is supposed to be still on the 
threshold of his true career. Were he to die tomorrow, all England 
would be surprised to learn that he had been a Minister for half a 
century. Though he is not a universal statesman, he is certainly a 
universal actor—equally successful in the heroic and the comic, 
the sublime and the vulgar style, in tragedy and in farce, although 
the last is, perhaps, better attuned to his nature. He is not a 
first-class orator, but is accomplished in debate. With a wonderful 
memory, great experience, consummate tact, never-failing pres­
ence of mind, refined flexibility and the most intimate knowledge 
of parliamentary artifices, intrigues, parties and personalities, he 
handles difficult cases with winsome ease, adapting himself to the 
prejudices of each audience in turn, shielded against all surprise 
by his nonchalance, against all self-betrayal by his egoistical facility, 
against impassioned ebullitions by his profound frivolity and 
aristocratic indifference. His happy wit enables him to insinuate 
himself with all and sundry. Because he always remains cool-
headed, he impresses hot-headed opponents. If a general stand­
point be wanting, he is ever prepared to spin a web of elegant 
generalities. If incapable of mastering a subject, he contrives to toy 
with it. If afraid to join issue with a powerful foe, he contrives to 
improvise a weak one. 

=====第45页=====
Lord Palmerston 15 
Submitting to foreign influence in practice, he combats it in 
words. Since he has inherited from Canning—who, however, 
warned against him on his death-bed—England's mission of 
disseminating constitutional propaganda on the Continent, he 
never, of course, lacks a theme with which to flatter national 
prejudice while simultaneously keeping alive the jealous suspicions 
of foreign powers. Having thus conveniently become the bête noire 
of continental courts, he could hardly fail to figure at home as a 
"truly English Minister". Although originally a Tory, he has 
succeeded in introducing into his conduct of foreign affairs all 
those "shams" 3 and contradictions that constitute the essence of 
Whiggism. He contrives to reconcile democratic phraseology with 
oligarchic views; to offset the bourgeoisie and their advocacy of 
peace with the overbearing language of England's aristocratic past; 
to seem an aggressor when he assents and a defender when he 
betrays; to spare an ostensible enemy and embitter an alleged ally; 
to be at the decisive moment of the dispute on the side of the 
stronger against the weak, and to utter courageous words in the 
ver}'  act of turning tail. 
Accused by one side of being in Russia's pay, he is suspected by 
the other of Carbonarism.12 If, in 1848, he had to defend himself 
in Parliament against a motion calling for his impeachment for 
acting in collusion with Russia, he had the satisfaction in 1850 of 
being the object of a conspiracy between foreign embassies which 
succeeded in the House of Lords but came to grief in the House 
of Commons.13 When he betrayed foreign nations, it was always 
done with extreme courtesy. While the oppressors could always 
count on his active support, the oppressed never wanted for the 
pageantry of his noble rhetoric. Poles, Italians, Hungarians, etc., 
invariably found him at the helm when they were vanquished, but 
their conquerors always suspected him of having conspired with 
the victims he had allowed them to make. Having him for a foe 
has, in every instance up till now, spelled a likelihood of success, 
having him for a friend, the certainty of ruin. But though the art 
of his diplomacy is not manifest in the actual results of his 
negotiations abroad, it shines forth all the more brightly in the 
manner in which he has succeeded in [inducing] the English 
people to accept phrase for fact, fantasy for reality and 
high-sounding pretexts for shabby motivation. 
Henry John Temple, Viscount Palmerston, was appointed 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第46页=====
16 Karl Marx 
Junior Lord3 of the Admiralty in 1807, when the Duke of 
Portland formed his administration. In 1809 he became Secretary 
at War3 and retained this post until May 1828 in the Ministries of 
Perceval, Liverpool, Canning, Goderich and Wellington. It is 
certainly strange to find the Don Quixote of "free institutions", 
the Pindar of the "glories of the constitutional system", as an 
eminent and permanent member of the Tory administration 
which promulgated the Corn Laws,14  stationed foreign mer­
cenaries on English soil, every now and then—to use an 
expression of Lord Sidmouth's—"let the people's blood", gagged 
the Press, suppressed meetings, disarmed the nation at large, 
suspended regular courts of justice along with individual free­
dom—in a word declared a state of siege in Great Britain and 
Ireland! In 1829 Palmerston went over to the Whigs who, in 
November 1830, appointed him Secretary for Foreign Affairs. 
Save for the intervals between November 1834 and April 1835 
and between 1841 and 1846, when the Tories were at the helm, 
he was in sole charge of England's foreign policy from the time of 
the revolution of 1830 to the coup d'état of 1851. We shall survey 
his achievements during that period in another letter. 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 83, February 19, 1855] 
London, February 14. In recent weeks Punch has been wont to 
present Lord Palmerston in the guise of the clown of the puppet 
show. As everyone knows, that clown is a mischief-monger by 
profession, who loves noisy ructions, a concocter of pernicious 
misunderstandings, a virtuoso of rowdyism, at home only in the 
general hurly-burly he has created, in the course of which he 
throws wife, child and, at last, even the police out of the window, 
ending up, after much ado about nothing, by extricating himself 
from the scrape more or less intact and full of malicious glee at 
the turn the rumpus has taken. And, from a picturesque point of 
view, Lord Palmerston does indeed appear thus—a restless and 
untiring spirit who seeks out difficulties, imbroglios and confusion 
as the natural element of his activity and hence creates conflict 
where he does not find it ready-made. Never has an English 
Foreign Secretary shown himself so busy in every corner of the 
earth—blockades of the Scheldt, the Tagus, the Douro, 15 
Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
The second instalment was published under the heading "Palmerston".— Ed. 

=====第47页=====
Lord Palmerston 17 
blockades of Mexico and Buenos Aires,16 Naples expeditions, 
Pacifico expeditions, expeditions to the Persian  Gulf, 17 wars in Spain 
for "liberty" and in China for the importation of opium,18 North 
American border disputes,19 Afghanistan campaigns, bombardment 
of Saint-Jean-d'Acre, squabbles over the right to search shipping 
off West Africa,21 discord even in the "Pacific", and all this to the 
accompaniment of and supplemented by innumerable minatory 
notes,  stacks of minutes and diplomatic protests. On average, all this 
noise would seem to dissipate itself in heated parliamentary debates 
which provide as many ephemeral triumphs for the noble lord. He 
appears to handle foreign conflicts like an artist who is prepared to 
go so far and no further, withdrawing as soon as they threaten to 
become too serious, and have provided him with the dramatic 
stimulus he requires. In this way, world history itself takes on the air 
of a pastime expressly invented for the private satisfaction of the 
noble Viscount Palmerston of Palmerston. This is the first 
impression Palmerston's chequered diplomacy makes on the 
impartial observer. A closer examination reveals, however, that, 
strange to say, one country has invariably profited from his 
diplomatic zigzag course, and that country was not England but 
Russia. In 1841 [Joseph] Hume, a friend of Palmerston's,declared: 
"Were the Tsar of Russia3 to have an agent in the British Cabinet, his interests 
could not be better represented than they are by the noble Lord." 
In 1837 Lord Dudley Stuart, one of Palmerston's greatest 
admirers, apostrophised him as follows: 
"How much longer [...] did the noble lord propose to allow Russia thus to insult 
Great Britain, and thus to injure British commerce? [...] The noble lord was 
degrading England in the eyes of the world by holding her out in the character of a 
bully—haughty and' tyrannical to the weak, humble and abject to the strong."b 
At any rate it cannot be denied that all treaties favourable to 
Russia, from the Treaty of Adrianople to the Treaty of 
Balta-Liman22 and the Treaty of the Danish Succession,23 were 
concluded under Palmerston's auspices. True, the Treaty of 
Adrianople found Palmerston in opposition, not in office; but for 
one thing he was the first to give the treaty his blessing, though in 
an underhand way and, for another, being then the leader of the 
a Nicholas I.— Ed. 
From Stuart's speech in the House of Commons on March 17, 1837. Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates, third series, Vol. XXXVII, London, 1837.— Ed. 

=====第48页=====
18 Karl Marx 
Whig Opposition, he attacked Aberdeen for his Austro-Turkish 
bias and declared Russia to be the champion of civilization. (Cf., 
for instance, the sittings of the House of Commons of June 1, 
1829,  June 11, 1829, a February 16, 1830, etc) On this occasion, 
Sir Robert Peel told him in the House of Commons that "he did 
not know whom Palmerston really represented".b In November 
1830 Palmerston took over the Foreign Office. Not only did he 
reject France's offer of joint intervention on Poland's behalf 
because of "the relations between the Cabinet of St. James and the 
Cabinet of St. Petersburg"; he also forbade Sweden to arm and 
threatened Persia with war should she fail to withdraw the army 
she had already dispatched to the Russian frontier. He himself 
helped to defray the cost of Russia's campaign in as much as, 
without parliamentary authorisation, he continued to pay out 
principal and interest on the so-called Russian-Dutch loan after 
the Belgian revolution had invalidated the stipulations governing 
that loan.24 In 1832 he allowed the mortgage on state demesnes 
which the National Assembly of Greece had guaranteed the 
English contracting party to the Anglo-Greek Loan of 1824, to be 
repudiated and transferred as security for a new loan effected 
under Russian auspices. His despatches to Mr. Dawkins, English 
representative in Greece, invariably read: "You are to act in 
concert with the agents of Russia."0  On July 8, 1833, Russia extorted 
from the Porte the Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi whereby the 
Dardanelles were closed to European warships, and Russia 
(cf. second article of the treaty) was assured of an eight years' 
dictatorship in Turkey. 25 The Sultan d was forced to sign the treaty by 
the presence of a Russian fleet in the Bosphorus and of a Russian 
army outside the gates of Constantinople—allegedly as a protection 
against Ibrahim Pasha. Palmerston had repeatedly refused Turkey's 
urgent plea that he intervene on her  behalf,  and had thus forced her 
into accepting the help of Russia. (He himself said as much in the 
House of Commons on July 11, August 24, etc., 1833 and March 17, 
1834.) When Lord Palmerston entered the Foreign Office he found 
English influence clearly preponderant in Persia. His standing order 
to English agents was that they should "in all cases act in concert with 
Presumably an error in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. On June 11, 1829, Parliament did 
not sit. The reference is to Palmerston's speech on February 5, 1830 (see present 
edition, Vol. 12, p. 355).— Ed. 
From Peel's speech in the House of Commons on February 16, 1830.— Ed. 
P. I. Rickmann. — Ed. 
Mahmud II.— Ed. 

=====第49页=====
Lord Palmerston 19 
the Russian Ambassador". With his support, Russia placed a Russian 
pretender on the Persian throne.3 Lord Palmerston sanctioned the 
Russo-Persian expedition against Herat.26 Only when this had failed 
did he order an Anglo-Indian expedition into the Persian  Gulf,  a 
stratagem that strengthened Russia's influence in Persia. In 1836, 
under the noble lord, Russia's usurpations in the Danubian Delta, 
her quarantines, her customs regulations,27 etc., were recognized by 
England for the first time. In the same year the confiscation of a 
British merchant vessel, the Vixen—and the Vixen had been sent out 
at the instigation of the British government—by a Russian warship 
in the Circassian Bay of Soujouk-Kale was used by him as a pretext to 
accord official recognition to Russian claims to the Circassian littoral. 
It transpired on this occasion that, as much as six years previously, he 
had secretly recognized Russia's claims to the Caucasus. On this 
occasion the noble Viscount escaped a vote of censure in the House 
of Commons by a slender majority of sixteen. One of his most 
^vehement accusers at the time was Sir Stratford Canning, now Lord 
Redcliffe, English Ambassador at Constantinople. In 1836 one of the 
English agentsb in Constantinople concluded a trade agreement with 
Turkey which was advantageous to England. Palmerston delayed 
ratification and, in 1838, substituted another treaty so greatly to 
Russia's advantage and England's detriment that a number of 
English merchants in the Levant decided they would in future trade 
under the aegis of Russian firms. The death of King William IV gave 
rise to the notorious Portfolio scandal. At the time of the Warsaw 
revolution28 a collection of secret letters, despatches, etc. by Russian 
diplomats and ministers had fallen into the hands of the Poles when 
they captured the palace of the Grand Duke Constantine. Count 
Zamoyski, Prince Czartoryski's nephew, took them to England. 
There, on the orders of the King and under Urquhart's editorship 
and Palmerston's supervision, they were published in The Portfolio. 
No sooner was the King dead than Palmerston denied all connection 
with The Portfolio, refused to pay the printer's1 bills, etc. Urquhart 
published his correspondence with Backhouse, Palmerston's Under-
Secretary of State. Upon this The Times (26 January, 1839) 
comments: 
a Mohammed-Shah.— Ed. 
David Urquhart.— Ed. 
c F. J. Shoberl.— Ed. 
d The Times, No. 16948, January 25, 1839.— Ed. 

=====第50页=====
20 Karl Marx 
"It is not for us to understand how Lord Palmerston may feel, but we are sure 
there is no misapprehending how any other person in the station of a gentleman, 
and in the position of a Minister, would feel, after the notoriety given to the 
correspondence...." 
Written on February 12 and 14, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
Nos.  79 and 8 February 16 and 19, 
1855 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
Marked with the sign X 

=====第51页=====
21 
Karl Marx 
HERBERT'S RE-ELECTION.—THE FIRST MEASURES 
OF THE NEW MINISTRY.—NEWS FROM INDIA 
London, February 16. The farce of Mr. Sidney Herbert's 
re-election as Member of Parliament for the southern division of 
Wiltshire took place yesterday in Salisbury Town Hall.a Even 
among the English counties Wilts is notorious for a concentration 
of land-ownership which has turned the whole area into the 
property of fewer than a dozen families. With the exception of 
some districts in Northern Scotland, the land has nowhere been so 
thoroughly "cleared" of inhabitants, nor the system of modern 
agriculture applied so consistently. Except when family feuds 
happen to break out among its few landlords, Wilts never sees an 
electoral campaign. 
No rival candidate had been put up against Sidney Herbert. 
The High  Sheriff, b who presided over the election, therefore 
declared him re-elected by all the forms of law at the very 
beginning of the meeting. Sidney Herbert then rose and 
addressed a number of very worn-out platitudes to his tenants and 
vassals. Meanwhile there had gradually gathered in the Town Hall 
an audience of townspeople who were not entitled to vote but 
whom the English Constitution fobs off with the privilege of 
boring the candidates at the hustings.0 Scarcely had Sidney 
Herbert sat down than a barrage of questions volleyed about his 
venerable head. "What about the green coffee-beans served to our 
soldiers?", "Where is our army?", "What did The Times say of 
a A report on the re-election was published in The Times, No. 21979, February 
16, 1855.— Ed. 
b E. L. Clutterbuck.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第52页=====
22 Karl Marx 
you yesterday?",29 "Why did you spare Odessa?", "Does your 
uncle, the Russian Prince Vorontsov, own palaces in Odessa?", 
etc. Naturally not the slightest notice was taken of these 
unparliamentary questioners. On the contrary, Sidney Herbert 
availed himself of the first lull to propose a vote of thanks to the 
Sheriff for his "impartial" conduct of the "proceedings". This was 
accepted amidst applause from the parliamentary audience, and 
hissing and groaning from the unparliamentary. There then 
followed a second volley of ejaculatory questions: "Who starved 
our soldiers? Let him go to war  himself!  etc." No more result than 
before. The Sheriff then declared the play, which had lasted little 
more than half an hour, to be over, and the curtain fell. 
The first measures of the re-constituted ministry were by no 
means received with approval. As Lord Panmure, the new 
Secretary for War, is an invalid, the main burden of his 
administration falls to the Under-Secretary for War. The appoint­
ment of Frederick Peel, the younger son of the late Peel, to this 
important post arouses all the more displeasure since Frederick 
Peel is a notorious mediocrity. Despite his youth, he is the living 
incarnation of routine. Other men become bureaucrats. He came 
into the world as one. Frederick Peel owes his post to the 
influence of the Peelites. It was therefore necessary to balance the 
scales with a Whig in the other pan. Sir Francis Baring has 
therefore been appointed Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. 
He was Chancellor of the Exchequer in Lord Melbourne's Whig 
administration and at that time bore the well-deserved nickname 
of "Mr. Deficit". The most recent army appointments all remain 
true to the system of gerontocracy. Thus the octogenarian Lord 
Seaton has been appointed to the command of the army in 
Ireland. Lord Rokeby, old, gout-ridden, and  deaf,  has been 
dispatched to the Crimea as commander of the Brigade of Guards. 
Command of the Second Division there—formerly under Sir de 
Lacy Evans—has fallen to General Simpson, who is no Samson but 
on the contrary occupied a fitting retirement-post as veteran 
Lieutenant-Governor of Portsmouth. General Somerset, already a 
Brigadier in 1811, has been sent to India as commanding General. 
Finally Admiral Boxer, "that anarch old", as The Times calls him, a 
who threw the whole transport service into utter confusion in 
Constantinople, has now been ordered to Balaklava to put that 
harbour into "proper order". 
The Times, No. 21979, February 16, 1855. The passage quoted below is from 
the same issue.— Ed. 

=====第53页=====
Herbert's Re-election 23 
"We fear," says The Times, "we must look elsewhere for Ministerial vigour. [...] 
It is vain for us to appeal to those who do these things against such cruel and 
wanton squandering of the best resources of the nation. Were they not infatuated 
by a long course of power, which only shifted from one portion of their own [...] 
class to another, they would scarcely have chosen this moment at least for the 
exhibition of such wanton and short-sighted selfishness. The instinct of self-preserva­
tion would have taught them better, but we solemnly ask the people of Eng­
land whether they will suffer their countrymen to be thus sacrificed at the shrine of 
cruel apathy or helpless incapacity." The Times threatens: "It is not a Government, 
nor is it even a House of Commons. It is the British Constitution that is under 
trial." 
The latest news from India is important because it describes the 
deplorable state of business in Calcutta and Bombay. In the 
manufacturing districts the crisis is slowly but surely advancing. 
The owners of spinning-mills of fine yarn in Manchester decided 
at a meeting held the day before yesterday only to open their 
factories four days a week from February 26 and in the meantime 
to call on the manufacturers in the surrounding area to follow 
their example. In the factories in Blackburn, Preston and Bolton 
notice has already been given to the workers that there will 
henceforth only be "short time". The fact that in the past year 
many manufacturers have tried to force the markets by circum­
venting the commission-houses and taking their export business 
into their own hands means that bankruptcies will be all the 
larger in number and in size. The Manchester Guardian, admitted 
last Wednesday3 that there was overproduction not only of 
manufactured goods but also of factories. 
Written on February 16, 1855 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, Published in English for the first 
No. 85, February 20, 1855 time 
Marked with the sign X 
a February 14, 1855.—Ed. 

=====第54页=====
24 
Karl Marx 
PARLIAMENT 
London, February 17. Parliament re-assembled yesterday. The 
House of Commons was obviously displeased. It appeared to be 
distressed by the conviction that the transactions of the last three 
weeks had completely broken its authority. There sat the old 
ministry once more, only reburnished. Two elderly Lords 3 who 
could not abide each other had disappeared from it, but a third 
elderly Lord who had shared the vote of no-confidence with those 
two had not fallen down a rung, but simply up to the top rung. 
Lord Palmerston was received in solemn silence. No "cheers",b no 
enthusiasm. Contrary to custom, his speech was received with 
visible indifference and ill-tempered scepticism. For once, too, his 
memory played him false, and he hesitated, hunting through the 
notes he had before him, until Sir Charles Wood in a whisper 
restored the broken thread. His audience seemed not to believe 
that the change of firm would save the old house from 
bankruptcy. His whole manner recalled Cardinal Alberoni's verdict 
on William of Orange: 
"He was a strong man while he held the balance. He is weak now that he has 
used his own weight to tip the scales." 
The most important fact however was undoubtedly the appear­
ance of a new coalition in opposition to the new version of the old 
one—the coalition of the Tories under Disraeli and the most 
outspoken section of the Radicals, men like Layard, Duncombe, 
Horsman, etc. It was precisely amongst the latter, the Mayfair 
Lord Aberdeen and Lord John Russell.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第55页=====
Parliament 25 
Radicals,30 that Palmerston hitherto counted his loudest suppor­
ters. Layard had been disappointed in his hopes of receiving a 
junior post in the Ministry for War, so mutters one government 
paper. Let him have a post!—hisses another. 
Lord Palmerston began the announcement of his new ministry 
with a brief account of the ministerial crisis. Then he praised his 
own creation. The ministry he had formed 
"contains sufficient administrative ability, sufficient political sagacity, sufficient 
liberal principle, sufficient patriotism and determination to [...] fulfil its duties".a 
Lord Clarendon, Lord Panmure, Mr. Gladstone, Sir James 
Graham—each was duly complimented. Excellent though the 
ministry was, it had one great difficulty staring it in the face. Here 
was Mr. Roebuck, insisting on having his Committee of Inquiry 
nominated next Thursday. Why had the House need of a 
committee? He would remind them of an anecdote from the days 
of Richard II at the time of Wat Tyler's uprising. The young 
monarch is said to have encountered a troop of rebels, whose chief 
had just been slain before their eyes. Boldly going up to them, he 
is said to have exclaimed: "You have lost your leader; my friends, 
I will be your leader." "So I say" (the young (!) dictator Palmerston), 
"if you, the House of Commons, now forego this committee, the 
Government itself will be your committee." 
This somewhat irreverent comparison of the House to a band of 
"rebels" and the unblushing demand of the cabinet to be 
appointed judge in its own cause, were received with ironical 
laughter. What do you want, cried Palmerston, raising his voice 
and tilting his head into that attitude of Irish audacity for which 
he is known. What is the purpose of a Committee of Inquiry? 
Administrative improvements? Very well! Hear all the things we 
intend to improve. Previously you had two Ministers of War, the 
Secretary at Warb and the Minister for War. Henceforth you shall 
have but one, the latter. In the Department of Ordnance, the 
military command will be transferred to the Commander-in-Chief 
(Horse Guards0) and the civil administration to the Secretary 
for War. The Transport Board will be enlarged. Previously, under 
a Excerpts from the speeches by Palmerston and other participants in the 
House of Commons debate of February 16 are quoted from The Times, No. 21980, 
February 17, 1855.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
c Horse Guards, the English term given by Marx, was used to denote the 
Commander-in-Chief of the British army, since he and his personnel were housed 
in what was originally the barracks of the Horse Guards.— Ed. 

=====第56页=====
26 Karl Marx 
the Act of 1847, the term of service was 10 years. It will now be made 
optional for men to enlist for any number of years they wish, from 1 
to 10. No man will be enlisted below the age of 24 nor over 32. Now 
to the theatre of war! In order to introduce uniformity, vigour and 
order into the conduct and management of the war, Palmerston has 
chosen the unusual device of providing each post with a controller 
with unspecified powers. Lord Raglan remains Commander-in-
Chief but General Simpson becomes Chief of  Staff,  and Raglan "will 
feel it his duty to adopt his recommendations". Sir John Burgoyne is 
recalled to service, and Sir Harry Jones becomes Chief of the 
Commissariat, with unspecified dictatorial power. At the same time 
however a civilian, Sir John MacNeill (author of the famous 
pamphlet Russia's Progress in the East), is ordered to the Crimea to 
inquire into misappropriation, incompetence and dereliction of duty 
by the Commissariat. New hospital arrangements in Smyrna and 
Scutari; reform of the medical department in the Crimea and at 
home, transport vessels for sick and wounded plying every 10 days 
between the Crimea and Britain. At the same time however the 
Minister for War3 will borrow three civilians from the Minister 
of Health b and send them to the Crimea to make the necessary sani­
tary arrangements for the prevention of pestilence when the 
spring weather comes and to organise inquiries into the 
staff and management of the medical department. As one can 
see, there is excellent opportunity for conflicts of authority. 
In order to compensate Lord Raglan for his "command 
hedged about by constitutional institutions", he receives full 
authorisation to negotiate in Constantinople for a corps of 300 
Turkish street-sweepers and grave-diggers whose task will be 
to consign the army of dead, the decaying horses and other ordure 
into the sea when the warm season comes. A separate department 
of land transport will be set up in the theatre of war. Whilst thus 
on the one hand, preparations are made for waging the war, in 
Vienna peace will be prepared by Lord John Russell, if that is 
expedient. 
Disraeli: When one has heard the noble Lord extolling his 
colleagues' "administrative ability and political sagacity", it is 
[hard] to believe that he is speaking of the same "unparalleled 
blunderers" whom the House condemned 19 days beforec! 
F. M. Panmure.— Ed. 
b B. Hall.— Ed. 
A reference to the House of Commons debate of January 29, 1855. The Times, 
No. 21964, January 30,  1855.—  Ed. 

=====第57页=====
Parliament 27 
Supposing that the promised improvements are implemented and 
are what they are given out to be, what a satire they were on the 
ministry which alone had opposed them and which had declared a 
Commons inquiry into the previous mismanagement to be a vote 
of no-confidence in  itself.  Even Lord John Russell had declared he 
found the mysterious disappearance of the army inexplicable and 
an investigation of its secret causes to be unavoidable.3 Was the 
House to delude itself into rescinding the decision it had reached 
only 10 days ago? By so doing, it would irrevocably forfeit its 
public influence for years. What was the argument of the noble 
Lord and his reburnished colleagues to induce the House of 
Commons to stultify itself? Promises which would never have been 
made, had it not been for the threat of a Committee of Inquiry. 
He would insist on a parliamentary inquiry. Palmerston was 
commencing his new post by threatening Parliament's freedom of 
movement. Never had a ministry met with such support and 
willingness from the opposition as had Lord Aberdeen's, the 
"late"  ministry, or how should he call it! There were two Dromiosb 
that confounded him; he would therefore say "the late Ministry and 
their present faithful representatives—their identical representa­
tives on the government bench". 
Roebuck declared that next Thursday he intended to table a list 
of names for the Committee, which the House had already 
adopted. The administration was the old one, only the cards had 
been shuffled but had fallen into the same hands again. Nothing 
short of the direct intervention of the House of Commons could 
break the shackles of routine and remove the obstacles which 
prevented the government from carrying out the necessary 
reforms, even if it wished to do so. 
Tfhomas] Duncombe: The noble Lord had told them, he and the 
government would like to be their committee. They were mightily 
grateful! What the House wanted to do was to inquire into the 
conduct of the noble Lord and his colleagues! He had promised 
reforms, but who was to institute them? The very men whose 
administration had created the necessity for reforms. There had 
been no change in the administration. It was the status quo ante' 
Roebuck. Lord John Russell had deserted his post in cowardly 
fashion. Lord Palmerston himself might be said to be the "faded 
John Russell's speech in the House of Commons on February 8, 1855. The 
Times, No. 21973, February 9, 1855.— Ed. 
Characters from Shakespeare's The Comedy of Errors.—Ed. 
The position as before [the motion  by].—  Ed. 

=====第58页=====
28 Karl Marx 
gem" of 13 bygone administrations, from that of Lord Liverpool 
down to the present one. Therefore he must undoubtedly be 
possessed of "great experience as well as of high administrative 
talent". His Lord Panmure was not even the equal of the Duke of 
Newcastle. The appointment of the committee was not a censure. 
It was a question of inquiry. Censure would probably follow on its 
heels.  Concerning the negotiations in Vienna, here too the 
government was in opposition to the people. The people was 
demanding a revision of the treaties of Vienna of 1815 in the 
interests of the Poles, Hungarians and Italians. By war against 
Russia however, it understood the literal destruction of Russian 
preponderance. 
One can see that Palmerston's ministry is continuing from the 
point where Aberdeen's ministry ended—with the fight against 
Roebuck's motion. Between now and next Thursday every effort 
will be made to obtain by hook or by crook a ministerial majority 
against the Committee of Inquiry. 
Written on February 17, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 88, February 22, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign x 

=====第59页=====
29 
Karl Marx 
THE COALITION BETWEEN TORIES 
AND RADICALS 
London, February 19. The coalition between Tories and Radicals, 
the first signs of which we reported in our last contribution,3 is 
today being talked of as a fait accompli by the whole of the London 
daily press. The government Morning Chronicle observes on the 
subject: 
"Yet there never yet was a revolution which was not accelerated from pique, 
wounded vanity, misplaced ambition, or sheer folly, by its predestined and 
unconscious victims; and the motley combination of Derbyites and Liberals who 
have coalesced with Mr. Roebuck are treading in the very footsteps of those 
members of the Chamber of Deputies who, when getting up the Reform banquets 
of 1848, sought only to displace a Ministry, and ended by upsetting a throne." 
Roebuck, it asserts, is ready to play the part of a Robespierre or 
(a most remarkable or!) of a Ledru-Rollin. His intention is to form 
a "committee of public safety". He had had no qualms about 
proposing the following names for the committee which he had 
requested: Roebuck, Drummond, Layard, Sir Joseph Paxton (who 
built the palace for the Great Exhibition31), Lord Stanley (Derby's 
son),  Ellice, Whiteside, Disraeli, Butt, Lowe (a member of The 
Times' secret council) and Miles. 
"It is useless," continues The Morning Chronicle, "to disguise that we are openly 
threatened with a revolutionary crusade against the aristocracy of this country. [...] 
The demagogues [...] are seeking the overthrow of Lord Palmerston's Administra-
a See this volume, pp.  24-25.—  Ed. 
"The prudence, fairness and consistency of nominating Mr. Roebuck's 
committee...", The Morning Chronicle, No. 27504, February 19, 1855. The item 
containing the passage "It is useless to disguise..." which is quoted below was 
published in the same issue.— Ed. 

=====第60页=====
30 Karl Marx 
tion, by skilfully playing off against it the associated, though not combined, forces 
of Mr. Disraeli and Mr. Roebuck. Democracy is seeking to bring about a revo­
lution by methodically overthrowing one cabinet after another." 
Finally, a government paper threatens the dissolution of 
Parliament, [an] "appeal to the people", as Bonaparte did a few 
months before the coup d'état. 
The Economist, whose publisher Wilson is Secretary of the 
Treasury, declares "a representative Constitution" to be incompat­
ible with the conduct of war.b The former hat-maker Wilson 
therefore proposes that Members of Parliament who accept offices 
of state should be released from the obligation of re-election and 
cabinet ministers should ex officio be granted a seat and voice in 
the House of Commons. Thus the ministry is to become 
independent of electors and the House of Commons, but the 
House would become dependent on the ministry. With regard to 
this, The Daily News warns: 
"The people of England must be on their guard, and prepared to make a 
resolute stand in defence of their representative institutions. [...] An attempt is 
about to be made to render Government more independent of the House of 
Commons. [...] This [...] would bring the [...] Government into conflict with the House 
of Commons. The result would be a revolution. "c 
And in fact in Marylebone—considered to be one of the most 
radical districts of London—a meeting has been called for next 
Wednesday,*1 to pass resolutions on "the government's attempt [...] to 
resist the parliamentary inquiry".6 
Whilst The Morning Chronicle is thus prophesying revolution and 
The Daily News an attempt at counter-revolution, The Times also is 
making reference to the February Revolution, although with 
regard not to the reform-banquets but to Praslin's murder. For a 
few days ago, in the Irish Court of Chancery, an inheritance case 
was brought in which the Marquis of Clanricardé —an English 
peer, ambassador at the court of St. Petersburg during Mel­
bourne's administration and Postmaster-General during Russell's— 
The concluding sentence given by Marx is not a direct quotation from The 
Morning Chronicle, but rather summarises the gist of several paragraphs.— Ed. 
"Two Much Needed Reforms", The Eco7iomist, No. 599, February 17, 
1855.—  Ed 
c The Daily News, No. 2731, February 19, 1855.— Ed. 
d February 21,  1855.—  Ed. 
From a letter written by parishioners to the St. Marylebone churchwarden, 
and published in The Times, No. 21982, February 20, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第61页=====
The Coalition between Tories and Radicals 31 
appeared as the principal actor in a truly Balzacian drama of 
murder, adultery, legacy hunting and fraud.32 
"In the gloomy autumn of 1847," observes The Times, "when the mind of 
France was disturbed by the indefinable presage of approaching revolution [...] a 
great scandal in the very highest circles of Parisian life startled still further the 
already excited public and contributed most powerfully to accelerate the then 
impending catastrophe. Those who contemplate with attention the highly excited 
state of the public mind at this moment cannot contemplate without similar 
emotion the great scandal which has been disclosed to the public [...] in the Irish 
Court of Chancery."3 
Crimes within the ranks of the ruling caste, revealed at the same 
time in their arrogant helplessness and impotence, the destruction 
of the flower of the British army, the dissolution of old parties, a 
House of Commons without a majority, ministerial coalitions based 
on outlived traditions, the expense of a European war coincident 
with the most fearful crisis in commerce and industry—here are 
symptoms enough of an imminent political and social upheaval in 
Great Britain. It is of particular significance that the wreck of 
political illusions is taking place at the same time as the wreck of 
free-trade illusions. Just as the former ensured the government 
monopoly of the aristocracy, so the latter ensured the legislative 
monopoly of the bourgeoisie. 
Written on February 19, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 92, February 24, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time 
Marked with the sign x 
The Times, No.  21981,  February 19, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第62页=====
V«- X—-N*  1,088.  NEW-YORK. TUESDAY, MARCH 13. IB«.  THREE DOLLARS A YEA*. 
Frederick Engels 
THE WAR THAT LOOMS ON EUROPE 
A few weeks more, and unless peace is made at Vienna34 with a 
promptitude that nobody in Europe now seems to expect, we shall 
witness the opening on that Continent of a war in comparison 
with whose events the Crimean campaign will sink into that 
insignificance which, in a war between three of the greatest 
nations on the face of the earth, it always ought to have worn. The 
hitherto independent operations in the Black Sea, and in the 
Baltic, will then be connected by a line of battle extending across 
the whole breadth of the Continent which separates those two 
colossal inland lakes; and armies whose magnitude is adequate to 
the almost boundless extent of the Sarmatian plain, will contend 
for its dominion. Then, and then only, can the war be said to have 
become truly a European one. 
The Crimean campaign requires but a short additional notice at 
our hands. We have so often, and in such detail, described its 
character and its chances, that we have merely to record a few 
fresh facts in confirmation of our statements. A week ago we 
observed3 that it had degenerated into a steeple-chase of 
reenforcements, and that the Russians were likely to get the best 
of this race. There is now hardly a doubt that by the time when 
the season admits of uninterrupted operations, followed up 
according to a preconcerted plan, the Russians will have from 
120,000 to 150,000 men in the Peninsula, to whom the Allies can, 
with superhuman efforts, oppose, perhaps, 90,000. Supposing, 
even, that both France and England had troops sufficient to send 
there, where are the transports to be found, as long as out of 
See this volume, p.  3.—  Ed. 

=====第63页=====
The War That Looms on Europe 33 
every four steamers sent to the Black Sea, three are kept there 
under all possible pretexts? England has already completely 
disorganized her transatlantic mail steam service, and nothing is at 
present in greater demand there than ocean steamers; but the 
supply is exhausted. The only thing which could save the Allies, 
would be the arrival in the Crimea exactly at the time it is wanted, 
of an Austrian corps of some 30,000 men, to be embarked at the 
mouth of the Danube. Without such a reenforcement, neither the 
Piedmontese corps, nor the Neapolitan corps, nor the driblets of 
Anglo-French reenforcements, nor Omer Pasha's army, can do 
them any real good. 
Now let us see what part of their respective forces England and 
France have already engaged in the Crimea. We shall speak of the 
infantry only, for the proportions in which cavalry and artillery 
are attached to such expeditions are so variable that no positive 
conclusions respecting them can be established. Besides, the whole 
active force of a country is always engaged in proportion as its 
infantry is engaged. Of Turkey we speak not, for with the army of 
Omer Pasha she engages her last, her only army, in this struggle. 
What is left to her in Asia is no army; it is but a rabble. 
England3 possesses, in all, 99 regiments, or 106 battalions of 
infantry. Of these, at least 35 battalions are on Colonial service. Of 
the remainder, the first five divisions sent to the Crimea took up 
about 40b battalions more; and at least eight battalions have been 
sent since as reenforcements. There remain about 23 battalions, 
hardly one of which could be spared. Accordingly, England fairly 
acknowledges, by her last military measures, the peace establish­
ment of her army to be entirely exhausted. Various devices are 
brought forward in order to make up for what has been 
neglected. The militia, embodied to the number of some 50,000, 
are allowed to volunteer for foreign service. They are to occupy 
Gibraltar, Malta, Corfu, and thus to relieve about twelve battalions 
on Colonial service, which then may be sent to the Crimea. A 
foreign legion is decreed; but, unfortunately, no foreigners seem 
to come forward for enlistment under the rule of the cat-o'-nine­
tails.  Finally, on the 13th February, orders were issued to create 
second battalions for 93 regiments—43 of 1,000 men and 50 of 
1,200 men each. This would give an addition of 103,000 men, 
The text of this paragraph was used by Marx in his report "Parliamentary 
and Military Affairs" (see this volume, pp. 41-42).— Ed. 
Here the New-York Daily Tribune has a misprint: 46. The correct figure is 
given in the German version of this article published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung of April 
23, 1855.— Ed. 
S—3754 

=====第64页=====
34 Frederick Engels 
besides about 17,000 more men for the cavalry and artillery. But 
not one of these 120,000 men has as yet been enlisted; and then, 
how are they to be drilled and officered? The admirable 
organization and general management of the British army has 
contrived to engage, one way or another, between the Crimea and 
the colonies, almost the whole of the infantry, with the exception 
of depot companies and a few depot battalions—not only the 
men, but the cadres too. Now, there are plenty of half-pay 
generals, colonels and majors on the British army list [who] can be 
employed for this new force; but of captains on half-pay, as far as 
we know, there are none, or very few, while lieutenants, ensigns 
and non-commissioned officers are nowhere to be had in the 
manufactured state. Raw material there is in plenty; but raw 
officers to drill raw recruits would never do; and old, experienced, 
steady non-commissioned officers, as everybody knows, are the 
mainstay of every army. Besides this, we know from the best 
authority—Sir W. Napier—that it takes full three years to drill 
the tag-rag-and-bobtail of Old England into what John Bull calls 
"the first soldiers of the world" and "the best blood of England." 
If that is the case when the  cadres  are at hand waiting to be filled 
up, how long will it take, without subaltern or non-commissioned 
officers, to manufacture heroes out of the 120,000 men who are 
not yet found? We may consider the whole military force of 
England so far engaged in this war that, for the next twelvemonth, 
the utmost the British Government can do will be to keep up a 
"heroic little band" of forty or fifty thousand men before the 
enemy. That number could only be exceeded for very short 
periods, and with essential derangement of all preparation for 
future reenforcements. 
France,3 with her larger army and far more complete organiza­
tion, has engaged a far inferior proportional part of her forces. 
France possesses 100 regiments of infantry of the line, 3 of 
Zouaves, and 2 foreign legions, at 3 battalions each; beside 20 
battalions of rifles, and 6 African battalions—together 341 
battalions. Of these, 100 battalions, or one to each regiment of the 
Here begins the text that was reproduced by Marx, with abridgements and 
alterations, in his report "Condition of the Armies" in the Neue Oder-Zeitung of 
February 24, 1855. The passage beginning with the words "France, with her larger 
army..." is preceded by the following paragraph: "We have seen that in the next 
twelve months England can put up against the enemy no more than 50,000 of her 
own troops, a fighting force which despite its numerical weakness is not to be 
despised given good leadership and sound administration. One need only recall the 
battle of Inkerman."" —Ed. 

=====第65页=====
The War That Looms on Europe 35 
line,  are considered as dépôt-battalions, for the reception and 
drilling of recruits; the two first battalions only are sent out for 
active service, while the dépôt prepares the reenforcements 
destined to keep up their full strength. Thus, 100 battalions must 
be at once struck off the number. If subsequently these 
dépôt-battalions are made use of as the groundwork for a third 
field battalion, as was more than once done under Napoleon, they 
can do so by having an extraordinary number of recruits made 
over to them, and then it is some time before they are fit for the 
field. Thus, the available force of the French army, at the present 
time,  does not exceed 241 battalions. Of these, 25 at least are 
required for Algeria. Four are at Rome. Nine divisions of infantry, 
or at least 80 battalions, have been sent to the Crimea, to 
Constantinople and to Athens. Altogether, say 110 battalions 
engaged, or very nearly one half of the available infantry of 
France, upon the peace establishment; minus the depots. Now, the 
arrangements in the French army, the dépôt-battalions organized 
beforehand, the calling in of the soldiers dismissed on furlough 
during their last year of service, the faculty of calling out the full 
number of every year's conscription, beside extraordinary recruit­
ings,  and finally the aptitude of the French for military duty, allow 
the Government to double the number of their infantry in about a 
twelvemonth. Considering the quiet but uninterrupted armaments 
made since the middle of 1853, the establishment of ten or twelve 
battalions of Imperial Guards, and the strength in which the 
French troops mustered in their respective camps last autumn, it 
may be supposed that their force of infantry at home is now fully 
as strong as it was before the nine divisions left the country, and 
that, as regards the capability of forming third field battalions out 
of the dépôt-battalions, without much impairing their efficiency as 
depots, it is even stronger. If we estimate, however, at 350,000 
men, the infantry force which France will have on her own 
territory by the end of March, we shall be rather above than below 
the mark. With cavalry, artillery, &c, such an infantry force 
would, according to the French organization, represent an army of 
about 500,000 men. Of these, at least 200,000 would have to 
remain at home, as cadres for the dépôts, for the maintenance of 
tranquillity in the interior, in the military workshops, or hospitals. 
So that by the 1st of April, France might take the field with 
300,000 men, comprising about 200 battalions of infantry. But 
these 200 battalions would, neither in organization nor in 
discipline and steadiness under fire, be upon a par with the troops 
sent to the Crimea. They would contain many young recruits, and 
3* 

=====第66页=====
36 Frederick Engels 
many battalions composed for the occasion. All corps where 
officers and men are strangers to each other, where a hasty 
organization upon the prescribed plan has but just been com­
pleted in time before they march out, are vastly inferior to those 
old established bodies in which the habit of long service, of 
dangers shared together, and of daily intercourse for years, has 
established that esprit de corps which absorbs very soon, by its 
powerful influence, even the youngest recruits. It must, then, be 
admitted that the eighty battalions sent to the Crimea represent a 
far more important portion of the French army than their mere 
number indicates. If England has engaged, almost to a man, the 
best part of her army, France, too, has sent to the East nearly 
one-half of her finest troops. 
We need not here go into a recapitulation of the Russian forces, 
having very recently stated their numbers and distribution.3 
Suffice it to say that of the Russian active army, or that destined to 
act upon the western frontier of the Empire, only the third, 
fourth, fifth and sixth corps have as yet been engaged during the 
war. The Guards and Grenadiers corps are quite intact, as is the 
first corps also; the second corps appears to have detached about 
one division to the Crimea. Beside these troops, eight corps of 
reserve, equal in number of battalions, if not in numerical 
strength, to the eight corps of the active army, have been, or are 
still being formed. Thus, Russia brings up against the West a force 
of about 750 battalions, 250 of which, however, may be still 
forming, and will always be weak in numbers, while 200 more 
have suffered great losses during two campaigns. The Reserve, as 
far as the fifth and sixth battalions of the regiments are 
concerned, must principally consist of old soldiers, if the original 
plan of organization has been followed up; but the 7th and 8th 
battalions must have been formed of recruits, and be very 
inefficient, as the Russian, in spite of his docility, is very slow to 
learn military duties. The whole reserve, besides, is badly 
officered. Russia, therefore, has engaged at the present time about 
one-half of her regularly organized active army. But then, the 
Guards, Grenadiers, first and second corps, forming the other 
half,  which has not yet been engaged, are the very flower of her 
army, the pet troops of the Emperor, the efficiency of which he 
watches over with especial care. And, moreover, by engaging 
See Engels' article "The European War" (present edition, Vol. 13, pp. 
609-14).—-Ed. 

=====第67页=====
The War That Looms on Europe 37 
one-half of her active army, what has Russia obtained?3  She has 
almost annihilated the offensive and defensive strength of Turkey; 
she has forced England to sacrifice an army of 50,000 men, and 
has disabled her for at least a twelvemonth; and she has, besides, 
forced France to engage a similar proportion of troops to those 
she herself engaged. And while the best African regiments of 
France are already before the enemy, Russia's own élite has not yet 
fired a shot. 
So far, then, Russia has had the best of it, although her troops 
employed in Europe cannot boast of a single success, but have 
had, on the contrary, to give way in every action of moment, and 
to abandon every one of their enterprises. But the matter will 
change entirely as soon as Austria joins in the war. She has an 
army of some 500,000 men ready for the field, beside 100,000 
more in the depots, and 120,000 more in reserve; an army, which, 
by very little extraordinary recruiting, may be brought to some 
850,000 men. But we will take its number at 600,000, inclusive of 
dépôts, and omitting the reserve, which has not yet been called in. 
Of these 600,000 men, 100,000 are in the dépôts, about 70,000 
more in Italy and other portions of the interior not menaced by 
Russia. The remaining 430,000 b are assembled in several armies, 
from Bohemia through Galicia to the Lower Danube, and 150,000 
men could be in a very short time concentrated upon any given 
point. This formidable army at once turns the balance against 
Russia, so soon as Austria begins to act against her; for since the 
whole of the late Russian army of the Danube has been drafted 
into the Crimea, the Austrians are superior to the Russians on 
every point, and can bring their reserves to the frontier quite as 
soon, in spite of the start the Russians have now got. There is only 
this to notice: that the Austrian reserve is far more limited in its 
number than that of the Russians, and that the 120,000 reserve 
soldiers once called in, all further increase must arise from fresh 
recruiting, and, therefore, be very slow. The longer, therefore, the 
Austrians hold back a declaration of war, the more advantage they 
give to Russia. To make up for this, we are told, a French 
auxiliary army is to march into Austria. But the road from Dijon 
or Lyons to Cracow is rather long, and unless matters are well 
Instead of this sentence the German version published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung has: "Only the effect of diplomacy on the Western Powers' conduct of 
the war explains the results already achieved by Russia." — Ed. 
Here the New-York Daily Tribune has a misprint: 330,000. The correct figure 
is given in the German version published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第68页=====
38 Frederick Engels 
arranged, the French army may arrive too late, unless the intrinsic 
value of the reorganized Austrian army should render it a match 
for even a moderately superior number of Russians.3 
Austria, then, is the arbiter of the situation. Ever since she took 
up a military position on her Eastern frontiers, she has maintained 
her superiority over the Russians. If well-timed arrivals of Russian 
reserves should for a moment deprive her of it, she may trust to 
her experienced generals—the only ones, save a very few 
Hungarians, who of late years have shown military genius—and to 
her well-organized troops, most of whom have been under fire. A 
few skilful maneuvers, a very slight step backward, would force 
her opponent to such detachments as to assure her a fair field. 
Militarily speaking, Russia is thrown completely on the defensive 
the very moment Austria moves her armies.b 
Another point must be mentioned. If France raises her domestic 
army to 500,000 men, and Austria increases her total forces to 
800,000, either of these countries is capable of calling, within a 
twelvemonth, at least 250,000 men more under arms.0 On the 
other hand, the Czar, if ever he completes the seventh and eighth 
battalions of his infantry regiments, thereby raising his total active 
force to say 900,000 men, has done almost everything in his power 
for defense. His late recruiting is said to have everywhere met 
with considerable difficulties; the standard of hight has had to be 
lowered, and other means resorted to, to get the requisite number 
of men. The decree of the Emperor, calling the whole of the male 
population of Southern Russia36 under arms, far from being an 
actual increase of the army, is a plain confession of the 
impossibility of further regular recruiting. This means was 
resorted to on the French invasion of 1812, when the country was 
actually invaded; and then in seventeen provinces only. Moscow 
then furnished 80,000 volunteers, or one tenth of the population 
of the province; Smolensk sent 25,000 men, and so forth. But, 
during the war they were nowhere; and these hundreds of 
thousands of volunteers did not prevent the Russians from 
arriving on the Vistula in as bad a state, and in as total a 
Instead of the passage beginning with the words "and unless matters are well 
arranged" and ending with the words "a moderately superior number of 
Russians", the version published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "The longer the 
diplomats procrastinate the less the likelihood that it will arrive on time." — Ed. 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung further has: "Even a short-lived successful offensive 
could not alter this result."—Ed 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung further has: "while England's contingent would 
continually grow from the second year onwards."—Ed. 

=====第69页=====
The War That Looms on Europe 39 
dissolution as the French themselves.3 This new levy en masse 
means, besides, that Nicholas is resolved on war to the utmost. 
But if Austria's participation in the war, throws Russia, militarily 
speaking, on the defensive, this is not necessarily the case, 
politically speaking. The Czar's great political means of offense— 
we have called attention to it more than once—is the raising of 
the Austrian and Turkish Slavons and the proclamation of 
Hungarian independence. How greatly these measures are 
dreaded by Austrian statesmen is known to our readers. No doubt, 
in case of necessity, the Czar will resort to this means; with what 
result, remains to be seen. We have not spoken of Prussia—she is 
likely to go, finally, with the West against Russia, though perhaps 
only after some storms which nobody can foresee. At all events, 
until some national movement takes place, her troops are not 
likely to play  a* very important part, and, therefore, we may for 
the present take very little account of her. 
Written about February 20, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4332, March 8, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1022, March 13, 1855; an 
abridged German version was first pub­
lished in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 93, 
February 24, 1855 
Marked with the sign X 
a Here ends the text reproduced by Marx in his report "Condition of the 
Armies" in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第70页=====
40 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
PARLIAMENTARY AND MILITARY AFFAIRS 
41» 
London, February 20. Although the House of Commons sat 
yesterday from 4 p. m. to 2 a. m. and voted away some £7.5 
million sterling for the army, the debates lacked anything 
interesting enough to report. Therefore, we shall only note that 
Palmerston disconcerted his liberal opponents both by the 
deliberate triviality of his replies and by the provocatively 
confident insolence with which he delivered these trivialities. 3 
Having declaimed about the battle of Balaklava37 in the manner of 
Astley's Amphitheatre, he attacked Layard for "vulgar declama­
tion against the aristocracy", for it was not the aristocracy that was 
dug-in in the Commissariat, in Transport and in the Medical 
department. He forgot that its lackeys are dug-in there. Layard 
rightly emphasised that the commissions invented by Palmerston 
are good for nothing but stirring up conflicts of competence in the 
expeditionary army. "What!" cried Palmerston (he saw himself 
again in the place of Richard II and Parliament in the role of Wat 
Tyler's mob). "You want to set up a parliamentary committee 
good for nothing but producing Blue Books,38 and you take 
exception to my commissions, which 'have to work'!" Palmerston 
treated Parliament with such superciliousness that for once he 
even found it superfluous to make his own jokes. He borrowed 
them from the ministerial morning papers which the Members of 
Parliament had in front of them on the table. They were spared 
neither the "Committee of Public Safety" of The Morning 
An account of Palmerston's speech was published in The Times, No. 21982, 
February 20,  1855.—  Ed 

=====第71页=====
Parliamentary and Military Affairs 41 
Chronicle* nor the jibe of The Morning Post about transporting the 
inquisitorious Members to the Crimea—and leaving them there. 
Only a parliament constituted like this one could have stood for 
this. 
So, while in Parliament Palmerston out-Aberdeens Old Aber­
deen, he lets it be known—not directly, through his own papers, 
but through the gullible newspaper of the united victuallers,b that 
he is not a free agent but bound in chains by the Court, etc. 
As a peace congress39 is soon to meet in Vienna, it is time to 
speak of the war and to estimate the military forces at the disposal 
of the powers which have so far appeared — more or less—on the 
battlefield. This is not a question only of the numerical strength of 
the armies, but of that part of them which can be used in 
offensive operations. We shall give details only of the infantry, as 
the other arms must be proportionate.0 
England possesses, in all, 99 regiments, or 106 battalions of 
infantry. Of these, at least 35 battalions are on Colonial service. Of 
the remainder, the first five divisions sent to the Crimea took up 
40 battalions more; and at least eight battalions have been sent 
since as reinforcements. There remain about 23 battalions, hardly 
one of which could be spared for service abroad. The militia, 
embodied to the number of over 50,000, are allowed to volunteer 
for foreign service. They are to occupy Gibraltar, Malta, Corfu, 
and thus to relieve about twelve battalions, which then may be sent 
to the Crimea. A foreign legion, as Palmerston stated in the House 
of Commons yesterday, will not be set up. Finally, on the 13th 
February, orders were issued to create second battalions for 93 
regiments—43 of 1,000 men and 50 of 1,200 men each. This 
would give an addition of 103,000 men, besides about 17,000 
more men for the cavalry and artillery. But not one of these 
120,000 men has as yet been enlisted, and afterwards they have to 
be drilled and officered. 
The admirable organisation existing at present has contrived to 
employ almost the whole of the infantry—with the exception of 
depot companies and a few depot battalions—between the Crimea 
and the colonies, and moreover not only the men but, though this 
a The Morning Chronicle, No. 27504, February 19, 1855.— Ed. 
The Morning Advertiser, which had published the articles "A Minister must be 
ambitious..." (No. 19863, February 17, 1855) and "Faithful are the wounds of a 
friend...", No. 19864, February 19, 1855.—£d. 
c The following paragraphs are largely based on Engels' article "The War That 
Looms on Europe", which was published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4332, 
March 8, 1855 (see this volume, pp. 32-39).— Ed. 

=====第72页=====
42 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
seems incredible, the cadres as well. Now, there are plenty of 
half-pay generals, colonels and majors on the British army list and 
they can be employed for this new force. But there are hardly any 
captains on half-pay, and no lieutenants and non-commissioned 
officers at all. But it is well known that the non-commissioned 
officers form the cornerstone of every army. According to General 
Sir William Napier, the historian of the Peninsular war,3 the best 
authority in this field, it takes fully three years to drill the 
"tag-rag" and "bobtail"b (the lumpenproletariat) of Old England 
into "the best blood of England", "the first soldiers of the world". 
If that is the case when the cadres are at hand and need only to be 
replenished, how long will it therefore take to manufacture heroes 
out of these 120,000 men? During the next twelvemonth, the 
utmost the British Government can do is to keep up a "heroic 
little band" of fifty thousand men before the enemy. That number 
could be exceeded for short periods, but only at the cost of 
considerably upsetting all preparation for future reinforcements. 
The departure of the mail compels us to break off at this point. 
Written on February 20, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 91, February 23, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 
This refers to W. F. P. Napier's History of the War in the Peninsula and in the 
South of France from the Year 1807 to the Year 1814, Vols. I-VI.— Ed 
The words in quotation marks are given in English in the original.— Ed 

=====第73页=====
43 
Karl Marx 
ON THE NEW MINISTERIAL CRISIS 
London, February 24. Yesterday, the House of Commons was 
packed, as ministerial statements on the breaking up of the first 
Palmerston administration had been announced.40 The closely-
crowded Members waited impatiently for the arrival of the noble 
Viscount, who at last appeared, an hour after the House had 
opened, received with laughter by one side, with cheers3 by the 
other. The Ministers who had broken away—Graham, Gladstone 
and Herbert—took their seats on the benches of the so-called 
Radicals (the Manchester School41 ), where Mr. Bright seemed to 
welcome them. One bench in front of them Cardwell, who had 
also resigned, sat enthroned. Lord Palmerston rose to move that 
the Roebuck Committee should be considered immediately. Sir 
James Graham then opened the ministers' case b and was still on 
the threshold of his rhetorical phantasy building when Palmerston 
began to accompany him with unmistakable signs of healthy 
sleep. 
Graham's polemic against the Committee of Inquiry was 
mainly confined to the claim that it represented an intrusion into 
the royal prerogatives by the House of Commons. As everyone 
knows, for a century and a half it has been the custom of English 
ministries to talk about the privileges of the House vis-à-vis the 
Crown and about the prerogatives of the Crown vis-à-vis the 
House. In fact Graham spoke threateningly about danger to the 
Anglo-French alliance in consequence of the Committee's investig-
a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
The speeches of Graham and the others were reported in The Times, No. 21986, 
February 24, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第74页=====
44 Karl Marx 
ations. What was this but an insinuation that the French ally would 
prove to have been the main cause of the deplorable mishaps! As 
to his own resignation from the Ministry, the Ministry had 
regarded Roebuck's motion from the beginning simply as a 
disguised vote of no confidence. Aberdeen and Newcastle had 
therefore been sacrificed and the old Ministry dissolved. The new 
Ministry consisted of the old personnel with the exception of 
Canning and Panmure; how then should Roebuck's motion 
suddenly be capable of a new interpretation? Not he, but Lord 
Palmerston had changed his views from Friday to Tuesday. Not 
he, but his noble friend, was a deserter. In addition—and this was 
a naive admission—Graham gave as reason for his resignation 
from the renewed Ministry that he had become convinced 
"that the present Administration [...] does not [...] possess in a greater degree the 
confidence of the House than that Administration which only a few weeks since 
retired". 
During his statement Graham said inter alia: 
"When the new Administration was formed I wished to know from my noble 
Lord" (Palmerston), "whether there was to be any change in the foreign policy'of 
Lord Aberdeen's Administration [...]; and also whether [...] there was any alteration 
with respect to the stipulated peace terms. Lord Palmerston gave me the fullest 
assurance that in these respects everything will remain as before." 
(These words are quoted here as they were spoken in the House 
of Commons, not as they were printed in more circumscribed form 
in the newspapers.)42 
Bright at once took up this pronouncement by Graham, stating 
that he did not wish the Palmerston Government to be over­
thrown, that he had no personal animosity against the noble Lord, 
that rather he was convinced Palmerston and Russell possessed 
everything the unjustly persecuted Aberdeen had lacked, namely 
sufficient popularity to make peace on the basis of the four 
points. 
Sidney Herbert: Roebuck's motion consisted of two quite diffe­
rent parts. First, he proposed to investigate the state of the army at 
Sevastopol; second, to investigate the conduct of the Government 
departments specifically in charge of the maintenance of the 
army. The House was entitled to do the second, but not 
the first. Presumably it was for that very reason that he, Herbert, 
had opposed the "second" on 26 January3 as violently as he now, 
Herbert's speech in the House of Commons on January 26, 1855. The Times, 
No. 21962, January 27, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第75页=====
On the New Ministerial Crisis 45 
on 23 February, opposed the "first"? When he (Herbert) took 
his position in the present Ministry, Lord Palmerston, in line 
with his speech of last Friday,3 had declared the Committee 
unconstitutional, abolished with the resignation of Aberdeen and 
Newcastle. Palmerston had not even doubted that the House 
would now reject Roebuck's motion without a debate. The Com­
mittee, in so far as its object was not a charge against the Govern­
ment but an investigation of the state of the army, would prove an 
immense sham. Lord Palmerston, since he did not have the courage 
of his repeatedly expressed conviction, was weakening the Govern­
ment. What was the use of a strong man if he pursued a weak 
policy? 
Gladstone in fact added nothing to the statements of his 
colleagues except the kind of argumentation which, on the 
occasion of Gladstone's resignation from Peel's administration—it 
was then a question of the Maynooth college44—moved the late 
Peel to declare that he believed he understood the reasons for his 
friend's resignation before his friend undertook to lay them before 
Parliament in a two-hour speech. 
Palmerston considered it superfluous to enter into the explana­
tions of his ex-colleagues. He regretted their resignations, but 
would be able to console  himself.  In his view the Committee did 
not intend any reproof but an investigation of the state of the 
army. He had opposed the setting up of the Committee but had 
become convinced that the decision of the House could not be 
rescinded. The country could not be without a government, hence 
he would remain the Government with or without the Committee. 
To Bright's question he replied that the peace negotiations were 
meant seriously and that Russell's instructions had been drafted on 
the basis of the four points. He told the House nothing of the 
position in his own Ministry. 
It is incontestable, that in spite of the sudden breaking up of his 
first administration, Palmerston has already won some victories, if 
not in public opinion, then in the Ministry and in Parliament. By 
Russell's mission to Vienna he has got rid of a troublesome, 
temperamental rival. By his compromise with Roebuck he has 
transformed the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry into a 
Government Commission which counts only as the fourth after the 
three appointed by  himself.  As Sidney Herbert says, he has put 
"immense sham" in place of a real thing. The resignation of the 
Peelites has enabled him to form a ministry consisting of nothing 
a February 16, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第76页=====
46 Karl Marx 
but ciphers with himself as the only figure. It is beyond question, 
however, that the formation of such a real Palmerston Ministry 
will have to struggle with almost insuperable obstacles. 
Written on February 24, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 97, February 27, 1855 
Marked with the sign X Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第77页=====
47 
Karl Marx 
[JOSEPH] HUME 
London, February 24. With Hume, the veteran of the House of 
Commons has died. His long parliamentary life was an accurate 
barometer of the radical bourgeois party which reached its highest 
point in 1831. In the initial period of the reformed House 45 a 
kind of parliamentary Warwick or Member-maker, eight years 
later he figured with Daniel O'Connell and Feargus O'Connor as 
one of the originators of the People's Charter,46 which to this day 
forms the political programme of the Chartists and basically 
contains only the demand for a universal franchise together with 
the conditions which would make it a reality in England. 
The break between the workers and the bourgeois agitators 
which soon followed found Hume on the side of the latter. At the 
time of the Russell Ministry he drafted the "Little Charter", which 
was adopted by the so-called "parliamentary and financial 
reformers" 47 as their programme. Instead of the six points of the 
People's Charter it contains three points and replaces the 
"universal" franchise by a more or less "enlarged" franchise.3 
Finally, in 1852, Hume proclaimed a new programme in which he 
even abandoned his "Little Charter" and demanded only one 
point: elections by ballot.b For the rest, Hume was the classical 
representative of the so-called "independent" opposition, which 
Cobbett aptly and exhaustively described as the "safety-valve" of 
the old system. In his last days the habit of proposing motions and 
Hume's speech in the House of Commons on June 20, 1848. Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates, third series, Vol. XCIX, London, 1848.— Ed. 
Hume's speech in the House of Commons on March 25, 1852. Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates, third series, Vol. CXX, London, 1852.— Ed. 

=====第78页=====
48 Karl Marx 
then, just before the closure, at the nod of a minister, withdrawing 
them again, became a veritable mania with him. His flirting with 
"economising public funds" had become proverbial. Each Ministry 
allowed him to fight and reduce minor items so as to get the big 
ones the more safely through the House. 
Written on February 24, 1855 Printed according to the news-
i-i-i • paper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 98, February 28, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 

=====第79页=====
49 
Karl Marx 
PALMERSTON 
London, February 27. The outcry against the aristocracy has 
been answered ironically by Palmerston with a ministry of ten 
lords and four baronets—ten lords, moreover, of whom eight sit 
in the House of Lords. He has met the dissatisfaction occasioned 
by the compromise between the various factions of the oligarchy 
with a compromise between various families within the Whig 
group. For the Grey clan, the ducal Sutherland family and, finally, 
the Clarendon family have received indemnification in his 
ministry. Sir George Grey, the Home Secretary, is a cousin of Earl 
Grey, whose brother-in-law is Sir Charles Wood, First Lord of the 
Admiralty. Earl Granville and the Duke of Argyll represent the 
Sutherland family. Sir George Cornewall Lewis, Chancellor of the 
Exchequer, is a brother-in-law of the Earl of Clarendon, the Foreign 
Secretary. India alone has been allotted to a man without a title, 
Vernon Smith; but at any rate he married into one of the Whig 
families. "A kingdom for a horse!" shouted Richard III. a "A horse 
for a kingdom!" shouts Palmerston, aping Caligula, and makes 
Vernon Smith Grand Mogul of India. 
"Lord Palmerston has given us not only the most aristocratic Administration 
of which we have any example in the history of the countrv", complains The 
Morning Advertiser, "but he has constructed his Government of the very worst 
aristocratic materials he could have selected." 
The worthy Advertiser, however, finds comfort in the fact that 
"Palmerston is not a free agent. [...] He is still in fetters and bonds". 
Shakespeare, Richard III, Act V, Scene 4.— Ed. 
"The Ministry of Titles", The Morning Advertiser, No. 19872, February 28, 
1855.—  Ed. 

=====第80页=====
50 Karl Marx 
As we predicted,3 Lord Palmerston has formed a cabinet of 
ciphers, he himself being the only figure in it. Lord John Russell, 
who in 1851 had tumbled him undiplomatically out of the Whig 
cabinet, has been sent by him diplomatically on a journey.50 
Palmerston has made use of the Peelites to enter upon Aberdeen's 
heritage. As soon as he was sure of the premiership he dropped 
the Aberdeenitesb and filched from Russell, as Disraeli says, not 
only the clothes of the Whigs but the Whigs themselves.0 Despite 
the great similarity, almost identity, of the present government 
and Russell's Whig administration of 1846-1852, nothing could be 
more erroneous than to confuse them. This time we have not a 
cabinet at all but Lord Palmerston in lieu of a cabinet. Although 
its members are largely the same as before, the posts have been 
distributed among them in such a way, its following in the House 
of Commons is so different and it is making its appearance under 
such completely changed circumstances that whereas before it was 
a weak Whig ministry it is now the strong dictatorship of a single 
man, provided Palmerston is not a spurious Pitt, Bonaparte not a 
spurious Napoleon, and Lord John Russell continues to travel. 
Though the English bourgeois has been annoyed by the unex­
pected turn of events he is at present amused by the unconsciona­
ble adroitness with which Palmerston has duped and cheated both 
friend and foe. Palmerston, says the merchant of the City, has 
once more proved himself "clever".d But "clever" is an untranslat­
able qualification, full of ambiguity and rich in connotations. It 
comprises all the attributes of a man who knows how to blow his 
own trumpet, and understands what profits him and what brings 
harm to others. Virtuous and respectable as the English bourgeois 
is, he nevertheless admires most the man who is "clever", who 
does not bother about morals, who is not disconcerted by respect, 
who regards principles as snares in which to catch his fellows. If 
Palmerston is so "clever" will he not outwit the Russians just as he 
outwitted Russell? Thus speaks the politician of the English upper 
middle-class. 
As for the Tories, they believe the good old times are back 
again, the evil coalition spell has been broken and the traditional 
Whig and Tory governmental seesaw has been restored. A real 
change, not confined to mere passive dissolution, could in fact 
a See this volume, p.  45.—  Ed. 
Graham, Gladstone and Herbert.— Ed. 
Disraeli's speech in the House of Commons on February 28, 1845. Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates, third series, Vol. LXXVIII, London,  1845.—  Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第81页=====
Palmerston 51 
only come about under a Tory government. Only when the Tories 
are at the helm is tremendous pressure from without3 exerted and 
the inevitable transformations are put into effect. For example, the 
emancipation of the Catholics during Wellington's ministry; the 
repeal of the Corn Laws during Peel's ministry; and the same was 
true if not of the Reform Bill then at least of the reform agitation, 
which was more important than its result.51 
When the English asked a Dutchman to come specially across 
the sea to become their Kingb it was for the purpose of ushering 
in with the new dynasty a new epoch—the epoch of the 
association of the landed aristocracy with the financial aristocracy. 
Ever since then we find privilege bestowed by blood and privilege 
bestowed by gold in constitutional equilibrium. Blood, for instance, 
decides in the case of certain army posts, whose incumbents hold 
them by virtue of family connections, nepotism or favouritism; but 
gold gets its due since all army commissions can be bought and 
sold for cash. It has been calculated that the officers now serving 
in the various regiments have invested an amount of £6 million in 
their posts. In order not to forfeit the rights they have acquired 
during their service and not to be ousted from their jobs by some 
young money-bags, the poorer officers borrow money to secure 
their advancement and thus become encumbered with mortgages. 
In the church as in the army, family connections and ready cash 
are the two factors that count. While part of the ecclesiastical 
offices is allotted to the younger sons of the aristocracy, the other 
part belongs to the highest bidder. Trade in the "souls" of the 
English people—in so far as they belong to the Established 
Church—is no less usual than the slave trade in Virginia. In this 
trade there exist not only buyers and sellers but also brokers. One 
such "clerical" broker, named Simpson, appeared yesterday before 
the Court of Queen's Benchc52  to demand the fee due to him 
from a certain Lamb, who, he claimed, had contracted to procure 
him the right to have the rector Josiah Rodwell presented for the 
West-Hackney parish benefice. Simpson had stipulated 5 per cent 
from both buyer and seller, besides some minor charges. Lamb, he 
said, had not fulfilled his obligations. The circumstances were as 
follows: Lamb is the son of a seventy-year-old rector holding two 
benefices in Sussex 'whose market price is estimated at £16,000. 
Marx uses the English words "pressure from without" and gives the German 
translation.— Ed. 
William of Orange.— Ed 
c "Court of Queen's Bench. Guildhall, Feb. 26", The Times, No. 21988, 
February 27, 1855. Marx gives the name of the court in English.— Ed 

=====第82页=====
52 Karl Marx 
The price is naturally in direct proportion to the income from the 
parish and in inverse proportion to the age of the incumbent. 
Lamb junior is the patron of the livings held by Lamb senior and 
is also the brother of a still younger Lamb, the owner of the living 
and rector of West-Hackney. Since West-Hackney's rector is still 
very young, the market price of the next presentation to his 
sinecure is relatively low. Though it provides an annual income of 
£550 as well as a rectory, its owner has agreed to sell the right to 
the next appointment for only £1,000. His brother has promised 
him the Sussex parishes upon the death of their father, but wants 
to sell his thus vacated living in West-Hackney through Simpson to 
Josiah Rodwell for £3,000, thus pocketing a net profit of £2,000, 
and his brother obtaining a better benefice. The broker would 
have received a commission of 5 per cent., i.e., £300. It did not 
transpire why the deal did not go through. The court awarded the 
broker Simpson £50 in compensation "for work done". 
Written on February 27, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 105, March 3, 1855 
Marked with the sign X Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第83页=====
53 
Karl Marx 
THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION 
London, March 2. While in every particular the British Constitu­
tion has failed at every point where the war has put it to the test, 
the coalition Ministry at home, the most constitutional of all 
ministries in the history of England, has broken up. Forty 
thousand British soldiers have died on the shores of the Black 
Sea—victims of the British Constitution! Officers, General  Staff, 
Commissariat, Medical Department, Transport Service, Admiralty, 
Horse Guards, 3 Ordnance Office, Army and Navy, all have broken 
down and have discredited themselves in the esteem of the world; 
yet all have had the satisfaction of knowing that they have simply 
done their duty in the eyes of the British Constitution! The Times 
spoke more truly than it surmised when it exclaimed with 
reference to this universal bankruptcy: "It is the British Constitu­
tion that is under trial."b It has been tried and found guilty. 
But what is the British Constitution? Does it essentially consist of 
a representative system and a limitation of the executive power? 
These features distinguish it neither from the Constitution of the 
United States of North America nor from the constitutions of the 
innumerable British joint-stock companies which understand 
"their business". The British Constitution is indeed nothing but an 
antiquated, obsolete, out-of-date compromise between the 
bourgeoisie, which rules not officially but in fact in all decisive 
spheres of civil society, and the landed aristocracy, which governs 
officially. Originally, after the "glorious" revolution of 1688, only a 
Marx uses the English term.— Ed, 
"Among all the political changes...", The Times, No. 21979, February 16, 
1855.—  Ed. 

=====第84页=====
54 Karl Marx 
section of the bourgeoisie, the aristocracy of finance,54 was included 
in the compromise. The Reform Bill of 1831 admitted another 
section, the  millocracy*  as the English call it, i.e. the high dignitaries 
of the industrial bourgeoisie.55 The history of legislation since 1831 
is the history of the concessions which have been made to the 
industrial bourgeoisie, from the new Poor Law to the repeal of the 
Corn Laws56 and from the repeal of the Corn Laws to the death 
duties on landed property. 
Even if the bourgeoisie—which is only the highest stratum of 
the middle classes—was on the whole acknowledged also politically 
as the ruling  class,  this was only on condition that the entire system 
of government in all its detail, even the executive department of 
the legislative power, i.e. the actual making of laws in both Houses 
of Parliament, remained safely in the hands of the landed 
aristocracy. [About] 1830 the bourgeoisie preferred the renewal of 
the compromise with the landed aristocracy to a compromise with 
the mass of the English people. Now the aristocracy, which, 
subject to certain principles laid down by the bourgeoisie, 
rules supreme in the Cabinet, in Parliament, in the 
administration, in the army and the navy—this section of the 
British nation, relatively the most important section, has just now 
been compelled to sign its own death warrant and to admit under 
the eyes of all the world that it no longer has the calling to govern 
Britain. One need only observe the attempts to galvanise its 
corpse! Ministry upon ministry is formed merely to go into 
dissolution after a regime of a few weeks. The crisis is permanent, 
the government only provisional. All political action is suspended, 
and everybody admits that his only aim is to keep the political 
machinery oiled sufficiently to prevent it from seizing up 
completely. The House of Commons does not even recognise itself 
in ministries created in its own image. 
In the midst of this general helplessness not only has war to be 
waged, but an enemy even more dangerous than the Emperor 
Nicholas has to be fought. This enemy is the crisis in trade and 
industry which since last September is growing more violent and 
universal every day. Its iron hand immediately closed the mouths 
of the superficial apostles of free trade who preached for years 
that glutted markets and social crises had been banished forever 
into the shadowy realm of the past since the repeal of the Corn 
Laws.  The glutted markets are there, but now nobody cries more 
loudly about the lack of prudence which prevented the manufac-
Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 

=====第85页=====
The British Constitution 55 
turers from limiting production than the selfsame economists who 
five months ago still taught—with the infallibility of dogmatism— 
that too much could never be produced. 
This disease had already revealed itself in chronic form at the 
time of the strike in Preston.57 Shortly afterwards the glut in the 
American market led to the outbreak of the crisis in the United 
States. India and China, though overstocked, as well as California 
and Australia, continued to form outlet channels for overproduc­
tion. As the English manufacturers could no longer sell their 
commodities in the home market without depressing prices, they 
resorted to the dangerous expedient of sending their commodities 
abroad on consignment, particularly to India, China, Australia and 
California. This makeshift enabled trade to proceed for a while 
with less disturbance than if the goods had been thrown on the 
market all at once. But no sooner did these shipments arrive at 
their destinations, than they determined prices there, and by the 
end of September the effect was felt here in England. 
The crisis then changed its chronic character for an acute one. 
The first houses to collapse were the cotton printers, among them 
old established firms in and around Manchester. Then came the 
turn of the shipowners and the Australia and California mer­
chants, then the Chinese houses, and finally the Indian. All took 
their turn, most of them suffered heavily, many had to suspend 
business, and the danger is not over for any of these branches of 
trade. On the contrary, it is constantly growing. The silk 
manufacturers were also hit; their industry is at the moment 
reduced to almost nothing, and the localities where it is carried on 
are experiencing the greatest distress. Now it will be the turn of 
the cotton spinners and manufacturers. Some of them have 
already succumbed and many more will yet have to share 
their fate. As we have seen earlier,a the fine-yarn spinners are 
working only short-time, and the coarse-yarn spinners will soon have 
to resort to the same remedy. A section of them are already wor­
king a few days a week only. How long will they be able to 
stand it? 
A few more months, and the crisis in the factory districts will 
reach the depth of 1842, if it does not exceed it. But no sooner 
will its effects be generally felt among the working classes, than 
the political movement which has more or less been dormant 
among these classes over the past six years, leaving behind only 
the cadres for a new agitation, will spring up again. The conflict 
See this volume, p.  23.—Ed. 

=====第86页=====
56 Karl Marx 
between the industrial proletariat and the bourgeoisie will flare up 
again at the same time that the conflict between the bourgeoisie 
and the aristocracy reaches its climax. Then the mask which has so 
far hidden the real features of Britain's political physiognomy 
from foreigners, will drop. Nevertheless, only those unfamiliar 
with the wealth of this country in human and material resources 
will doubt that it will emerge victorious and freshly rejuvenated 
from the impending great crisis. 
Written on March 2, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 109, March 6, 1855 
Marked with the sign x Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第87页=====
57 
Karl Marx 
LAYARD 
London, March 2. Layard, the great Nineveh scholar, in a speech 
to his constituents of Aylesbury the day before yesterday, made an 
interesting chapter public characterising the way in which the 
oligarchy distributes the most important state posts on the one 
hand, and the highly ambiguous attitude of the so-called liberal 
and independent Members of Parliament to this oligarchy on the 
other. 
Layard told us that Lord Granville appointed him Under-
Secretary of State in the Foreign Office, where he served for three 
months, when Russell's Ministry was overthrown and the Derby 
Cabinet was being formed. Derby proposed to him that he should 
stay in his post until the successor appointed for him, Lord Stanley 
(Derby's son), returned from India. Then he would entrust him 
(Layard) with a diplomatic mission abroad. 
"All my political friends," Layard said, "thought I ought to have accepted that 
offer. Lord J. Russell alone expressed a contrary opinion, which I unhesitatingly 
accepted."3 
So Layard rejected Derby's offer. Well! Lord Russell is Minister 
again and Layard is not forgotten. Russell now invites him 
to a ministerial banquet where he is to take his seat as Under-
Secretary of the "Board of Control",b i. e. the Ministry for India. 
Layard agrees. Suddenly, however, Russell remembers that 
an elderly Whig gentleman, by the name of Sir Thomas 
Redington, who in the past had been in charge of Irish, though 
"Mr. Layard and His Constituents", The Times, No. 21990, March 1, 
1855.—  Ed. 
Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 

=====第88页=====
58 Karl Marx 
never of Asiatic affairs, "is still unprovided for" (literally). 
He therefore gives Layard to understand that he should not stand 
in the way of the accommodation of the elderly gentleman. 
Layard resigns again. Russell, encouraged by the self-sacrificing 
modesty of the scholar, conveys to him that he should get right out 
of the way and accept a consular post in Egypt. This time Layard 
is infuriated, he refuses and becomes conspicuous in Parlia­
ment by making important speeches against the oriental policy of 
the Ministry. 
Palmerston has no sooner formed his Cabinet than he seeks to 
compensate him by offering him the post of Secretary in the 
Ordnance Office. Layard rejects this, as he knows nothing at all 
about artillery, etc. How naive! As though the retiring Secretary— 
Mr. Monsell, one of the brokers of the Irish Brigade58—had ever 
been able to tell an ordinary musket from a needle gun! 
Palmerston now offers him the Under-Secretaryship in the War 
Ministry. Layard accepts, but the next morning Palmerston has 
discovered that Frederick Peel—that bureaucratic nonentity—can 
at this moment not be spared from the War Ministry, of whose 
functions Peel notoriously understands nothing. As a substitute he 
finally offers Layard the Under-Secretaryship in the Colonial 
Office, in Russell's name. Layard considers that the present 
situation is too difficult to engage in the study of fifty colonies 
with which he has never before been concerned. He refuses, and 
there this edifying story ends. 
The only moral which the ministerial papers draw from it is: 
that Layard is still very inexperienced in the way of the world and 
has iniquitously forfeited his Assyrian fame. 
Written on March 2, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 107, March 5, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 

=====第89页=====
y»L xiV N»- TO».  NEW-YORK. SATURDAY. MARCH 31. 1855  TWO DOLLARS A YEAR. 
Karl Marx 
THE CRISIS IN ENGLAND 
Of course, the most interesting feature of the news from Europe 
by the Atlantic59 must be the death of the Czara and the influence 
of that event on the pending complications. But important as may 
be the intelligence on this subject, or on other continental affairs, 
in its interest for the thoughtful observer it can hardly surpass the 
gradual indications and developments of that momentous political 
crisis in which, without any will of their own, the British nation are 
now involved at home. The last attempt to maintain that 
antiquated compromise called the British Constitution—a com­
promise between the class that rule officially and the class that rule 
non-officially—has signally failed. The coalition ministry, the most 
constitutional of all, has not only broken down in England but the 
constitution itself has broken down in detail at every point where 
it has been tested by the war. Forty thousand British soldiers have 
died on the shores of the Black Sea, victims to the British 
Constitution. Officers,  Staff,  Commissariat, Medical Department, 
Transport Service, Admiralty, Horse Guards, Ordnance, Army 
and Navy, all and every one have broken down, have ruined 
themselves in the estimation of the world; but all and every one 
have failed with the satisfaction of knowing that they had but done 
their duty in the eyes of the British Constitution. The Lon­
don Times spoke more truly than it knew, when it said, with respect 
to this universal failure, that it was the British Constitution itself 
which was on its trialb! 
Nicholas I died on March 2, 1855.— Ed. 
"Arno 
1855.—  Ed. "Among all the political changes...", The Times, No. 21979, February 16, 

=====第90页=====
60 Karl Marx 
It has been tried, and found guilty. This British constitution, 
what is it but a superannuated compromise, by which the general 
governing power is abandoned to some sections of the middle 
class,  on condition that the whole of the real Government, the 
Executive in all its details, even to the executive department of the 
legislative power—or that is the actual law-making in the two 
Houses of Parliament—is secured to the landed aristocracy? This 
aristocracy which, subject to general principles laid down by the 
middle class, rules supreme in the Cabinet, the Parliament, the 
Administration, the Army and the Navy—this very important half 
of the British constitution has now been obliged to sign its own 
death-warrant. It has been compelled to confess its incapacity any 
longer to govern England. Ministry after Ministry is formed, only 
to dissolve itself after a few weeks' reign. The crisis is permanent; 
the Government is but provisional. All political action is sus­
pended; nobody professes to do more than to keep the political 
machine greased well enough to prevent it from stopping. That 
pride of the constitutional Englishman, the House of Commons 
itself,  is brought to a dead stand. It knows itself no longer, since it 
is split up in numberless fractions, attempting all the arithmetical 
combinations and variations, of which a given number of units is 
capable. It can no longer recognize itself in the various Cabinets, 
which it makes in its own image, for no other purpose than to 
unmake them again. The bankruptcy is complete. 
And not only has the war had to be carried on in the midst of 
this national helplessness, which, breaking out like a pestilence in 
the Crimea, has gradually seized all the branches of the body 
politic, but there is an opponent to contend with far more 
dangerous than Russia—an opponent more than a match for all 
the Gladstones, Cardwells, Russells and Palmerstons of past, 
present and future Cabinets put together. That opponent is the 
commercial and industrial crisis which, since September last, has 
set in with a severity, a universality, and a violence, not to be 
mistaken. Its stern, iron hand at once shut up the mouths of those 
shallow Free Traders who for years had gone on preaching, that 
since the repeal of the Corn Laws glutted markets were 
impossible. There the glut is, with all its consequences, and in its 
most acute form; and in view of it nobody is more eager to accuse 
the improvidence of manufacturers, in not reducing production, 
than those very economists, who told them only a few months 
before that they never could produce too much. We long since 
called attention to the existence of this disease in a chronic form. 
It has been aggravated, of course, by the late difficulties in 

=====第91页=====
The Crisis in England 61 
America, and the crisis that depressed our trade. India and China, 
glutted though they were, continued to be used as outlets—as also 
California and Australia. When the English manufacturers could 
no longer sell their goods at home, or would not do so rather than 
depress prices, they resorted to the absurd expedient of consign­
ing them abroad, especially to India, China, Australia and 
California. This expedient enabled trade to go on for a while with 
less embarrassment than if the goods had been thrown at once 
upon the home market; but when they arrived at their destina­
tions they produced embarrassment at once, and about the end of 
September last the effect began to be felt in England. 
Then the crisis exchanged its chronic form for an acute one. 
The first houses that felt it were the calico printers; a number of 
them, including very old established houses in Manchester and 
that vicinity, broke down. Then came the turn of the shipowners 
and the Australian and Californian merchants; next came the 
China traders, and finally the Indian houses. All of them have had 
their turn; most of them losing severely, while many had to 
suspend; and for none of them has the danger passed away. On 
the contrary it is still increasing. The silk manufacturers were 
equally affected; their trade has been reduced to almost nothing, 
and the localities where it is carried on have suffered, and still 
suffer, the greatest distress. Then came the turn of the cotton-
spinners and manufacturers. Some of them had already suc­
cumbed at our last advices, and a great many more must do so. 
The spinners of fine yarns, as we also learn, had begun to work 
only four days a week, and the coarse spinners would shortly have 
to do the same. But how many of them will be able to stand this 
for any length of time? 
A few months more and the crisis will be at a hight which it has 
not reached in England since 1846, perhaps not since 1842. When 
its effects begin to be fully felt among the working classes, then 
will that political movement begin again, which has been dormant 
for six years. Then will the working-men of England rise anew, 
menacing the middle classes at the very time that the middle 
classes are finally driving the aristocracy from power. Then will 
the mask be torn off which has hitherto hid the real political 
features of Great Britain. Then will the two real contending 
parties in that country stand face to face—the middle class and 
the working classes, the Bourgeoisie and the Proletariat—and 
England will at last be compelled to share in the general social 
evolutions of European society. When England entered into the 
French Alliance she finally abandoned that isolated character 

=====第92页=====
62 Karl Marx 
which her insular position had created for her, but which the 
commerce of the world, and the increasing facilities for inter­
course, had long since undermined. Henceforth she can hardly 
help undergoing the great internal movements of the other 
European nations. 
It is also a striking fact that the last moments of the British 
Constitution are a.s prolific in evidences of a corrupt social state as 
the last moments of Louis Philippe's monarchy. We have before 
referred to the Parliamentary and Government scandals, to the 
Stonor, the Sadleir, the Lawley3  scandals; but, to crown all, came 
the Handcock and De Burgh revelations, with Lord Clanricarde, a 
peer of the realm, as a principal though indirect party to a most 
revolting deed. 60 No wonder that this should seem to complete the 
parallel, and that people, on reading the damning details, should 
involuntarily exclaim "The Duc de Praslin! The Due de Praslin!" 
England has arrived at her 1847; who knows when and what will 
be her 1848? 
Written on March 2, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4346, March 24, 1855, 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1027, March 30, 1855 and the 
New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 707, March 
31, 1855 as a leading article 
See the article "The Late British Government" by Marx and Engels (present 
edition, Vol. 13, pp. 620-26).— Ed. 

=====第93页=====
63 
Karl Marx 
THE BUYING OF COMMISSIONS.— 
NEWS FROM AUSTRALIA 
London, March 3. At the sitting the day before yesterday the 
House of Commons, as everybody knows, rejected Lord 
Goderich's motion allowing non-commissioned officers to reach 
the rank of captain. Palmerston used the old dilemma: a partial 
reform is impossible because one part of the old system depends 
upon the other.3 Individual practical reforms are thus impossible 
because they are theoretically impossible. The total reform of the 
system is impossible because that is not reform but revolution. 
Theoretical reform therefore is impossible because it is not 
practical. This House of Commons—a House which takes to heart 
the principle principiis obstab was eager to be convinced, or rather 
it did not need convincing as it had passed sentence before the 
trial. 
Palmerston argued on this occasion that the system of selling 
officers' commissions was old, and he was right there. As we 
indicated earlier/ it began with the "glorious" revolution of 
1688, 61 with the introduction of the National Debt, banknotes, and 
the Dutch succession. Already in the Mutiny Act of 169462 the 
necessity is stated of forestalling 
"the great mischief of buying and selling Military Employment in his Majesties 
Armies", and it is enacted that "every commissioned officer" (only non­
commissioned officers have no commissions) should swear that he has not bought 
his commission. 
Palmerston's speech was reported in The Times, No.  21991,  March 2, 
1855.—Ei 
Resist temptation (Ovidius, Remédia amoris, 91).— Ed. 
c See Marx's article "Parliamentary News" (present edition, Vol. 13, 
pp. 605-08).— Ed. 

=====第94页=====
64 Karl Marx 
This restriction was, however, not carried into effect; on the 
contrary, in 1702 Sir Nathan Wright, the Lord Keeper,3 decided in 
the opposite sense. On May 1, 1711, a statute of Queen Anne 
expressly recognised the system by decreeing 
"that commissions shall no longer be sold without royal confirmation and that 
no officer may buy himself off unless he has served 20 years or has become 
incapacitated in the service, etc." 
From this official recognition of the trade in military commis­
sions it was but one step to officially regulating the market price of 
commissions. Accordingly, in 1719-20 market prices were fixed for 
the first time. The prices of officers' commissions were renewed in 
1766,  1772, 1773, 1783, and finally in 1821, when the present 
prices were fixed. As early as 1766 War Minister Barrington 
published a letter which states: 
"The consequence of this trade in officers' commissions frequently is that men 
who enter the army with the most ardent desire to serve, who have distinguished 
themselves at every opportunity, are kept for their whole lives in the lowest rank 
because they are poor. These deserving officers suffer the most cruel humiliation 
of being under the command of youths from wealthy families who entered the 
service much later but whose fortune enabled them to find entertainment outside 
the service, while the others, who are constantly at service quarters, carry out the 
duties of these gentlemen and have learnt their own." 
It is true that England's common law declares it illegal to give a 
present or a "broker's fee" for any public office, just as the Rules 
of the Established Church place a ban on simony.63 Historical 
development, however, shows that the law does not determine 
practice nor does practice remove a contradictory law. 
The latest news from Australia adds a new element to the 
general discomfort, unrest and insecurity. We must distinguish 
between the riot in Ballarat (near Melbourne} and the general 
revolutionary movement in the State of Victoria.64  The former will 
by this time have been suppressed; the latter can only be 
suppressed by far-reaching concessions. The former is merely a 
symptom and an incidental outbreak of the latter. Concerning the 
Ballarat riot, the facts are simply these: A certain Bentley, owner 
of the Eureka Hotel at the Ballarat goldfields, had got into all 
sorts of conflicts with the gold diggers. A murder which occurred 
at his house increased the hatred of him. At the coroner's inquest 
Bentley was discharged as innocent. Ten of the twelve jurymen, 
who functioned at the inquest, however, published a protest 
Marx uses the English expression.— Ed 

=====第95页=====
The Buying of Commissions 65 
against the partiality of the coroner,3  who had attempted to 
suppress witnesses' evidence disadvantageous to the prisoner. At 
the demand of the people a second inquest was held. Bentley was 
again discharged despite very suspicious evidence by some 
witnesses. It became known, however, that one of the judges had 
financial interests in the hotel. Many earlier and later complaints 
show the dubious character of the government officials of the 
Ballarat district. On the day Bentley was discharged for the second 
time,  the gold diggers held a tremendous demonstration, set his 
hotel on fire and then withdrew. Three of the ringleaders were 
arrested on a warrant issued by Sir Charles Hotham, the 
Governor-General of Victoria State. On November 27 a deputa­
tion of gold diggers demanded their release. Hotham rejected the 
demand. The gold diggers held a monster meeting. The Governor 
sent police and troops from Melbourne. It came to a clash, several 
dead remained on the scene, and according to the latest news, 
up to December 1, the gold diggers have hoisted the flag of 
independence. 
Even this story, which is in the main taken from a government 
paper, does not put the English judges and government officials 
in a favourable light. It shows the prevailing distrust. There are 
actually two big issues around which the revolutionary movement 
in Victoria State is revolving. The gold diggers are demanding the 
abolition of the gold digging licences, i.e. of a tax directly imposed 
on labour; secondly, they demand the abolition of the property 
qualification for Members of the Chamber of Representatives, in 
order themselves to obtain control over taxes and legislation. Here 
we see., in essence, motives similar to those which led to the 
Declaration of Independence of the United States,65 except that in 
Australia the conflict is initiated by the workers against the 
monopolists linked with the colonial bureaucracy. In the Mel­
bourne Argus we read of big reform meetings and, on the other 
hand, of large-scale military preparations on the part of the 
Government. It says among other things: 
"At a meeting of 4,000 persons it was decided that the [...] license-fee is an 
imposition and an unjustifiable tax on free labour. This meeting therefore pledges 
itself to take immediate steps to abolish the same, by at once burning all their licenses. 
That in the event of any party being arrested for having no licenses, [...] the united 
people will [...] defend and protect them". 
Marx uses the English term, with the German equivalent in brackets.— Ed. 
"Ballaarat. Wednesday, November 29th, 1854", The Argus (Melbourne), 
No. 2359, December 1, 1854.— Ed. 

=====第96页=====
66 Karl Marx 
On 30 November Commissioners Rede and Johnson appeared 
with cavalry and police at Ballarat and demanded with drawn 
swords and fixed bayonets that the gold diggers show their 
licences. These, mostly armed, held a mass meeting and resolved 
to resist the collection of the hated tax to the utmost. They 
refused to show their licences; they declared they had burnt them; 
the Riot Act 66 was read, and so the revolt was complete. 
To describe the joint actions of the monopolists lording it in the 
local legislatures and the colonial bureaucracy in league with them, 
it is sufficient to mention that in 1854 government expenditures in 
Victoria amounted to £"3,564,258 sterling, including a deficit of 
£"1,085,896, that is of more than one-third of the total income. 
And in face of the present crisis, of the general bankruptcy, Sir 
Charles Hotham demands for the year 1855 a sum of £4,801,292 
sterling. Victoria has barely 300,000 inhabitants, and of the above 
sum £"1,860,830 sterling, that is £"6 sterling per head, are intended 
for public works, namely roads, docks, quays, barracks, govern­
ment buildings, customs offices, botanical gardens, government 
stables, etc. At this rate of £"6 per head, the population of Great 
Britain would have to pay £"168,000,000 sterling annually for 
public works alone, i.e. three times as much as their total tax. It is 
understandable that the working population is indignant at this 
supertaxation. It is likewise evident what good business the 
bureaucracy and the monopolists between them must make with 
such extensive public works defrayed at other people's expense. 
Written on March 3, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. Ill, March 7, 1855 
Marked with the sign X Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第97页=====
67 
Karl Marx 
THE ENGLISH PRESS ON THE LATE TSAR 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 109, March 6, 1855] 
London, March 3. Today's entire daily and weekly press carries, 
of course, leading articles on the death of the Emperor of 
Russia 3—but all, without exception, commonplace and dull. The 
Times has at least attempted to inflate its style to the heights of 
Timur Tamburlaineb by exaggerated grandiloquence. We shall 
single out only two passages, both of them compliments for Lord 
Palmerston. The strain which had hastened the Emperor's death 
had been exacerbated by the appointment as Prime Minister of 
Palmerston, the "worst enemy of the Czar". Between 1830 
and 1840 (the first decade of Palmerston's foreign policy), the 
Tsar had abandoned his policy of encroachment and world 
domination. The former assertion is as much worth as the latter. 
The Morning Advertiser, on the other hand, distinguishes itself by 
the discovery that Michael is the Emperor's eldest son and thus the 
legitimate heir to the throne.0  The Morning Post, Palmerston's 
private Moniteur, in its funeral oration, reveals to the English 
public that 
"The Conference at Vienna will, of course, be delayed for a short time, and will 
be renewed under new auspices;" and that "this very afternoon [...] Lord 
Clarendon will have an interview with the Emperor Napoléon, at Boulogne, in 
which [...] the ideas of the two Governments, with reference to this sudden and 
momentous event, will be interchanged and discussed". 
a Nicholas I.— Ed. 
This refers to the items "Scarcely had the intelligence..." and "The Emperor 
of Russia is dead...." in The Times, No. 21992, March 3, 1855.— Ed. 
c "No event of greater importance...", The Morning Advertiser, No. 19875, 
March 3, 1855. Actually, the eldest son of Nicholas I was Alexander.— Ed. 
"Nicholas Paulovitch, Emperor and Autocrat of All the Russias...", The 
Morning Post, No. 25325, March 3, 1855.— Ed. 
\* 

=====第98页=====
68 Karl Marx 
The Daily News does not believe in the peaceful consequences of 
this "sudden event" for the Western powers could not withdraw 
before  the fall of Sevastopol and Russia could not withdraw after it. a 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 116, March 10, 1855] b 
London, March 6. The death of Emperor Nicholas has been the 
occasion for strange claims in the press here. Dr. Granville is 
surpassed by Mr. James Lee, who has made no medical 
observations.67 
In today's Morning Advertiser he writes: "On the 6th of February I sent a letter 
[...] to you, in which I said, that the Emperor of Russia would be a corpse at the 
expiration of three weeks, dating the time from my letter." 
In a postscript, the editor of The Morning Advertiser states that 
his paper had in fact received Lee's letter, but consigned it to the 
wastepaper basket as the figment of a sick brain. Lee goes even 
further. He offers to prophesy to the Advertiser the early demise 
of another potentate, on the one condition that his communication 
be published. Lee's predictions seem to be cheaper than the books 
of the Sibyl. 
Similarly, the Emperor's death has led Urquhart who, as 
Highland Scot, possesses the gift of second sight, to make several 
Pythian utterances,68 of which the following is the most charac­
teristic and also the most intelligible: 
"There was blood between him [Nicholas] and the Poles, who could not be left 
behind to be watched, and whose five hundred thousand warriors were required. 
And it was well understood that the restoration of the white double-headed 
eagle—the symbol of that reunion of the Slavonic races announced in the Cathe­
dral of Moscow by his predecessor, Alexander, was not to take place in his day."c 
Urquhart thinks that now the moment has come when Russia 
will be absorbed by Slavdom, as the Muscovite empire had earlier 
been absorbed by Russia. 
Written on March 3 and 6, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
Nos.  109 and 116, March 6 and 10, 1855 Published in English for the first 
Marked with the sign x time 
"The Death of the Czar. (Communicated)", The Daily News, No. 2742, March 3, 
1855.—Ed. 
The second instalment was published without a heading.— Ed. 
c D. Urquhart, "On the Death of the Emperor Nicholas. To the Editor of The 
Morning Advertiser", The Morning Advertiser, No. 19877, March 6, 1855. Instead of 
"reunion of Slavonic races" "reunion of Slavonic faces" is printed in Urquhart's 
article.— Ed 

=====第99页=====
69 
Karl Marx 
ON THE HISTORY OF THE FRENCH ALLIANCE 
London, March 6. Today's Morning Herald has surprised London 
by the following announcement: 
"We have excellent authority for stating that the French Emperor has 
remonstrated against the committee for inquiring into the conduct of the war, and 
that he has said, that, in the event of its continuing to sit, the armies of the two 
nations cannot act together, although they may act for the same object. In order 
[...] to satisfy Louis Napoleon, without affronting the English people, a dissolution 
of Parliament will [...] take place as soon as possible." 
Without attributing too much importance to this paragraph in 
the Herald,  we record it as one of the many symptoms which 
indicate that secret forces on both sides of the Channel are working to 
bring about a dissolution of the Anglo-French alliance. 
In this context the statements made by ex-minister Sir James 
Graham should be recalled15: under pressure from  the"  Committee 
of Inquiry our Admiral0 would be forced to reveal all the 
considerations which led to the postponement of the blockade, and 
the inquiry would include our relations with our great and-
powerful ally at a time when it is of the utmost importance that 
there should not be the least misunderstanding. 
Sidney Herbert: He challenged the Committee to get to the 
bottom of the affair without taking the risk of insulting our army 
in the Crimea and possibly shaking the confidence of our allies. 
Unless one of its members were able to check the Committee when 
"England and France. Probable Dissolution of Parliament", The Morning 
Herald,  No. 22372, March 6, 1855.— Ed. 
The speeches of Graham, Herbert and Gladstone in the House of Commons 
on February 23 were reported in The Times, No. 21986, February 24, 1855.— Ed. 
c J. W. D. Dundas.— Ed. 

=====第100页=====
70 Karl Marx 
it stepped on dangerous ground, great injustice would be done, 
and even the officers summoned by it might perhaps be sacrificed, 
since incriminating questions might be put to them, while they 
would not be permitted to answer because in so doing they might 
have to make dangerous and delicate revelations. He for one 
thought it his duty to prevent officers of the British army being 
placed in a position where they would be made the object of 
accusations while their hands were tied and they were unable to 
defend themselves. 
Gladstone: Among other things, a committee would have to 
examine why a road from Balaklava had not been constructed 
earlier! If the Committee did not investigate this, it would achieve 
nothing. If however it investigated this question, the reply would 
be: shortage of labour. If it then asked what caused this shortage 
of labour, the reply would be that the men were digging trenches 
and that these  were  extensive owing  to the  proportion in which the lines  had 
been distributed  between the French  and the English. I further declare that 
an investigation would be empty pretence unless you probed the 
question of the roads, and, if you probed that, the defence of the 
accused parties would directly disturb the most intimate relations 
between England and France. 
Understandably these ministerial statements have forced the 
widely scattered seeds of distrust into abundant growth. National 
pride had already been severely wounded by the relegation of the 
British army in the Crimea to guard duty at Balaklava. Then came 
the semi-official article in the Moniteur with its "imperatorial" 
remarks on the British Constitution. 3 It called forth caustic replies 
in the weekly press here. Then came the publication of the 
Brussels Mémoire, in which Louis Bonaparte is represented as the 
originator of the Crimean expedition on the one hand, and of the 
concessions to Austria on the other. b By their ruthlessness, the 
comments on this Mémoire —as, for instance, that in The Morning 
Advertiser—remind one of the "Letters of an Englishman" on the 
coup d'état of December 2. c The following extract from the Chartist 
Le Moniteur universel, No. 48, February 17,  1855.—  Ed 
The reference is to the anonymous pamphlet De la conduite de la guerre 
d'Orient.., published in Brussels in 1855, which criticised the conduct of the Crimean 
campaign. The pamphlet was attributed, among other writers, to Prince Napoleon 
(Jérôme Bonaparte,  Jr.).—  Ed. 
' c The comparison is between the article "Secret History of the Crimean 
Expedition" {The Morning Advertiser, No. 19875, March 3, 1855) and the 
anonymous "Letters of an Englishman" by A. Richards, which were published in 
The Times between December 1851 and November 1852 and appeared in book 
form in 1852.— Ed 

=====第101页=====
On the History of the French Alliance 71 
organ, The People's Paper, will illustrate the repercussions of all this 
in the true popular press3: 
"He [Bonaparte] it was that lured England to the Crimea. [...] Our army, once in 
that snare, was placed by him in such a position, that it broke the edge of Russia's 
strength before that strength could reach his own. [...] At Alma, at Balaklava, at 
Inkermann, at Sebastopol, the British were played into the post of danger. They 
had to bear the brunt—they had to suffer the chief loss; [...] England engaged to 
send only one-third as many men as France. That one-third had to fight nearly the 
whole of the battles. That one-third had to take more than half the lines before 
Sebastopol. Our army was destroyed, because they could not get the food and 
clothes which lay rotting at Balaklava. They could not get them because there was 
no road from Balaklava to Sebastopol, and there was no road from Balaklava to 
Sebastopol because Napoleon insisted that the British with less than one-third of 
the force [...] should do more than half the work in the trenches; and, therefore, 
they had no men to spare to make the road.f...] This is the secret at which Graham, 
Sidney Herbert, and Gladstone hinted.... Thus he, Napoleon, has deliberately 
murdered 44,000 of our soldiers, etc." 
All these signs of suspicious vexation with the French ally gain 
importance because Lord Palmerston is at the head of the 
government—a man who on each occasion has reached his 
position by climbing up the ladder of the French alliance, then 
suddenly turned this alliance into almost unavoidable war between 
France and England. Thus it was in the Turko-Syrian affair of 1840, 
and the treaty of July 1569 with which he crowned his ten-year-old 
alliance with France. In reference to this, Sir Robert Peel remarked 
in 1842 that 
"he had never  clearly understood  why the alliance with France of which the noble lord 
had always pretended to be so proud, had been broken." 
And thus, once again, in 1847, on the occasion of the Spanish 
marriages.70 At the time, it was asserted by Palmerston—who, in 
1846,  was allowed to resume his post only after he had paid his 
respects to Louis Philippe, become reconciled to him with great 
ostentation, and flattered the Frenchman in a speech in the House of 
Commons—that it was Louis Philippe who had dissolved the alliance 
because the Treaty of Utrecht71 had been violated (a treaty lapsed in 
1793 and never renewed since that time) and because he had 
committed an "act of perfidy" against the English Crown. As to the 
"act of perfidy" it was really committed, but, as the documents 
The extract is from the speech delivered by Ernest Jones at St Martin's Hall 
on February 27, 1855. Marx quotes from a report published in The People's Paper, 
No. 148, March 3, 1855.— Ed. 
From Peel's speech in the House of Commons on August 10, 1842. Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates, third series, Vol. LXV, col. 1281-82, London, 1842.— Ed. 

=====第102页=====
72 Karl Marx 
subsequently published proved, Palmerston had manoeuvred the 
French Court into this act of perfidy in the most cunning manner so 
as to obtain a pretext for the break. While the wily Louis Philippe 
thought he was outwitting him, he simply fell into the carefully laid 
trap of the "facetious" viscount. The February revolution alone 
prevented the outbreak of war between England and France at that 
time. 
Written on March 6, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 115, March 9, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign x 

=====第103页=====
73 
Karl Marx 
THE COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY 
London, March 7. The rumour of an impending dissolution of 
Parliament, on the pretext that the Committee of Inquiry was 
compromising the French alliance, seems to be correct. A 
correspondent of The Morning Advertiser remarks in this connec­
tion: 
"But who made the committee an open one? Lord Palmerston, who, they say, 
will dissolve the House [...]. Mr. Roebuck had demanded and compelled an inquest, 
and he desired secrecy—Lord Palmerston had refused and had been driven to an 
inquest, and he was for publicity. [...] He compels the Committee to pursue the 
course most obnoxious to our French Ally. That obnoxiousness then is to enable the 
Minister to dissolve the House, extinguish the Inquiry, and laugh in his sleeve at 
both!"3 
In a leading article on the same subject, The Morning Herald 
says,  inter alia: 
"When the allied armies took up their positions before Sebastopol the English 
contingent was the stronger of the two, and the subsequent destruction of our 
army was to be attributed entirely to the want of reserves in the Mediterranean and 
of an organised militia at home; from which causes it became impossible to supply 
the English army with those reinforcements [...]. The attempt to involve the name 
of our [...] allies in the discussion is an almost undisguised effort, on the part 
of desperate and unprincipled men, to screen themselves from that inquiry 
which they well know must be fatal to their future political existence. [...] Lord 
Clarendon has unconstitutionally sought an interview with the Emperor of the 
French, for the sole purpose of extracting from him some declaration of opinion 
which might be tortured and twisted into a disapproval of an inquiry [...]. Having 
obtained this,.[...] it is the intention of these patriotic Ministers to attempt to intimidate 
a "The Reported Dissolution", The Morning Advertiser, No. 19878, March 7, 
1855.—  Ed. 

=====第104页=====
74 Karl Marx 
the House of Commons [...] by a threat of dissolution, and an appeal to the country 
upon a cry that 'the French alliance is in danger!'."* 
It is obvious that, if this pretext of the English Government 
serves to get rid of the Committee of Inquiry, it serves no less to 
jeopardise the French alliance and so to prepare for the very thing 
which it pretends to be preventing. The conviction that the 
Committee was being abandoned because it would unearth 
"delicate and dangerous" mysteries, compromising to the French 
ally, effectively compromises that ally. The suppression of the 
Committee would speak more loudly against him than could the 
Committee  itself.  Besides, the slightest acquaintance with the tides 
of public opinion in England must convince anyone that conscious­
ness of so great a concession to a foreign state as suppressing a 
parliamentary committee, or dissolving Parliament at Bonaparte's 
alleged request, would lead at the next opportunity to a terrible 
reaction against French influence in an attempt to redress the 
balance. 
We have compiled General Sir de Lacy Evans' b statements from 
reports on the first two sittings of the Committee of Inquiry. At 
Malta, whither a commissary had been sent some time before the 
army, he was surprised that rto purchase of mules was made. No 
adequate preparation was made at Scutari for killing cattle or 
baking. Some of the Treasury regulations at this time proved very 
inconvenient. He firmly believed the war was commenced under 
the delusion that matters would be settled without any explosion 
of gunpowder, and that there was no necessity for any magazines 
at all. Though the Commissariat was under the control of the 
commander, yet it was closely connected also with the Treasury 
(and therefore with the Prime Minister), and the officers of the 
Commissariat must have been given to understand that it was 
extravagant to make the disbursements necessary for a real war. 
At Varna, hardly any preparations had been made for looking 
after the wounded. Evidently the predominant impression had 
been that this would be a war without wounds. Arrangements 
were not made to enable the army to take the field at once. When 
the Russians crossed the Danube Omer Pashä applied for 
assistance, and the answer was that the army had not the means of 
transport, which ought to have been provided long before. He 
"A more audacious and unconstitutional attempt...", The Morning  Herald,  No. 
22373,  March 7, 1855.—Ed. 
b Published in The Times, No. 21994, March 6, and No. 21995, March 7, 
1855.—Ed. 

=====第105页=====
The Committee of Inquiry 75 
thought the Government was still waiting for notes and protocols 
from Vienna, and no great exertions were made to put the army 
in a condition to move; it was, of course, the Government, not the 
Commissariat, that was responsible for this sort of delay. The 
Russians were carrying on the siege of Silistria, and still the army 
was not in readiness to move. The two departments entrusted with 
the procurement of food supplies were the Commissariat and the 
Department of the Quartermaster General. Clashes with the 
Commissariat were the order of the day. Its officials might have 
been efficient clerks in the Treasury: in fact, they spent most of 
their time writing letters to the Treasury. In the field they proved 
useless. Even eighteen miles from Varna, there was the greatest 
difficulty in getting provisions. There the Commissariat proved to 
be so short of staff that he had to lend 100 non-commissioned 
officers for service in the department. Mortality among troops at 
Varna was due mainly to low morale, a consequence of their 
trying and prolonged inactivity. 
As to the situation of the troops in the Crimea, de Lacy partly 
repeats what is already common knowledge—lack of food, of 
clothing, of wooden huts, etc., etc. As to detail, we merely quote 
the following statements: 
"Filder, as old as the hills, in charge of the Commissariat as far back as the 
Pyrenean campaign and now Quartermaster General never consulted with him as to 
the wants of his [Evans'] division; it was his duty to do so; he [Evans] wanted him to do 
it, but Mr. Filder declined. Mr. Filder was under the direct orders of Lord Raglan, but, 
of course, he carried on a correspondence with the Treasury." "It was very 
inconvenient that the cavalry and artillery horses should have been employed for the 
transport of forage. The consequence was that his [Evans'] guns were latterly not more 
than half horsed." "The road from Balaklava harbour to the camp had been 
frightfully churned up and waterlogged. [...] The work of 1,000 men for ten days 
would have secured a road from Balaklava [...] but he believed that all the men who 
could be spared [...] were set to work in the trenches". 
Finally, on the melting away of the British army before Sevastopol, 
Evans declares 
"...his conviction that neither the deficiency in the supply of clothes, food, or fuel 
would have produced the shocking sickness and death in the army, had not the troops 
been overworked in the trenches. It was the fatigue of the men that was so injurious. 
From the first the work cut out for them was entirely beyond their numerical strength. 
The overwork during the nights was decidedly the main cause of the suffering of the 
army". 
Written on March 7, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 117, March 10, 1855 
Marked with the sign X Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第106页=====
76 
Karl Marx 
THE BRUSSELS MEMOIRE 
London, March 7. Today The Morning Post, Palmerston's private 
Moniteur, prints the well-known Brussels Mémoire 3 in an English 
translation with a brief foreword according to which Prince 
Napoleon is supposed to be the pamphlet's author. Simultaneously 
the same paper prints a leading article full of vicious attacks on 
Napoleon Bonaparte, making the fulsomely often repeated point 
that "only a Russian spy" could be the author of the Mémoire. 
Under the pretext of standing up for Louis Bonaparte against 
his cousin and of preserving the memory of the unsullied Achille 
Leroy, alias Florimond, alias de S[ain]t-Arnaud, the Post obviously 
only means to accumulate material for Anglo-French collisions. 
Saint-Arnaud was one of those saints who turn up in the calendar of 
French chevaliers d'industrie at any given period, e. g. Saint-
Germain, Saint-Georges, etc. Credit is due to The Morning Post 
for having canonised them and transformed them into saints 
befitting their station. The assertion that the Mémoire made "mi­
litary" revelations to the Russians is completely absurd. Neither 
in England nor in America or Germany have critics waited 
for the Mémoire to present the Crimean expedition as a failure. 
The Mémoire has added not one syllable to criticism made so far, 
although it does have the merit of supplying informal portraits of 
the mediocrities who were laying down the law at Sevastopol. It is 
The reference is to the anonymous pamphlet De la conduite de la guerre 
d'Orient., (see this volume, p. 70) which was published in English under the title 
"Memoir Addressed to the Government of H. M. the Emperor Napoleon III" in The 
Morning Post, No. 25328, March 7, 1855. The leading article mentioned below was 
printed in the same issue.— Ed. 

=====第107页=====
The Brussels Mémoire 77 
only in the interest of the Russians to keep alive illusions about the 
Crimean expedition, and the grandiloquence with which the Post 
holds forth about Russian agents and Russian spies reminds one of 
Aeschines, who similarly boasted that he was the first to see 
through the king of Macedonia's plans, while reproaching 
Demosthenes with having been bribed by Philip. However, we are, 
of course, far from presenting Prince Napoleon Bonaparte as a 
Demosthenes. 
Written on March 7, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 118, March 11, 1855 
Marked with the sign X Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第108页=====
78 
Karl Marx 
IRELAND'S REVENGE 72 
London, March 13. Ireland has revenged herself upon England, 
socially—by bestowing an Irish quarter on every English industrial 
maritime or commercial town of any size, and politically—by 
presenting the English Parliament with an "Irish Brigade". 73 In 
1833,  Daniel O'Connell decried the Whigs as "base, bloody and 
brutal". In 1835, he became the most efficient tool of the Whigs; 
although the English majority was opposed to the Melbourne 
Administration, it remained in office from April 1835 to August. 
1841 because of the support it received from O'Connell and his 
Irish Brigade. What transformed the O'Connell of 1833 into the 
O'Connell of 1835? It was an agreement, known as the Lichfield-
House Contract, according to which the Whig Cabinet granted 
government patronage in Ireland to O'Connell and O'Connell 
promised the Whig Cabinet the votes of the Irish Brigade in 
Parliament.74 "King Dan's" Repeal3 agitation75 began immediately 
the Whigs were overthrown, but as soon as the Tories were 
defeated "Kingb Dan" sank again to the level of a common 
advocate. The influence of the Irish Brigade by no means came to 
an end with O'Connell's death. On the contrary, it became evident 
that this influence did not depend on the talent of one person, but 
was a result of the general state of affairs. The Tories and Whigs, 
the big traditional parties in the English Parliament, were more or 
less equally balanced. It is thus not surprising that the new, 
numerically small factions, the Manchester School76 and the Irish 
Brigade, which took their seats in the reformed Parliament, should 
Marx uses the English word "Repeal" here and below.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English word here.— Ed. 

=====第109页=====
Ireland's Revenge 79 
play a decisive role and be able to turn the scale. Hence the 
importance of the "Irish quarter" in the English Parliament. After 
O'Connell left the scene it was no longer possible to stir the Irish 
masses with the "Repeal" slogan. The "Catholic" problem,77 too, 
could be used only occasionally. Since the Catholic Emancipation it 
could no longer serve as a permanent propaganda theme. Thus 
the Irish politicians were compelled to do what O'Connell had 
always avoided and refused to do, that is, to explore the real cause 
of the Irish malady and to make landed property relations and 
their reform the election slogan, that is to say a slogan that would 
help them to get into the House of Commons. But having taken 
their seats in the House, they used the rights of the tenants, 
etc.—just as formerly the Repeal—as a means to conclude a new 
Lichfield-House Contract. 
The Irish Brigade had overthrown the Derby ministry and had 
obtained a seat, even though a minor one, in the coalition 
government. How did it use its position? It helped the coalition to 
burke measures designed to reform landed ownership in Ireland. 
The Tories themselves, having taken the patriotism of the Irish 
Brigade for granted, had decided to propose these measures in 
order to gain the support of the Irish M.P.s. Palmerston, who is an 
Irishman by birth and knows his "Irish quarter", has renewed 
the Lichfield-House Contract of 1835 and has broadened its scope. 
He has appointed Keogh, the chief of the Brigade, Attorney-
General3  of Ireland, Fitzgerald, also a liberal Catholic M P. for 
Ireland, has been made Solicitor-General, and a third member of the 
Brigade 13 has become legal counsel to the Lord Lieutenant of 
Ireland, so that the judicial general staff of the Irish government is 
now composed entirely of Catholics and Irishmen. Monsell, the 
Clerk of Ordnance in the coalition government, has been 
reappointed by Palmerston after some hesitation, although—as 
Muntz, deputy for Birmingham and an arms manufacturer, rightly 
observed — Monsell cannot distinguish a musket from a needle-gun. 
Palmerston has advised the lieutenants of the counties always to give 
preference to the protégés of Irish priests close to the Irish 
Brigade when nominating colonels and other high-ranking officers 
in the Irish militia. The fact that Sergeant Shee has gone over to 
the government side, and also that the Catholic Bishop of Athlone 
has pushed through the re-election of Keogh and that moreover 
a Here and below Marx gives the titles in English: Attorney-General, 
Solicitor-General, Lord Lieutenant, Clerk of Ordnance, Sergeant.— Ed 
b G. W. F. Howard.— Ed. 

=====第110页=====
80 Karl Marx 
the Catholic clergy has promoted the re-election of Fitzgerald 
shows that Palmerston's policy is already producing an effect. 
Wherever the lower ranks of the Catholic clergy have taken their 
"Irish patriotism" seriously and have stood up to those members 
of the Irish Brigade who deserted to the government, they have 
been rebuked by their bishops who are well aware of the 
diplomatic secret. 
A protestant Tory newspaper 3 exclaims in distress: "It is perfectly understood 
between Lord Palmerston [...] and [...] the Irish priests, that if Lord Palmerston hands 
over Ireland to the priests, the priests will return members who will hand over 
England to Lord Palmerston". 
The Whigs use the Irish Brigade to dominate the British 
Parliament and they toss posts and salaries to the Brigade; the 
Catholic clergy permits one side to buy and the other to sell on 
condition that both sides acknowledge the power of the clergy and 
help to extend and strengthen it. It is, however, a very remarkable 
phenomenon that in the same measure as the Irish influence in 
the political sphere grows in England, the Celtic influence in the 
social sphere decreases in Ireland. Both the "Irish quarter" in 
Parliament and the Irish clergy seem to be equally unaware of the 
fact that behind their back the Irish society is being radically 
transformed by an Anglo-Saxon revolution. In the course of this 
revolution the Irish agricultural system is being replaced by the English 
system,  the system of small tenures by big tenures, and the modern 
capitalist is taking the place of the old landowner. 
The chief factors which prepared the ground for this transfor­
mation are: 1847, the year of famine, which killed nearly one 
million Irishmen; emigration to America and Australia, which 
removed another million from the land and still carries off 
thousands; the unsuccessful insurrection of 1848, which finally 
destroyed Ireland's faith in  herself;  and lastly the Act of 
Parliament which exposed the estates of the debt-ridden old Irish 
aristocrats to the hammer of the auctioneer or  bailiff,  thus driving 
them from the land just as starvation swept away their small 
tenants, subtenants and cottagers.78 
Written on March 13, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 127, March 16, 1855 
Marked with the sign X 
a The Morning  Herald,  No. 22378, March 13, 1855.—Ed. 

=====第111页=====
81 
Frederick Engels 
THE RESULTS IN THE CRIMEA 
The illusions with which official incapacity and national self-love 
have surrounded the military operations in the Crimea, 3 now begin 
to melt away, along with the sheet of snow which has covered the 
scene of action through the winter months. The recent pamphlet of 
Napoleon Bonaparte says distinctly, that while in the Crimea 
everything went wrong, the generals-in-chief 
"must have been in possession of orders from their governments enjoining 
them to pass under silence and to dissimulate the obstacles which opposed 
themselves to the taking of Sevastopol". 
This supposition is fully borne out by the reports of these 
generals,0 and especially by the repeated reports which they caused 
to be sent, indirectly, from the camp,d as to the assault being fixed 
on such and such a day. Everybody recollects that from the 5th of 
November down to the beginning of March the European public 
was kept in constant expectation of this grand and final spectacle. 
Though continually postponed, every adjournment was to be for a 
short time only, and public curiosity was but increased by it. But 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "with which official incapacity, English ministerial 
intrigues and self-interested Bonapartism have surrounded the military operations 
in the Crimea".— Ed. 
Thus in the New-York Daily Tribune—presumably a mistake; the version in 
the Neue Oder-Zeitung reads: "The pamphlet of Jérôme Bonaparte (Jr.)", 
the reference being to the anonymous pamphlet De la conduite de la guerre 
d'Orient.... —Ed. 
Raglan and Canrobert. — Ed 
Instead of the passage "the repeated reports which they caused to be sent, 
indirectly, from the camp", the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "the rumours which they 
repeatedly spread".— Ed 

=====第112页=====
82 Frederick Engels 
now matters begin to take a different turn,a and the length of the 
siege has at last called into existence a sort of public opinion in the 
camp,  based upon the views publicly expressed by officers who 
know something about these matters, and the gentlemen of the 
staff are no longer able to whisper about the camp, with all the 
importance and oracularity inherent to their position, that on such 
and such a day the assault will take place and the town will be 
overwhelmed. Every private now knows better. The nature of the 
defenses, the superiority of the enemy's fire, the disproportion of 
the besieging forces to the task before them, and, above all, the 
decisive importance of the North Fort, are by this time too well 
understood to admit of such preposterous tales being successfully 
repeated .b 
About the end of February, the Allies are said to have had 
before Sevastopol 58,000 French, 10,000 English, and 10,000 
Turks—all together about 80,000 men, which agrees pretty 
nearly with our own computations at various epochs.0 Supposing 
they had even 90,000 men, they would still be unable to maintain 
the siege with one portion, and to detach the other upon an 
offensive movement against the Russians at Bakshiserai; for this 
field army of the Allies could not arrive before Bakshiserai with 
more than 40,000 men, while the Russians could bring at least 
60,000 against them in an open field, where the advantages of the 
position between Inkermann and Balaklava would not exist, and 
where, therefore, the moral superiority of the allied army would 
be considerably affected by maneuvers which could not be 
effectually employed by superior numbers of Russians either at 
Balaklava or at Inkermann.d Thus, the Allies must remain 
besieged on their Chersonese, until they are strong enough to 
advance beyond the Chernaya with something like 100,000 men. 
This shows the vicious circle in which they move: the more men 
they bring into this pestilential mouse-trap, the more they lose by 
sickness; and yet, the only way to get successfully out of it, is to 
send more men thither. 
The other expedient they have hit upon to get out of the 
Part of this sentence and the preceding sentence do not occur in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung further has: "We have even had reports of letters by 
English officers which permit no doubt on this point." — Ed, 
The end of the sentence beginning with the words "which agrees..." does not 
occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 
The end of this sentence beginning with the words "and where, therefore the 
moral superiority..." does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第113页=====
The Results in the Crimea 83 
scrape—the Turkish Expedition to Eupatoria80—now turns out to 
be a perfect repetition of the original Crimean blunder. The 
Turks landed at Eupatoria are far too weak to advance into the 
interior. The intrenchments around the place appear to be so 
extensive that an army of some 20,000 men is required for their 
defense. The reports of the "battle" of February 17, before 
Eupatoria, lead to the conclusion that at least one-half of the 
40,000 men assembled there found active employment in the 
defense.3 The extent of an intrenched camp intended to shelter 
40,000 men must, besides, be such that about one-half of the men 
will be required for active service in case of an attack. Thus the 
town will require about 20,000 men for its defense, and 20,000 
only remain disposable for field operations. But 20,000 men 
cannot venture more than a few miles out of Eupatoria without 
exposing themselves to all sorts of flank and rear attacks from the 
Russians, and to the risk of having their communications with the 
town intercepted. Now the Russians, having a double line of 
retreat either toward Perekop or toward Sympheropol, and being, 
besides, in their own country, can always avoid a decisive action 
with the 20,000 Turks who may emerge from Eupatoria. 
Thus,  10,000 Russians, placed at a day's march from the town, 
will always be able to keep in check the 40,000 Turks concentrated 
in it; if they retreat for another ten or twelve miles they will be a 
match for any number of Turks who can venture to advance to 
that distance from their base of operations. In other words, 
Eupatoria is another Kalafat; but with this difference, that Kalafat 
had the Danube in its rear, and not the Black Sea, and that 
Kalafat was a defensive position, while Eupatoria is an offensive 
one. If 30,000 men at Kalafat could maintain a successful defense, 
with occasional and equally successful offensive sallies, extending 
to a limited distance, 40,000 men at Eupatoria are far too many to 
defend a place which about 1,000 English and French held for 
five months; while they are far too few for any offensive 
operations. The consequence is, that a Russian brigade, or at the 
outside a Russian division will be abundantly sufficient to check 
the whole Turkish force at Eupatoria. 
The so-called battle of Eupatoria was a mere reconnaissance on 
the part of the Russians. They advanced, 25,000 to 30,000 strong, 
against the place from the north-west, the only available side, as 
the south is sheltered by the sea, and the east by a marshy lake, 
called Sasik. The country to the north-west of the town is formed 
This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第114页=====
84 Frederick Engels 
by low, undulating ground, which, to judge from the maps, and 
from the experience of this action, does not command the town 
within effective field-gun range. The Russians, with a force 
inferior by 10,000 men to the garrison, and exposed besides, on 
both flanks, and especially on the right one, to the fire from the 
men-of-war in the bay, could never have had any serious intention 
of taking the place by assault. They consequently confined 
themselves to an energetic reconnaissance, opening a cannonade 
on the whole of the line, at a distance which precluded the 
possibility of serious damage; they then advanced their batteries 
nearer and nearer, keeping their columns as much as possible out 
of range, and then moved up these columns as if for attack so as 
to force the Turks to show their strength, and made one attack at 
a point where the shelter afforded by the monuments and 
shrubbery of a burying-ground allowed of their approaching close 
to the defenses. Having ascertained the situation and strength of 
the intrenchments, as well as the approximative numbers of the 
garrison, they retired, as every other army, judiciously com­
manded, would have done. Their object was attained; that their 
losses would be greater than those of the Turks, they knew 
beforehand. This very simple affair has been magnified by the 
allied commanders into a glorious victory. People must be very 
much in want of something to boast of, if they attempt to impose 
upon the public in such a barefaced way.3 
It certainly was a great mistake that the Russians allowed the 
Allies to maintain themselves in Eupatoria for five months, until 
the Turks came. A Russian brigade, with a sufficient number of 
twelve-pounders, might have driven them into the sea, and by a 
few slight earthworks on the shore, might even have kept the 
men-of-war at a respectful distance. If the allied fleets had 
detached an overwhelming force to Eupatoria, the place could 
have been burned down, and thus made valueless as a future base 
of operations for a landing force. But as it is, the Russians may be 
quite satisfied with having left Eupatoria in the possession of the 
Allies. Forty thousand Turks, the last remnant of the only 
respectable army Turkey ever possessed, blocked up in a narrow 
camp,  where 10,000 Russians can keep them in check, and where 
they are exposed to all the diseases and sufferings of men 
crowded closely together—these forty thousand paralyzed Turks 
are a not inconsiderable deduction from the offensive forces of 
the Allies. 
Instead of this sentence the Neue Öder-Zeitung has: "What does this prove but 
the great demand for and the small supply of real victories?" — Ed. 

=====第115页=====
The Results in the Crimea 85 
The French and English, after having lost 50,000 to 60,000 
men, are still besieged on the Heracleatic Chersonese, and the 
Turks are besieged at Eupatoria, while the Russians are in full 
communication with both the North and South sides of Sevastopol, 
whose defenses are much stronger than ever.3 Such is the glorious 
result of five months' experimenting in the Crimea!b 
Written about March 16, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No.  4353,  April 2, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1028, April 3, 1855 and the 
New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 708, April 7, 
1855 as a leading article; the German 
version was first published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, No. 131, March 19, 1855, 
marked with the sign X 
a In the Neue Oder-Zeitung the words "after having lost 50,000 to 60,000 men" 
and "whose defenses are much stronger than ever" do not occur.— Ed. 
b The Neue Oder-Zeitung further has: "There are also military and political 
questions to be taken into account, which we shall consider in our next 
letter." — Ed. 

=====第116页=====
86 
Frederick Engels 
FATE OF THE GREAT ADVENTURER 
We published the other day some interesting extracts from the 
pamphlet lately issued by Prince Napoleon, which, we doubt not, 
were duly considered by our readers. That pamphlet3  reveals the 
striking and most important fact, that the Crimean Expedition was 
an original invention of Louis Bonaparte  himself;  that he 
elaborated it in all its details, without communicating with 
anybody; that he sent it in his own handwriting to Constantinople, 
in order to avoid the objections of Marshal Vaillant. Since all this 
is known, a great portion of the flagrant military blunders 
connected with this expedition is explained by the dynastic 
necessities of its author. In the council of war at Varna it had to 
be forced upon the Admirals and Generals present, by St. Arnaud, 
appealing, in the most direct manner, to the authority of the 
"Emperor," while that potentate, in return, publicly branded all 
opposing opinions as "timid counsels." Once in the Crimea, 
Raglan's really timid proposal to march to Balaklava was readily 
adopted by St. Arnaud, as it led directly, if not into, at least to 
somewhere near, the gates of Sevastopol. The frantic efforts to 
push the siege, though without sufficient means—the eagerness to 
open the fire, which made the French neglect the solidity of their 
works to such a degree that their batteries were silenced by the 
enemy in a couple of hours—the consequent overworking of the 
troops in the trenches, which is now proved to have done as much 
as anything else toward the destruction of the British army—the 
inconsiderate and useless cannonade from the 17th of October to 
the 5th of November^-the neglect of all defensive works, and 
De la conduite de la guerre d'Orient.... —Ed. 

=====第117页=====
Fate of the Great Adventurer 87 
even of a sufficient occupation of the ridge toward the Chernaya, 
which ended in the losses of Balaklava and Inkermann82 —all thisjis 
now as clearly explained as can be wished for. The Bonaparte 
dynasty was bound to take Sevastopol at any cost, and at the 
shortest notice; and the allied armies had to do it. Canrobert, if 
successful, would be made a Marshal of France, Count, Duke, 
Prince, whatever he liked, with unlimited powers to commit 
"irregularities" in financial matters; while if unlucky, he would be 
a traitor to the Emperor, and would have to go and join his 
former comrades, Lamoriciëre, Bedeau, and Changarnier, in their 
exile. And Raglan was just enough of an old woman to give way to 
his interested colleague. 
All this, however, is but the least important feature of the 
consequences incumbent upon this Imperial plan of operations. 
Nine French divisions, equal to eighty-one battalions, have been 
engaged in this hopeless affair. The greatest efforts, the most 
lavish sacrifices have accomplished nothing; Sevastopol is stronger 
than ever; the French trenches are, as we now learn from 
authentic sources, still fully four hundred yards from the Russian 
works, while the British trenches are twice that distance; Gen. 
Niel, sent by Bonaparte to look into the siege works, declares that 
an assault is not to be thought of; he has changed the principal 
points of attack from the French to the British side, thereby not 
only causing delay in the siege, but directing the main attack 
toward a suburb which, even if taken, is still separated from the 
town by the Inner Harbor Creek. In short, device after device, 
dodge after dodge is resorted to, to keep up, not the hope, but the 
mere appearance of a hope of success. And when matters are 
come to this pitch, when a general war on the Continent is 
imminent, when a fresh expedition to the Baltic is preparing—an 
expedition which must do something this season, and therefore 
must be far stronger in land-troops than that of 1854—at this 
moment, obstinacy goads Louis Bonaparte to engage five more 
divisions of infantry in this Crimean slough, where men, and even 
whole regiments, vanish as by enchantment! And, as if that were 
not sufficient, he has made up his mind to go there  himself,  and 
to see the final assault carried out by his soldiers. 
This is a situation to which the first strategic experiment of 
Louis Bonaparte has reduced France. The man who, with some 
sort of reason, thinks he is bound to be a great Captain, 
approaching, in some degree, the founder of his dynasty, turns 
out at the very beginning a mere presumptuous piece of 
incapacity. With very limited information, he forms the plan of the 

=====第118页=====
88 Frederick Engels 
expedition at some 3,000 miles from the spot, works it out in its 
details, and sends it off secretly and without consulting anybody, 
to his General-in-Chief,3  who, though but a few hundred miles 
from the point of attack, is yet equally ignorant as to the nature of 
the obstacles and the force of resistance likely to be encountered. 
The Expedition once commenced, disaster follows disaster; even 
victory is worse than sterile, and the only result obtained is the 
destruction of the expeditionary army  itself.  Napoleon, in his best 
days,  would never have persisted in such an undertaking. In such 
a case, he used to find some fresh device, to lead his troops on a 
sudden to a fresh point of attack, and by a brilliant maneuver, 
crowned with success, make even temporary defeat appear as but 
contributive to final victory. What if he had resisted to the last at 
Aspern 83? It was only in the time of his decline, when the 
thunderstroke of 1812 had shaken his confidence in  himself,  that 
his energy of will turned into blind obstinacy, that, as at Leipsic,84 
he clung to the last to positions which his military judgment must 
have told him were completely false. But here is just the 
difference between the two Emperors; what Napoleon ended with, 
Louis Napoleon begins with. 
That Louis Bonaparte has the firm intention to go to the 
Crimea, and to take Sevastopol  himself,  is very likely. He may 
delay his departure, but nothing short of peace will shake his 
resolution. Indeed, his personal fate is bound up with this 
expedition, which is his first military effort. But, from the day he 
actually sets out, the fourth and greatest French revolution may be 
said to date its beginning. Everybody in Europe feels this. 
Everybody dissuades him. A shudder runs through the ranks of 
the French middle-class when this departure to the Crimea is 
mentioned. But, the hero of Strassburg85 is inflexible. A gambler 
all his life, a gambler accustomed of late to the very heaviest of 
stakes, he stakes his all upon the one card of his "star," against the 
most fearful odds. Besides, he knows well enough that the hopes 
of the bourgeoisie, to escape the crisis by retaining him in Paris, 
are entirely hollow. Whether he be there or not, it is the fate of 
the French Empire, the fate of the existing social order of things, 
which is still approaching its decision in the trenches before 
Sevastopol. If successful there against hope, by his presence he will 
overstep the barrier between a highwayman and a hero, at least in 
the opinion of Europe; unsuccessful, his Empire is gone under all 
circumstances. That he calculates upon the possibility of such an 
Saint-Arnaud. — Ed. 

=====第119页=====
Fate of the Great Adventurer 89 
event, is shown by his taking with him his rival and heir 
presumptive, the young Jérôme Bonaparte, in the livery of a 
Lieutenant-General. 
For the moment, this Crimean Expedition serves nobody better 
than Austria. This slough which drains off by army-corps after 
army-corps the strength of both France and Russia, must, if the 
struggle before Sevastopol lasts a few months longer, leave Austria 
the main arbiter of the Continent, where her 600,000 bayonets 
remain disposable, in a compact mass, to be cast as an 
overwhelming weight into the scale. But, fortunately, there is a 
counterpoise against this Austrian supremacy. The moment 
France is launched again in the revolutionary career, this Austrian 
force dissolves itself into its discordant elements. Germans, 
Hungarians, Poles, Italians, Croats are loosened from the forced 
bond which ties them together, and instead of the undetermined 
and hap-hazard alliances and antagonisms of today, Europe will 
again be divided into two great camps with distinct banners and 
new issues. Then the struggle will be only between the Democratic 
Revolution on one side and the Monarchical Counter-Revolution 
on the other. 
Written about March 16, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No.  4353,  April 2, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1028, April 3, 1855 as a 
leading article 

=====第120页=====
90 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
CRITICISM OF THE FRENCH CONDUCT 
OF THE WAR 
London, March 17. Now that the pamphlet of Jérôme Bonaparte 
(junior) 8 has revealed the fact that the Crimean expedition was an 
invention of Louis Napoleon  himself,  that he had worked it out in 
every detail without consulting others, that he had sent it to 
Constantinople in his own handwriting in order to avoid the 
objections of Marshal Vaillant —since all this has become known, a 
large proportion of the most flagrant military blunders of this 
expedition is explained by the dynastic needs of its author. In the 
war council at Varna it had to be forced upon the generals and 
admirals present by S[ain]t-Arnaud's direct appeal to the authority 
of the "Emperor", who, in turn, publicly branded the opposing 
views as "timid counsel". Once in the Crimea, Raglan's really 
"timid counsel"—to march to Balaklava—was eagerly adopted by 
St.-Arnaud, as it led, although not directly into Sevastopol, at 
least close to its gates. The frantic efforts to push the siege ahead, 
though without sufficient means; the eagerness to open fire which 
made the French neglect the solidity of their works to such a 
degree that their batteries were silenced by the enemy in a couple 
of hours; the over-exertion of the troops in the communication 
trenches which is now proved to have contributed as much 
towards the destruction of the British army as did the Commis­
sariat, the Transport Service, the Medical Department, etc.; the 
rash and useless cannonade from October 17 to November 5; the 
neglect of all defensive works—all this has been sufficiently 
explained. The Bonaparte dynasty required the capture of 
Sevastopol, and in the shortest time; and the allied army was to 
De la conduite de la guerre d'Orient.... —Ed. 

=====第121页=====
Criticism of the French Conduct of the War 91 
carry it out. Canrobert, if successful, would be made Marshal of 
France, Count, Duke, Prince—whatever he desired, with un­
limited powers in financial matters. If unsuccessful, his career was at 
an end. Raglan was enough of an old woman to give way to the 
self-interests of his colleague. 
These, however, are not the most important consequences of the 
imperatorial plan of operation. Nine French divisions or 81 
battalions have been engaged in this hopeless affair. It is 
recognised to be almost hopeless; the greatest efforts, the most 
lavish sacrifices have accomplished nothing; Sevastopol is stronger 
than ever; the French trenches, as we now know from an 
authentic source, are still fully four hundred yards from the 
Russian works, while the British trenches are twice as far away. 
General Niel, sent by Bonaparte to inspect the siege works, has 
declared that an assault is not to be thought of; he has shifted the 
principal point of attack from the French to the British side, 
thereby causing not only a delay in the siege, but directing the 
main attack toward a suburb which, even if taken, is still separated 
from the town by the inner harbour. In short, there is plan after 
plan, dodge after dodge, to keep up, not the hope of success, but 
the mere semblance of such a hope. And when things have come 
to this pass, when a general war on the continent is imminent, 
when a new expedition to the Baltic is being prepared—an 
expedition which, this time, must do. something and therefore 
must dispose of far more landing troops than in 1854—at this 
moment Bonaparte is sending five fresh infantry divisions to the 
Crimean swamp where men vanish and regiments disappear as if 
by magic. Indeed, he is determined to go there  himself,  and go 
there he will, unless an improbable peace or significant events at 
the Polish border decide otherwise. That is the situation to which 
Bonaparte's first strategic experiment has reduced Bonaparte and 
"imperial" France. What drives him is not only obstinacy, but the 
fatalistic instinct that the destiny of the French empire will be 
decided in the trenches at Sevastopol. Up to now, there has been no 
Marengo to justify the second edition of the 18th Brumaire. 86 
It may be regarded as historical irony that, however meticulous­
ly the restored empire copies its model, it is forced everywhere to 
do the opposite of what Napoleon did. Napoleon attacked the very 
heart of the states on which he made war; present-day France has 
attacked Russia in a cul-de-sac. It did not aim at great military 
operations, but at a fortunate coup de main, a surprise attack, an 
adventure. In this change of purpose lies the whole difference 
between the first and the second French empire and their 

=====第122页=====
92 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
respective representatives. Napoleon used to enter the capitals of 
modern Europe as conqueror. His successor moved French 
garrisons into the capitals of ancient Europe, Rome, Constan­
tinople and Athens under various pretexts—the protection of the 
Pope, the protection of the Sultan, the protection of the King of 
the Hellenes 3—in fact, there has been no increase in power, but 
merely a dispersal of strength. Napoleon's art consisted in 
concentration, that of his successor in dispersal. When Napoleon 
was obliged to conduct a war in two different theatres, as in his 
wars against Austria, he concentrated by far the greater part of his 
fighting force along the decisive line of operation (in the wars with 
Austria this was the line between Strasbourg and Vienna), while 
leaving a comparatively minor fighting force in the secondary 
theatre of war (Italy), confident that, even if his troops should be 
defeated here, his own successes along the principal line would 
hinder the progress of the enemy army more certainly than any 
direct resistance. His successor, however, scatters the fighting force 
of France over many areas, concentrating a part in the very place 
where the least significant results—if any—must be achieved with 
the greatest sacrifices. Besides the troops in Rome, Athens, 
Constantinople and the Crimea, an auxiliary force is to be 
despatched to the Polish border in Austria, and another to the 
Baltic Sea. Thus the French army must be active in at least three 
theatres of war, separated from each other by at least a thousand 
miles.  By this plan, the entire French fighting force would be as 
good as disposed of even before the war had seriously begun in 
Europe. Napoleon, if he found that an undertaking he had begun 
was not feasible (as at Aspern), would rather than persist in it, find 
some new turn, lead his troops in a surprise move to a fresh point 
of attack, and, by a brilliant manoeuvre crowned with success, 
make even temporary defeat appear to be but a contribution to 
final victory. It was only at the time of his decline, after 1812 had 
shaken his self-confidence, that the energy of his will turned into 
blind obstinacy which made him hold on to positions (as at 
Leipzig) which his military judgment must have rejected. His 
successor, however, is forced to begin where his predecessor ended. 
What with one was the result of unaccountable defeats, was the 
result of unaccountable good fortune with the other. For one his 
own genius became the star in which he believed; for the other, 
his belief in his star has to serve as a substitute for his lack of 
genius. One defeated a real revolution, because he was the only 
a Pope Pius IX, Sultan Abdul Mejid and King Otto I.— Ed. 

=====第123页=====
Criticism of the French Conduct of the War 93 
man to carry it through; the other defeated the newly revived 
recollection of a past revolutionary epoch, because he bore that 
unique man's name, and hence was himself a recollection. It would 
be easy to demonstrate that the pretentious mediocrity with which 
the Second Empire is conducting this war is reflected in its internal 
administration, that here, too, semblance has taken the place of 
essence, and that the "economic" campaigns were in no way more 
successful than the military ones. 
Written on March 17, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 133, March 20, 1855 
Marked with the sign X Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第124页=====
94 
Karl Marx 
AGITATION AGAINST PRUSSIA.—A DAY 
OF FASTING 
London, March 19. To show the attitude of the press here 
towards Prussia, we have chosen two extracts, one from The 
Morning  Herald,  the Tory organ, the other from The Morning Post, 
Palmerston's organ. Referring to the speech made by Sir Robert 
Peel, newly appointed Junior Lord of the Admiralty, to his 
constituents at Portsmouth, The Morning Herald remarks: 
"Sir Robert Peel has most truthfully represented the people of England's 
sentiments when he demanded that Prussia should be urged to adopt an 
unequivocally stated policy, or our second expedition to the Baltic will be as futile as 
the first one. We have had enough of protocoling and 'points'; it is now high time to 
cut off Russia from her resources and to bring about repercussions within Russia." a 
The Morning Post has received the following report about 
General Wedell's mission from Paris: 
"General Wedell has [...] communicated his new instructions to the Cabinet of 
Napoleon. And what are they? [...] General Wedell tells the Government of 
France—First: His Majesty the King of Prussia is deeply afflicted at the death of 
cousin Nicholas0; [...] Secondly: [...] Prussia quite agrees with the Western Powers 
about the protocol of Dec. 28, and is ready to subscribe to the same in any and 
every imaginable form! Ergo, Prussia must have a place at the Council board of 
Vienna. [...] But it happens that the protocol of December 28 does not bind any 
one to anything—it is only a diplomatic sketch for an historical work. And as [...] 
Prussia refuses to countersign the real alliance treaty between England, France and 
Austria, Mr. Wedell's mission is, I suppose, closed". 
a "Portsmouth—Saturday", The Morning  Herald,  No. 22383, March 19, 
1855.—  Ed. 
Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
c Nicholas I.— Ed. 
"Paris,  Friday Evening", The Morning  Post,  No. 25338, March 19, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第125页=====
Agitation against Prussia 95 
It is well known that the rulers of Tyre and Carthage assuaged the 
wrath of the gods, not by sacrificing themselves, but by buying 
children from the poor to fling them into the fiery arms of Moloch. 
Official England orders the people to humble themselves before the 
Lord, to do penance and fast for the disgrace the misrule of their 
former government brought upon them, the millions of pounds 
which it extorted from them to no purpose, and the thousands of 
lives of which it unscrupulously robbed them. For the Privy Council 
has ordered a Day of Fasting and Prayer for next Wednesday,a 
"to obtain pardon of our sins, and in the most devout and solemn manner send 
up our prayers and supplications to the Divine Majesty, imploring His blessing and 
assistance on our arms, for the restoration of peace to her Majesty and her 
dominions". 
Just like the Lord Chamberlain at Court ceremonies, the 
Archbishop of Canterburyc has published a "set of rules" for 
these religious ceremonies, rules which prescribe how the divine 
Majesty is to be addressed. On the occasion of this extraordinary 
competition of the English State Church with that of Russia, which 
has also entreated God's blessing for their arms, the latter 
obviously has the advantage over the former. 
"Read by the Czar's countrymen," The Leader remarks, "the prayer prescribed by 
Canterbury is the prayer of cowards; read by Englishmen [...], it is the prayer of 
hypocrites. [...] Read by Dissenters, it is the prayer of one sect dictating to the rest; and 
read by the working people, it is the prayer of the rich who belong to that one sect, 
and who keep up these mummeries [...] through a belief that the mummeries are an 
indirect means of sustaining the monopolies of rank and office. The Archbishop's 
unctuous verbiage has aroused the working classes in several parts of the country. A 
day of fast and humiliation is to them a reality. To the other 'persuasions', besides 
those of poverty, it only means the addition of fish and egg sauce to the usual dinner, 
with a closing of their place of business, as if it were Sunday. To the working men a 
'fasV means stopped wages and the want of dinner." 
In a previous despatch we stated: 
"The conflict between the industrial proletariat and the 
bourgeoisie will flare up again at the same time that the conflict 
between the bourgeoisie and the aristocracy reaches its climax."d 
At a large meeting which took place at the London Tavern last 
Friday,6 this was manifestly demonstrated. We preface our report 
a March 21, 1855.— Ed. 
"A Proclamation for a Day of Solemn Fast, Humiliation and Prayer. Victoria R.", 
The Leader, No. 260, March 17, 1855. Below Marx quotes another article from the 
same issue, headlined "Humiliation 'Ex-Officio'".— Ed. 
J. B. Sumner.— Ed. 
See this volume, pp. 55-56.— Ed. 
e March 16, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第126页=====
96 Kar! Marx 
of this meeting with some particulars of the skirmishes which have 
recently taken place inside and outside Parliament between 
bourgeoisie and proletariat. A short time ago the manufacturers of 
Manchester held meetings where it was resolved to agitate for the 
removal of the official factory inspectors, since these inspectors not 
only presume to supervise the observance of working hours fixed 
by law, but even demand that the measures prescribed by 
Parliament to prevent damage to life and limb by machinery 
should actually be put into effect in the factories. The factory 
inspector for South Lancashire, the well-known Leonard Horner, 
has incurred their particular displeasure because, in his latest 
report,a he insisted on a legally prescribed appliance in spinning 
mills,  the neglect of which, as one manufacturer—a member of 
the Peace Society,89 of course—exclaimed naively, had "cost the 
lives of only five adult workers last year". 
This was extra parliamentary. Inside the House of Commons, Sir 
Henry Halford's Bill, which declared the "stoppage of wages"b 
illegal, was thrown out during the second reading. "Stoppage of 
wages" means deductions from the money wages, partly as penalty for 
infringements of factory regulations framed by the employer, and 
partly, in branches of industry where the modern system has not 
yet been introduced, deduction of rents, etc., for looms, etc., lent 
to workers. 
The latter system prevails particularly in the stocking factories 
of Nottingham, and Sir Henry Halford has provedc that, in many 
instances, instead of being paid by his employer, the worker has 
actually to pay his employer. For, under various pretexts, so many 
deductions are made from the money wages that the worker must 
give back an excess, which the capitalist notes down in the form of 
a debit. The worker is thus turned into his employer's debtor, and 
is forced by him to renew his contract under ever more 
unfavourable conditions until he has become a bondsman in the 
fullest sense, but unlike the bondsman, he does not receive even 
the guarantee of physical survival. 
While the House of Commons rejected Sir Henry Halford's Bill, 
which was to put an end to this malpractice, at its second reading, 
it refused even to consider the Bill of Cobbett, son of the great 
"Report of Leonard Horner, Esq., Inspector of Factories, for the Half Year 
ended the 31st of October, 1854."—Ed. 
Marx lises the English phrase "stoppage of wages" here and below.— Ed. 
In his speech in the House of Commons on March 8, 1855. The Times, No. 
21997.  March 9, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第127页=====
Agitation against Prussia 97 
English pamphleteer. The aim of this Bill3 was (1) to replace the 
ten-and-a-half hours law of 1850 by the "ten-hours law" of 
1847 90; (2) to make the legal restrictions of working hours in 
factories a "reality" by the compulsory shutting down of machin­
ery at the end of each legal working day. 
Tomorrow we shall revert to the meeting at the London Tavern. 
Written on March 19, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 137, March 22, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign x 
a Submitted on March 16, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第128页=====
98 
Karl Marx 
A MEETING' 
London, March 20. For several months The Morning Advertiser 
has endeavoured to set up a propaganda society under the name 
of National and Constitutional Association for the purpose of 
overthrowing the oligarchic regime. After many preparations, 
appeals, subscriptions, etc., a public meeting was at last called for 
last Friday at the London Tavern. 3 It was to be the birthday of the 
new, much advertised Association. Long before the meeting 
opened the great hall was crowded with working men, and the 
self-appointed leaders of the new movement, when they appeared 
at last, had difficulty in finding room on the platform. Mr. James 
Taylor, made chairman, read letters from Layard, Sir George de 
Lacy Evans, Wakley, Sir James Duke, Sir John Shelley, and others, 
who gave assurances of their sympathy for the aims of the 
Association, but at the same time under various pretexts declined 
the invitation to appear in person. Then an "Address to the People" 
was read. In it, the conduct of the war in the East and the 
ministerial crisis were spotlighted and then followed the declara­
tion that 
"there were 'practical men of every class, and  especially  the middle  class,  with all the 
attributes for governing the country'". 
This clumsy allusion to the special claims of the middle class was 
received with loud hisses. 
A detailed account of this meeting, held on March 16, 1855, was published in 
The Morning Advertiser, No. 19887, March 17, 1855. Reports based on it appeared 
in other newspapers. Below Marx quotes from a report printed in The Morning 
Post, No. 25338, March 19, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第129页=====
A Meeting 99 
"The chief object of this Association," continues the address, "will be to destroy 
the aristocratical monopoly of power and place, which has proved fatal to the best 
interests of the country. Among its collateral objects will be included the abolition of 
the system of  secret  diplomacy [...]. It will be the peculiar mission of this Association to 
address itself to the constituencies of the United Kingdom, warning and exhorting 
them to be careful into whose hands they entrust the liberties and resources of 
the country and to shrink from bestowing their votes any longer on the mere 
nonentities of Aristocracy and Wealth, and their nominees...." 
Thereupon Mr. Beale rose and seconded the first motion in a 
lengthy speech: 
"...The perilous state of public affairs, and the manifest hopelessness of 
improvement under the present oligarchical system, which has usurped the 
functions of Government, monopolised place and privilege, and brought disgrace 
and disaster upon the country, makes it incumbent on the people to unite, in order 
to prevent a continuation of the existing [...] system.... That an Association 
be therefore now formed; and be called 'The National and Constitutional Associa­
tion'." 
Mr. Nicolay, one of the Marylebone luminaries, supported the 
motion. So did Apsley Pellatt, M.P., saying the people would 
"go about their work of reforming the Government with determination, 
temperance, steadiness, and the resolution of the Ironsides'1 of Cromwell. [...] The 
electors of England had it in their own hands to rectify every abuse, if they 
determined to send honest men to Parliament free of  expense;  but they could never 
expect to be honestly represented whilst a man like Lord Ebrington only got 
returned to Parliament for Marylebone at an expense of £5,000, and the 
unsuccessful candidate had to spend upwards of £3,000". 
Mr. Murrough, M.P., now rose, but after considerable opposition 
was forced to give way to George Harrison (a worker and Chartist 
from Nottingham). 
"This movement," Harrison said, "was an attempt of the middle classes to get 
the government into their own hands, to divide amongst themselves the places and the 
pensions, and establish a worse oligarchy than that now in existence." 
He then read an amendement 0 in which he denounced equally the 
landed aristocracy and monied aristocracy as enemies of the people 
and declared that the only way to regenerate the nation was to 
introduce the People's Charter with its five points: universal 
suffrage, vote by ballot, equal constituencies, annual parliaments 
and abolition of the property qualification. 
a Marx uses the English word. Ironsides was the name given to Oliver Cromwell's 
soldiers in the English bourgeois revolution after Cromwell was referred to as "Old 
Ironsides" following the Battle of Marston Moor in 1644.— Ed. 
b J. Bell.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the French spelling.— Ed. 
5* 

=====第130页=====
100 Karl Marx 
Ernest Jones (the Chartist leader, member of an aristocratic 
family) speaking in support of the amendement said among other 
things: 
"The people would be destroying their own position were they to support this 
movement of the middle classes to get into their own hands place and power. 
There were no doubt many hungry prime ministers on the platform"—cheers3 — 
"many expectant placemen." (Cheers.) "The people must not, however, ally 
themselves to the Cobdens, the Brights, and the moneyed interests. It was not the 
landed aristocracy, [...] it was the moneyed interest that opposed a humane Factory 
Act and turned down the Bill against the stoppage of wages, that had prevented the 
passing of a good partnership law—and it was the moneyed and manufacturing 
interest that always endeavoured to keep down and degrade the people. He had no 
objection to join at any moment in an endeavour to upset the influence of the Duke of 
Devonshire, et al., but he would not do so to establish in its stead that of the Duke of 
Devil's Dust or a Lord of Shoddy" (cheers and laughter). "It had been said the 
workers' movement, the Chartist movement, was dead. He declared to the reforming 
gentlemen of the middle class that the working class was sufficiently alive to kill any 
movement. It would not allow the middle class to move unless it decided to include the 
People's Charter and its five points in its programme. It had better not deceive  itself.  A 
repetition of the old deception was out of the question." 
After some further discussion, amid considerable commotion, 
the chairman attempted to get rid of the amendement, by declaring 
that it was not an amendement, but he found himself compelled to 
change his mind. The amendement was put to the vote and passed 
with a majority of at least ten to one, with loud acclamation and 
waving of hats. After declaring the amendement passed, the 
chairman stated amid loud laughter that he still believed the 
majority of the people present was in favour of founding the 
Constitutional and National Association. They would therefore 
proceed with its organisation and later address another appeal to 
the public; he intimated, though covertly, that only persons with 
membership cards would be admitted in future to avoid opposi­
tion. The Chartists in high spirits complimented the chairman with 
a vote of thanks, and the meeting broke up. 
It cannot be denied that logic was on the side of the Chartists, 
even from the standpoint of the publicly proclaimed principles of 
the Association. It wants to overthrow the oligarchy by an appeal 
from the Ministry to Parliament. But what is the Ministry? The 
creation of the parliamentary majority. Or it wants to overthrow 
Parliament by appealing to the electors. But what is Parliament? 
The freely elected representation of the electors. Hence there 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English phrase "stoppage of wages".— Ed 

=====第131页=====
A Meeting 101 
remains only: extension of the franchise. Those who refuse to 
broaden the franchise to cover the whole of the people by 
adopting the People's Charter are admitting that they wish to 
replace the old aristocracy by a new one. Vis-à-vis the existing 
oligarchy they wish to speak in the name of the people, but at the 
same time they would like to prevent the people from appearing 
in person when they call it. 
Written on March 20, 1855 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 141, March 24, 1855 
Marked with the sign x 

=====第132页=====
102 
Karl Marx 
REPORTS FROM THE ENGLISH PRESS 
London, March 20. The Duke of Newcastle has ordered the 
recall of Lord Lucan; Lord Panmure has published Raglan's letter 
attacking him, and Lord Hardinge, the fabulous Lord High 
Constable of the British Army, has refused him an investigation 
and a military tribunal. In spite of the opposition of two 
ministries, of the Commander-in-Chief in the Crimea and of the 
Commander of the Horse Guards a in London, Lord Lucan proved 
in a detailed speech in the House of Lords yesterday that not he, 
but Raglan alone was responsible for the sacrifice of the Light 
Brigade at Balaklava93 and that the Aberdeen and Palmerston 
Ministries had sacrificed Lord Lucan to the displeased public in 
order to save the obedient, feeble-minded and tractable Comman­
der in the Crimea. The public monster had to be satisfied. A 
half-completed letter found on the body of General Cathcart 
addressed to his wife and dated November 2, three days before 
the battle of Inkerman M and a week after the charge of the Light 
Brigade at Balaklava, is decisive on this question. This letter says 
word for word: 
"Neither Lord Lucan nor Lord Cardigan was to blame, but on the contrary, for 
they obeyed orders." 
In an article on the Vienna Conference,95 The Times today makes 
the characteristic comment that should the Congress become 
a reality, the main difficulties were [to be] expected from the 
Turkish side.0 Within the framework of the four points the main 
Marx uses the English expression "Horse Guards". The designation 
"Commander of the Horse Guards" referred to the Commander-in-Chief of the 
British army (see footnote on p. 24 of this volume).— Ed. 
Cathcart's letter was quoted by Lucan in the House of Lords on March 19, 
1855.  The Times, No. 22006, March 20, 1855.— Ed. 
"The Conferences at Vienna were opened in due form...", The Times, 
No. 22006, March 20,  1855.—  Ed. 

=====第133页=====
ipilllilfl 11 
concessions would have to be extorted from the Sultan, not from 
the Tsar. a 
Yesterday The Times mystified its public yet again with the 
"authentic" announcement that the great bombardment and final 
storming of Sevastopol had undoubtedly taken place before March 
19.b Whence this sudden turn from desperate hopelessness to 
sanguine superstition? The Times began its Crimean campaign 
against the overthrown coalition and its "  ceterum  censed" c that a 
Committee of Inquiry was necessary at the very moment that 
Gladstone threatened its monopoly by the proposal to abolish the 
stamp duty and to limit the weight of newspapers that can be sent 
for one penny by post to four ounces — less than the weight of 
one copy of The Times. No sooner was Gladstone overthrown, 
than his successor, Sir George Cornewall Lewis withdrew the Bill, 
and The Times, hoping that everything would remain as before, 
suddenly transformed its bilious view of the Crimea into a mobile 
panorama, radiant with hope of success, in which even the army, 
whose obituary it published three months ago, has become active 
again. Today its view is again darkened, because yesterday Sir 
George Cornewall Lewis, against all expectations, himself brought 
in a Bill to abolish the newspaper stamp duty. The animosity of a 
writer of retrospective reviews to fresh news! The Times ejaculates. 
Lewis as everybody knows was editor of The Edinburgh Review. 
We shall return to the Bill as soon as the details are laid before 
the House of Commons, but meanwhile note that it is a concession 
to the Manchester School96 which retains the merit of having 
untiringly agitated for the introduction of free competition in the 
field of the press. The concession of the Palmerston Ministry to 
the Manchester School is a captatio benevolentiaed in case of the 
dissolution of the Lower House and new elections. 
Written on March 20, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 139, March 23, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time 
Marked with the sign X 
a Abdul Mejid, Alexander II.— Ed. 
b The Times, No. 22005, March 19, 1855.— Ed. 
c Something constantly repeated. The phrase derives from the famous dictum 
with which, after 157 B.C., Cato the Elder concluded every speech: "Ceterum censeo 
Carthaginem esse delendam" (For the rest I take the view that Carthage must be 
destroyed).— Ed. 
An attempt to curry favour.— Ed. 

=====第134页=====
104 
Karl Marx 
FROM PARLIAMENT 
London, March 21. At yesterday's sitting of the House of Lords, 
Lord Lyndhurst, the old colleague of Liverpool and Castlereagh, 
brought in his long-expected motion "on the position of Prussia with 
reference to the Vienna Conference". Two circumstances, he said, 
had lately imparted new interest to this question: The message of the 
dying Emperor of Russia 3 to the Prussian Court, and the manifesto 
of Alexander II, in which he promises to consummate the policies 
of Peter, Catherine, Alexander, and his father. How Russia 
herself regarded Prussian policies can be seen from the following 
excerpt from a secret despatch which Pozzo di Borgo sent to Nes­
selrode shortly before the outbreak of the war of 1828-29. It reads in 
part: 
"Suppose then that Russia should undertake alone to put in execution those 
coersive means against Turkey, there is every reason to believe that Prussia 
would not in any manner oppose Russia. But, on the contrary, her attitude 
at once unfettered and friendly, would operate as a powerful check on other States 
and bring them to submit to results suited to the dignity and interests of Russia. 
It will be necessary to let the Cabinet of Berlin, to a certain extent, into our 
confidence, and to convince it that the part we assign to Prussia will contribute to 
increase the happy intimacy between the two Sovereigns and the two Courts." 
Was it possible, Lord Lyndhurst exclaimed, to anticipate in a 
more prophetic spirit the line which the Prussian Court has taken 
in the past six or twelve months? It was true that Prussia had 
joined in signing the protocols of December 5, January 13 and 
April 9.97 The purpose of these protocols had been to bring about 
a Nicholas I.— Ed. 
The despatch was quoted by Lyndhurst in the House of Lords on March 20, 
1855.  The speeches by Lyndhurst and Clarendon quoted in this article were 
reported in The Times, No. 22007, March 21,  1855.—  Ed. 

=====第135页=====
From Parliament 105 
the evacuation of the Danubian principalities and to obtain 
guarantees for the protection of the Sultan's independence and 
the integrity of Turkey. Had the Prussian Court acted in this 
spirit? On the occasion of the loan of 30 million taler for military 
operations Baron Manteuffel had declared that in these protocols 
Prussia had expressed her view on Russia's policy, namely that a 
great injustice had been committed; but she did not consider herself 
obliged to go further and take an active part. Was this the language 
of a great nation? And was Prussia not expressly committed to the 
protection of Turkey by the Agreements of 1840 and 1841 98? Baron 
Manteuffel had added that Germany's independence and German 
interests were not involved in the dispute and Prussia was therefore 
not obliged to make any sacrifices.3 Baron Manteuffel himself had, 
however, stated the opposite in another document.15  Besides, once 
the Tsar seized Constantinople, it would be superfluous to talk any 
more of German independence and German interests. They would 
then succumb to an overwhelming power. After Lord Lyndhurst had 
alluded to the dismissal of War Minister Bonin, to the recall of 
Ambassador Bunsen from London and to the rejection of an address 
of the Prussian Chambers in reply to a speech from the throne, 0 he 
came to the "second act of this political drama". After a considerable 
time had elapsed Austria had deemed it proper to demand of Russia 
that she evacuate the Danubian principalities. This demand was 
drafted and sent to Berlin for signature. Counter-proposals were 
sent from Berlin to Vienna, which were completely inadequate but 
caused delay in as much as they had to be communicated to the Allies 
for examination. In the meantime Russia had evacuated the 
principalities, but retained one part under occupation for military 
reasons, declaring that she wished to keep entirely on the defensive. 
Prussia had thereupon withdrawn from the confederation, because 
Russia had satisfied all reasonable claims. From this moment on 
Prussia had made every effort to thwart Austria's plans. For this 
purpose she had, to a great extent with success, made proposals to 
the Federal Diet and to the individual German states. At the same 
time Russia had publicly thanked two German states for their refusal 
to join the Allies. He (Lyndhurst) was now coming to the third and 
last act of the drama. The Allies had arranged for a conference to be 
a This refers to Manteuffel's speech in the Credit Committee of the First Chamber 
on April 22, 1854.— Ed. 
In his speech in the First Chamber on April 25, 1854, Manteuffel said: "Si vis 
pacem, para bellum..." (If you desire to maintain peace, be prepared for war).— Ed. 
c Frederick William lV's speech of November 30, 1854.— Ed. 

=====第136页=====
106 Karl Marx 
held on August 8 in Vienna to decide what should be demanded of 
Russia as a basis for any provisional negotiations. Prussia had been 
informed of the meeting in the usual manner and repeatedly. 
Prussia had not expressly refused to attend, but in fact did not 
appear at the conference. In consequence of her absence the Allies, 
instead of drafting a Protocol, had signed a Note laying down the 
four points" as a basis for future negotiations. The four points had 
then been submitted to Russia for her acceptance, but she had 
refused to accept them. Prussia for her part published and circulated 
a document in which she raised objections to the four points. She 
also continued to hinder, both at the Federal Diet and at the 
individual German courts, the adhesion of the small German states 
to the Allies. After the conclusion of the Agreement of December 
2 10° Prussia was informed that room had been left for her accession. 
She refused to accede but declared that she was ready to conclude 
similar agreements with France and England separately. From the 
moment that these latter accepted this proposal, Prussia had in 
various negotiations and divers proposals demanded innumerable 
modifications, which France and England would certainly have to 
reject. When he (Lyndhurst) was speaking of Prussia, he was 
referring to the official Prussia. He knew that the vast majority of the 
Prussian nation was anti-Russian. It was incomprehensible that 
Prussia, after refusing to accede to the Agreement of December 2, 
could demand to be invited to the Vienna negotiations. He hoped 
the Allied Powers would not admit a Prussian envoy on any pretext: 
for if they did, Russia would have two votes at the Vienna Congress 
instead of one. Prussian diplomacy had not changed since Frederick 
the Great. He recalled 1794, the time just before and after the battle 
of Austerlitz, etc. 
Lord Clarendon: He would confine himself to filling in a few 
gaps in respect of the communications which had taken place 
between England and Prussia. After the Russian Government had 
rejected the conditions of the Allies a conference of the respective 
plenipotentiaries had been called, which, however, could not be 
held since the representative of the Prussian Government would 
not attend. It was true that later the Prussian Ambassador in 
London3 had informed him [Clarendon] that his Government 
would give the requested permission to its plenipotentiary in 
Vienna.b He (Clarendon) had declared, however: "It was too late." 
a A. Bernstorf  t.—Ed. 
H. F. Arnim-Heinrichsdorf-Werbelow. — Ed. 

=====第137页=====
From Parliament 107 
The correspondence between Prussia and Austria had helped 
Russia. Before the signing of the Agreement of December 2 
Prussia had already been invited to accede, but in vain. Prussia 
had demanded to be admitted unconditionally to the new 
conference because it was a continuation of the earlier conference, 
which had not yet been concluded and from which she had by no 
means withdrawn. With respect to the latter, the British Govern­
ment referred to the fact that at an earlier occasion no conference 
could be held because Prussia would not attend, although 
repeatedly asked. Moreover, the new conference was not at all a 
continuation of the old one, for, when in October and November 
Austria requested France and England to resume it, she received 
the reply that the time for protocols and conferences had passed, 
but that if Austria would enter into a military commitment with 
them, they would see whether peace was realisable. This had led 
to the Agreement of December 2. Later, they had been prepared 
to enter into special treaties with Prussia. 
"But, to admit Prussia to claim all the privileges without incurring any of the 
risks—to admit her unconditionally to a conference that might end in peace, but 
which might lead to war on a more extended sphere—without her telling us what 
were her intentions or her policy—without entering into any engagement with us, 
either immediate or prospective—without knowing whether she entered on the 
conference as a neutral, as a foe, or as a friend—was utterly impossible." 
The special missions sent later by Prussia had been received with 
equal friendliness in London and Paris, but so far had not led to 
anything. He did not, however, regard the negotiations as broken 
off. Only three days ago new proposals had been made. 
Unfortunately, the Vienna conferences had opened, however, 
while Prussia remained excluded by her own action. A great 
power like Prussia should not restrict itself to the narrow German 
confines. They had repeatedly remonstrated against this attitude. 
The constant reply was that Prussia's policy was peace. In fact her 
policy was neither "European nor German nor Russian", more 
likely to thwart Austria than to keep Russia in check. In spite of all 
this Prussia could not long remain in isolation when important 
European interests were at stake. She could not side with Russia in 
opposition to national feeling in Prussia and Germany. She knew 
well that on Russia's side against Austria she would become 
dependent on the former. She did not want to take Austria's side. 
On the contrary, she had taken an unfriendly attitude to Austria. 
"I say, therefore, that Prussia is in an insular and in a false position [...]. This 
may be satisfactory to her enemies, but it is deeply regretted by her allies, and by 
-the noble-minded and patriotic of her own population." 

=====第138页=====
108 Karl Marx 
He declared finally that every effort would be made to win 
Prussia's co-operation. 
In the Lower House Lord William Graham asked the Prime 
Minister 
"whether the Austrian Ambassador3 had called upon Lord Clarendon for any 
explanation of the words [...] used by Sir Robert Peel, when he was re-elected that no 
settlement of the Eastern question would be satisfactory unless Hungary and Poland 
were restored?" 
Lord Palmerston, instead of giving some reply to this question, 
began by congratulating himself on Sir Robert Peel's having 
accepted a post in his administration. Concerning Hungary, 
Austria had long known that England would regard its separation 
from the imperial state as a great calamity for Europe, since the 
imperial state as a totality in the centre of Europe was an essential 
element in the balance of powers. Concerning Poland (considera­
ble laughter was here caused by a little pause in Palmerston's reply 
and the peculiar manner in which he resumed his speech) it was 
his opinion that the Kingdom of Poland, as now constituted and as 
now possessed, was a constant threat to Germany. Nevertheless, 
stipulations concerning a re-organisation of Poland formed no 
part of the points now being negotiated in Vienna. England and 
France had, however, reserved the right, according to cir­
cumstances and the events of war, to add to the four points, on 
the basis of which the negotiations were now being conducted, 
further stipulations which appeared to them essential for the 
future security of Europe. 
Written« on March 21, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 141, March 24, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time 
Marked with the sign x 
F. de Paula Colloredo-Wallsee.— Ed. 
Graham's question in the House of Commons on March 20, 1855, and 
Palmerston's reply were reported in The Times, No. 22007, March 21, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第139页=====
109 
Frederick Engels 
NAPOLEON'S LAST DODGE 101 
"If Croesus does pass the Halys, he will destroy a great empire." 
This answer, given to the Lydian King by the oracle of Delphi,3 
might, with equal aptness, now be sent to Louis Bonaparte on his 
Crimean excursion. It is not the Russian Empire which this 
journey is calculated to destroy, but his own. 
An extraordinary, anomalous position creates anomalous neces­
sities.  Every other man, in his place, would be considered a fool if 
he undertook this trip, whose unfavorable chances are to the 
favorable as ten to one. Louis Bonaparte must be quite aware of 
that fact, and nevertheless he must go. He is the originator of the 
whole expedition; he has got the allied armies into their present 
unenviable position, and is bound, before all Europe, to get them 
out of it again. It is his first military feat, and upon its issue will 
depend, for some time at least, his reputation as a general. He 
answers for its success with no less a pledge than his crown. 
There are, besides, minor reasons, which equally contribute to 
make this hazardous journey a matter of State necessity. The 
soldiers in the East have shown, on more than one occasion, that 
their expectations of the military glories of the new Empire have 
been sadly disappointed. At Varna and Bazardshik, the paladins of 
the mock Charlemagne were saluted by their own troops with the 
title of "apes." "A bas les singes! 102 Vive Lamoricière!" was the cry 
of the Zouaves when St. Arnaud and Espinasse had sent them into 
the Bulgarian desert, to die of cholera and fever. Now it is no 
longer the banished generals alone whose fame and popularity are 
opposed to the commanders of doubtful reputation, now leading 
the French army. The singular conduct of Napoleon Jérôme 
junior, while in the East, 103 has recalled to the mind of the old 
Herodotus, History, I,  53.—  Ed. 

=====第140页=====
110 Frederick Engels 
Algerian soldiers the far different behavior of the Orleans Princes 
in Africa, who, whatever else may be said against them, were 
always at the head of the troops and did their duty as soldiers. 
The contrast between young Aumale and young Napoleon was 
certainly strong enough to make the soldiers say: If the Orleans 
were still in power, the Princes would be with us in the trenches, 
sharing our dangers and fatigues; and yet, their name was not 
Napoleon! Thus the soldiers do speak, and what is to be done to 
stop them? The man who "is permitted to wear the uniform of a 
General of Division," has managed to throw a stain upon the 
military traditions of the name of Napoleon; the remainder of the 
family are all very quiet civilians, naturalists, priests, or else 
unmitigated adventurers; old Jerome cannot go on account of his 
age, and because his warlike feats of old throw no great halo of 
glory around his head; so Louis Napoleon cannot but go  himself. 
Then the rumor of the Crimean journey has been made known in 
the remotest hamlets of France, and has been hailed with 
enthusiasm by the peasantry; and the peasantry it was that made 
Louis Napoleon Emperor. The peasantry are convinced that an 
Emperor of their own make, and who bears the name of 
Napoleon, must actually be a Napoleon redivivus3; his place is, in 
their eyes, at the head of the troops, who, led by him, will rival the 
legions of the great Army.b If Sevastopol is not taken, it is only 
because the Emperor has not yet gone there; let him but once be 
on the spot, and the ramparts of the Russian fortress will crumble 
into dust like the walls of Jericho. Thus, if ever he wished to 
retract his promise to go, he cannot now do so, since the report 
has once gone forth. 
Accordingly, everything is being prepared.0  The ten divisions 
now in the Crimea are to be followed by four new ones, two of 
which are to form, in the beginning of the campaign, an army of 
reserve at Constantinople. One of these divisions is to consist of 
the Imperial Guard, another of the combined élite companies, or 
the Grenadiers and Voltigeurs of the army of Paris; the two other 
divisions (11th and 12th) are already getting embarked or 
concentrated at Toulon and Algiers. This fresh reenforcement 
Napoleon risen from the dead.— Ed. 
The army of Napoleon I which invaded Russia in 1812.— Ed. 
Here begins the text of the German version of Engels' articles "Napoleon's 
Last Dodge" and "A Battle at Sevastopol", which was published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, No. 143, March 26, 1855 under the title "On the Latest Events in the 
Crimea". The opening sentence in it reads as follows: "While the peace talks 
continue in Vienna, the war preparations are being stepped up in France." — Ed. 

=====第141页=====
Napoleon's Last Dodge 111 
would bring the French troops in the Crimea to some 100,000 or 
110,000 men, while, by the end of April, the 15,000 Piedmontese 
troops, and numerous British reenforcements will be arriving.3 
But yet, it can hardly be expected that the Allies can well be in a 
position to open the campaign in May, with an army of 150,000 
men. The state of the Heracleatic Chersonese, which has been 
turned into one great and wretchedly managed burial-ground, is 
such that with the return of hot and damp weather, the whole 
must form one hotbed of pestilence of all kinds; and whatever 
portion of the troops will have to stop in it, will be exposed to 
losses by sickness and death far more terrific than at any previous 
time.  There is no chance for the Allies to break forth with an 
active army from their present position, before all their reenforce­
ments are up; and that will be somewhere about the middle of 
May, when the sickness must have already broken out. 
In the best event the Allies must leave 40,000 men before the 
south side of Sevastopol, and will have from 90,000 to 100,000 
men at liberty for an expedition against the Russian army in the 
field. Unless they maneuver very well and the Russians commit 
great blunders, this army, on debouching from the Chersonese, 
will have first to defeat the Russians, and drive them back from 
Sympheropol, before it can effect its junction with the Turks at 
Eupatoria. We will, however, suppose the junction to be effected 
without difficulty; the utmost reenforcement which the Turks will 
bring to this motley body of French, English and Piedmontese, will 
be 20,000 men not very well adapted for a battle in the open field. 
Altogether this would make an army of some 120,000 men. How 
such an army is expected to live in a country exhausted by the 
Russians themselves, poor in corn, and whose main resource, the 
cattle, the Russians will take very good care to drive off toward 
Perekop, it is not very easy to see. The least advance would 
a The further text in the version of the Neue Oder-Zeitung up to the end of the 
article is abridged and changed: "Apart from all difficulties of a purely local 
character, there remains the principal objection to this mode of campaigning in the 
Crimea, viz., that it consigns a whole quarter of France's disposable forces to a 
secondary theatre of war, where even the greatest success decides nothing. The 
fictitious value that has been attributed to the successes and defeats in the Crimea 
rebounds with redoubled force upon the originator of the scheme. Sevastopol is far 
from being Russia for Alexander II, but it has become France for Bonaparte.—As 
for the local difficulties, it is clear that Chersonese, at present the burial-ground of 
thousands of people and animals, will with the first ray of sun turn into a hothouse 
of pestilential diseases. Assuming that the Allies will bring up their army to 150,000 
men, keeping them supplied with provisions in a Crimea already grazed down by 
the Russians and poor in corn will be the harder for the fact that the Russians will 
not fail to drive off the cattle in good time before their own retreat." — Ed. 

=====第142页=====
112 Frederick Engels 
necessitate extensive foraging and numerous detachments to 
secure the flanks and the communications with the sea. The 
Russian irregular cavalry, which has hitherto had no chance to act, 
will then commence its harassing operations. In the meantime, the 
Russians will also have received their reenforcements; the publicity 
with which the French armaments have been carried on for the 
last six weeks, has enabled them to take their measures in time. 
There can be no doubt that at this present moment two or three 
Russian divisions, either from the army of Volhynia and Bes­
sarabia, or from the new-formed reserves, will be on the march so 
as to maintain the balance of power there. 
The greatest detachment to be made from the allied army, 
must, however, be the force which has to inclose Sevastopol on the 
north side. For this purpose, 20,000 men will have to be set aside, 
and whether the remainder of their forces will then be sufficient, 
fettered as they must be by difficulties of sustenance, embarrassed 
with trains of carriages for stores and provisions, to drive the 
Russian field army out of the Crimea, is very doubtful. 
So much is certain, that the laurels by which Louis Bonaparte 
intends to earn the name of a Napoleon in the Crimea are hung 
up rather high, and will not be so very easily plucked. All the 
difficulties, however, which have been hitherto mentioned, are of 
a merely local character. The great objection to this mode of 
campaigning in the Crimea is, after all, that it transfers one-fourth 
of the disposable forces of France to a minor theater of war, 
where even the greatest success decides nothing. It is this absurd 
obstinacy about Sevastopol, degenerating into a sort of supersti­
tion, and giving to successes, but also to reverses, fictitious values, 
which forms the great fundamental mistake of the whole plan. 
And it is this fictitious value given to events in the Crimea which 
rebounds with redoubled force upon the unfortunate originator of 
the scheme. For Alexander, Sevastopol is not Russia, far from it; 
but for Louis Bonaparte, the impossibility of taking Sevastopol is 
the loss of France. 
Written about March 23, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4358, April 7, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1030, April 10, 1855 as a 
leading article; an abridged German ver­
sion was published in the Neue Oder-
Zeitung, No. 143, March 26, 1855, marked 
with the sign X 

=====第143页=====
113 
Frederick Engels 
A BATTLE AT SEVASTOPOL 1 
Our columns, this morning, contain the official French, English, 
and Russian reports of a contest between the antagonists at 
Sevastopol. It was sufficiently important to require, in addition to 
the official documents, some words of explanation and comment 
from us. 
About a month ago, from the generally-successful sorties of the 
Russians, we came to the conclusion that the trenches had been 
pushed forward to a point at which the force of the besieged was 
equal to that of the besiegers3; in other words, that the proximity 
of the trenches was such as to enable the Russians to bring, in a 
sally, to any portion of the trenches, a force at least equal to what 
the Allies could bring up during the first hour or two hours. As 
an hour or two are quite sufficient to destroy the rivetings, and to 
spike the guns of a battery, the natural consequence was, that 
beyond this point the Allies could not push their approaches. 
Since then the siege came to a stand, until the arrivalb of three 
French brigades (one of the Eighth, and two of the Ninth 
Division) allowed them to relieve part of the English infantry, and 
to establish stronger trench-guards. At the same time, the arrival 
See this volume, pp. 5-7.— Ed. 
Here follows the continuation of the German version of Engels' articles 
"Napoleon's Last Dodge" and "A Battle at Sevastopol", published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, No. 143, March 26, 1855 under the title "On the Latest Events in the 
Crimea". Instead of the preceding text this paragraph has: "As regards the 
obstacles created to the siege of Sevastopol, in particular by Russian engineers 
(partly Frenchmen), the affair of Malakhov provides an instructive illustration. As is 
generally known, about a month ago the siege came to a stand, but the 
arrival...". — Ed. 

=====第144页=====
114 Frederick Engels 
of Generals Niel and Jones, of the Engineers, gave fresh activity to 
the siege operations, and remedied mistakes caused, principally, by 
the obstinacy of the French General Bizot, and by the numeric 
weakness of the British infantry. New approaches were now 
pushed forward, especially on the English side, where a parallel 
was opened at about 300 yards from the Russian works on the hill 
of Malakoff.  Some of the batteries now erected were so far toward 
the Inkermann side that they would have taken part of the 
Russian batteries in the rear, or enfiladed them, as soon as their 
fire could be opened. Against these new lines the Russians have 
just taken a step which has been carried out with uncommon skill 
and boldness.3 
The Russian lines, as every plan shows, extend in a semicircular 
arch round the town, from the head of the Quarantine Bay to that 
of the inner war harbor, and thence to the head of the Careening 
Bay. This latter bay is a small creek, formed by the extremity of a 
deep ravine, extending from the great harbor or Bay of 
Sevastopol far up the plateau on which the Allies are en­
camped.3 On the western side of this ravine extends a range 
of hights forming the Russian lines; the most considerable of 
these elevations is the hill of  Malakoff,  forming, hy its com­
manding position, the key of the whole Russian right. On the eastern 
side of the ravine and the Careening Bay, another elevation is 
situated, which, being completely under the fire both of the Russian 
batteries and of their men-of-war, remained out of the reach of 
the Allies as long as they could not completely interrupt the 
communication of Sevastopol with Inkermann, which was pro­
tected by the fire of the forts and batteries on the north side of 
the harbor. But since the Allies had found positions to the east 
and south-east of  Malakoff,  for batteries to take in the Russian 
lines,  flank and rear, this neutral hill had become important. 
Accordingly, on the night of February 21, the Russians sent a 
party of workmen to erect on it a redoubt, planned beforehand by 
their engineers.13 In the morning the long trench and a beginning 
of parapets behind it, were visible to the Allies. They appear to 
have been entirely unable to understand the meaning of this; 
accordingly, they were content to let well alone. Next morning, 
however, the redoubt was all but complete, at least in its outline, 
for the sequel showed that the profile, that is, the depth of the 
ditch and strength of the parapet, was still very weak. By this time 
This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, — Ed. 
The Selenghinsk redoubt; in the Neue Oder-Zeitung the end of this sentence 
beginning with the words "planned beforehand" does not occur.— Ed. 

=====第145页=====
A Battle at Sevastopol 115 
the Allies began to find out that this work was admirably situated 
to enfilade their own enfilading batteries, and thus to make them 
all but useless. The engineers protested that this work must be 
taken at any cost. Accordingly, Canrobert organized with the 
greatest secrecy, a storming column, consisting of about 1,600 
Zouaves and 3,000 Marines. The orders having to be given at a 
late hour, and all on a sudden, some delay occurred in collecting 
the troops at the rendezvous, and it was 2 o'clock on the morning 
of the 24th before they could start for the assault, the Zouaves 
leading. A short march brought them up to twenty yards from the 
ditch. As usual in assaults, not a shot was to be fired; the soldiers 
were made to take off the percussion-caps from their guns to 
prevent their being entangled in useless and dilatory firing. All at 
once,  a few Russian words of command were heard; a strong body 
of Russians in the interior of the redoubt, rose from the ground, 
leveled their guns over the top of the parapet, and poured a volley 
into the advancing column. From the darkness and the well known 
inveterate habit of soldiers in intrenchments to fire always straight 
across the parapet, this volley can have had but little effect upon 
the narrow head of the column.3 The Zouaves, hardly detained by 
the sloping sides of the incomplete ditch and rampart, in a 
moment were in the redoubt, and rushed at their opponents with 
the bayonet. A terrible hand-to-hand struggle took place. After 
some time the Zouaves possessed themselves of one-half of the 
redoubt, and, at a later period, the Russians entirely abandoned it 
to them. In the mean time, the marines, following the Zouaves at a 
short distance, either lost their way, or from some other reason, 
stopped on the brink of the hill. Here they were assailed in each 
flank by a Russian column, which, after a desperate resistance, 
drove them down the hill. During or shortly after this struggle, 
daylight must have dawned, for the Russians speedily retired from 
the hill—leaving the redoubt in the possession of the Zouaves— 
upon whom now opened all the Russian artillery which could be 
brought to bear on the spot. The Zouaves lay down for a moment, 
while some rifle volunteers, who had accompanied them, crept up 
to the Malakoff works, trying to fire at the Russian gunners 
through the embrasures. But the fire was too heavy; and, before 
long, the Zouaves had to retreat on the side toward Inkermann, 
which sheltered them against most of the batteries. They profess 
to have carried all their wounded with them. 
This little affair was carried out with great bravery by the 
This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第146页=====
116 Frederick Engels 
Zouaves and a Gen. Monet, and with great skill combined with 
their usual tenacity by the Russians. They consisted of the two 
regiments of Selenghinsk and Volhynia, the strength of which, 
after several campaigns, cannot have exceeded 500 men per 
battalion, or 4,000 men in all. Gen. Kroushoff commanded them.3 
Their arrangements were so admirable that the French declare 
that the whole plan of attack must have been known to them. The 
attack upon the marines was completely and almost instantaneous­
ly successful, while their retreat out of the incomplete redoubt had 
the effect of exposing the unfortunate and unsupported Zouaves 
to an overwhelming fire, which must have remained silent as long 
as the struggle within the redoubt was going on. 
Gen. Canrobert found that this defeat had a very great effect on 
his troops. Their impatience which had made itself remarkable on 
various occasions, now broke out with full force. The assault upon 
the town was demanded by the soldiers. The word of treason, that 
everlasting excuse for a defeat suffered by the French, was loudly 
pronounced, and Gen. Forey, without any apparent reason, was 
even nominally pointed out as the party who betrayed to the 
enemy the secret resolutions of the French Council of War. So 
confused was Canrobert, that in one breath he wrote an order of 
the day representing the whole affair as a brilliant though relative 
success, and a note to Lord Raglan proposing an immediate 
assault, a proposal which Lord Raglan, of course, declined.1* 
The Russians, on their part, maintained their new redoubt, and 
have since been busy completing it. This position is of great 
importance. It secures the communication with Inkermann arid 
the arrival of supplies from that direction. It menaces the whole 
right of the allied siege-works,c by taking them in flank, and 
necessitating fresh approaches to paralyze it. Above all, it shows 
the capability, in the Russians, not only to hold their ground, but 
even to advance beyond it. In the latter part of February they 
pushed trenches of counter-approach toward the allied works 
from their new redoubt. The reports do not, however, state the 
exact direction of these works. At all events, the presence of the 
two regiments of the line in Sevastopol proves that the garrison, 
The last two sentences do not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed, 
Instead of this paragraph the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "General Forey was 
loudly accused in the French camp of having communicated the secret decisions of 
the Council of War to the enemy."—Ed 
The identical text of the English and German versions ends here. In the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung the article closes as follows: "Lastly, with its capture the Russians have 
taken the offensive." — Ed 

=====第147页=====
A Battle at Sevastopol 117 
hitherto consisting of marines and sailors only, has been considera­
bly reenforced, and is strong enough for any eventuality. 
It is now reported that by the 10th or 11th of March, the Allies 
would be in a position to open their batteries upon the Russian 
defenses, but, with the resources of the Russians and the 
difficulties of the Allies, how is it to be expected that the first 
condition will be fulfilled, namely: That the besiegers' fire will be 
superior to that of the besieged, and so far superior, too, as to 
silence the Russian batteries before the English and French have 
exhausted their stores of ammunition? But let us suppose even 
this result is obtained. Suppose even that at this decisive moment 
the Russians in the field should neglect attacking the positions of 
Inkermann and Balaklava. Suppose the assaults attempted upon 
the first Russian line, and suppose that line even carried: What 
then? Fresh defenses, fresh batteries, strong buildings converted 
into small citadels requiring a new set of batteries to bring them 
down, are before the storming columns; a hail of grape and 
musketry drives them back, and it is as much as they can do if 
they hold the first Russian line. 
Then follows the siege of the second, then that of the third 
line—not to mention the numerous minor obstacles which the 
Russian engineers, as we now have learned to know them* cannot 
have failed to accumulate in the interior of the space intrusted to 
their care. And during this time, wet and heat, and heat and wet 
alternately, on a ground impregnated with the animal decay of 
thousands of men and horses, will create diseases unknown and 
unheard of. The pestilence, it is true, will reign within the town as 
well as without; but which party will have to give in to it first? 
Spring will carry along with it terrible things on this little 
peninsula of five miles by ten, where three of the greatest nations 
of Europe are fighting an obstinate struggle; and Louis Bonaparte 
will have plenty of reason to congratulate himself when his great 
expedition comes to develop its full fruit. 
Written about March 23, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4358, April 7, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1030, April 10, 1855 as a 
leading article; an abridged German ver­
sion was published in the Neue Oder-
Zeitung, No. 143, March 26, 1855, marked 
with the sign X 

=====第148页=====
118 
Karl Marx 
SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE HISTORY 
OF THE FRENCH ALLIANCE 
London, March 24. The Press, the organ of Disraeli, last week 
raised a storm in a teacup by maintaining that "Emperor Louis" 
was the only obstacle to the conclusion of peace and had tied 
Austria to himself by a secret "agreement" of which Austria was 
endeavouring to rid  itself.  Until now the Tories had maintained 
that the Anglo-French alliance was their own handiwork. Had not 
their Lord Malmesbury sealed the union with Bonaparte105? Had 
not Disraeli in Parliament showered sarcasms on Graham and 
Wood, who had wickedly calumniated the coup of December 2 
before their electors? Had not the Tories for two years, in 
speeches and in the press, been the loudest heralds of war? And 
now, suddenly, without transition, entirely without any mitigating 
circumstances, insinuations are made against the French Alliance, 
and caustic remarks about "Emperor Louis" and the homily on 
peace? The Morning  Herald,  the senile organ of the High Tories, 
uninitiated into the secret of the Party leaders, shook its head 
doubtfully, and murmured violent protests against the, to it, 
incomprehensible hallucinations of The Press* The latter neverthe­
less returns today to the fateful subject. The following announce­
ment appears in bold letters at its top: 
"Important circumstances have transpired. When we last wrote there was a 
prospect of the Congress breaking up 're infecta? , and of Lord John Russell 
returning abruptly to England. [...] The altered tone adopted to Russia by Austria 
since the death of the Emperor Nicholas [...] and especially the declaration of the 
This refers to an item published in The Morning  Herald,  No. 22385, March 21, 
1855,  in reply to the statement of The Press cited above.— Ed. 
Without achieving its purpose.— Ed. 

=====第149页=====
Some Observations on the History of the French Alliance 119 
Austrian Emperor3 to Alexander II, have doubtless mainly contributed to this 
result. We have reason to believe that the Emperor of the French has removed the 
obstacles which existed to a general pacification, and that France will consent to the 
complete evacuation of the Crimea without any conditions as to the demolition or 
diminution of any of the fortresses of that province. "b 
To elucidate the meaning of the oracle The Press refers to the 
"authentic details of its leading article". Oddly enough, these very 
details refute the conclusion allegedly based on them and stated 
beforehand. 
According to the leading article "...the situation of affairs in Vienna is 
becoming every hour less rational and satisfactory; and it is of importance that 
enlightened opinion on both sides of the Channel should exercise its influence to 
prevent results which may become alike mortifying and deplorable.  [....]  Had the 
Anglo-French alliance been sincere on the part of our Ministers in 1853, we 
should, probably, never have had occasion to embark in war; but, had such an 
appeal proved necessary, its conduct, in all probability, would have been trium­
phant and effective. Instead of acting cordially with France [...] a year was 
wasted by the British Government in obtaining what they styled 'the adhesion of the 
great German Powers' [...]. Nothing could justify a war with Russia but a 
determination, on the part of the Western Powers, materially to reduce its empire 
in the South. This is the only solution of the Eastern question. The occasion in 
1853 was favourable, it has been lost. Time, treasure, armies, reputation, have been 
alike squandered. Had we acted cordially with France in 1853 the German Powers 
must have followed in our wake. What has now happened? The Emperor of 
Austria has assured the Emperor Alexander of Russia, 'That Austria seeks neither 
to diminish the limit of his empire, nor to inflict on his territory any dishonor'. 
There is only one meaning which can be attributed to these words. With reference 
to an allusion, which we made earlier, to the secret engagements entered into 
between France and Austria, we are assured, on high authority, that 'while those 
engagements [...] indicate a [...] probably permanent union between the two 
empires there is nothing in those engagements that would necessarily lead to an 
invasion of Russia on the part of Austria'. [...] The Emperor of Russia is 
prepared to submit to terms of peace, which, though they offer no solution of 'the 
Eastern question', are, unquestionably, an admission of baffled aggression, and, in 
some degree, an atonement for the outrage. We believe that the opportunity for 
the higher policy has been lost, and that the combination of circumstances which 
[...] might have secured the independence of Europe, will not speedily recur; but a 
peace, on the whole, advantageous to Europe, beneficial to Turkey, and not 
discreditable to the Western Powers, may still be obtained. [...] We have reason to 
fear that such a peace will not be negotiated. What is the obstacle? The Emperor 
of the French. If the Emperor of the French, notwithstanding the [...] adverse 
circumstances [...], were still of opinion that the solution of the Eastern question 
ought to be attempted, we are not prepared to say that England should falter, but 
it reaches us that the views of his Imperial Majesty are of a very different order 
[...}. Between the reduction of the Russian limits and the negotiation of the 
projected peace, the Emperor of the French has devised a mezzo termine^ which is 
perilous, and may be fatal. There is to be a campaign of brilliant achievement, 
Francis Joseph I.— Ed. 
Quoted from The Press, No. 99, March 24, 1855. The long quotation below is 
from the leading article in the same issue.— Ed. 
Middle road.— Ed. 

=====第150页=====
120 Karl Marx 
which is to restore the prestige, and then conclude with a peace, which will not 
affect the present territorial arrangement of Europe or Asia one whit more than 
the Austro-Russian propositions to which [...] her Majesty's Plenipotentiary 
Extraordinary at Vienna3 was prepared to accede. We will not dwell on that part of 
this scheme which would sacrifice many thousands of human lives to the mere 
restoration of prestige.... We hold that the impolicy of this project is as flagrant as 
its immorality. Suppose the campaign of prestige do not succeed? In addition to 
the obstacles presented by the Russian army in the Crimea pestilence is as likely to 
be at hand as war. [...] If the campaign of prestige fail, where will be France and 
England? On whose side will then be arrayed the great German Powers? The vista 
is no less than the decline and fall of Europe. Even if the odds were not against us, 
are we justified in running such a chance—not even in favour of a policy, but of a 
demonstration? It may be mortifying to the ruler of France that a great 
opportunity has been lost: [...] it is not less mortifying to the people of England. 
But statesmen must deal with the circumstances before them. Neither France, nor 
England, nor Russia, in 1855, are in the position they respectively occupied in the 
year 1853. Woe to the men who have betrayed the highest interests of Europe! 
May they meet the doom they deserve! The ruler of France and the Queen of 
England" are guiltless; but they must not, like bewildered gamesters, persist in 
backing their ill luck in a frenzy of disappointment, or in a paroxysm of despair". 
The same paper refers to Girardin's pamphlet La Paix, in which 
the simultaneous disarming of Sevastopol and Gibraltar is extolled 
as the true solution for peace. 
"Remember," The Press exclaims, "this pamphlet, or rather its sale, is 
authorised by the French Government, and its author is the dear and intimate 
friend, adviser and companion, of the heir presumptive to the Throne Imperial."0 
Here we shall only allude to the fact that the Derbyites, whose 
organ The Press is, are working for a coalition with the (peaceable) 
Manchester School and that the Ministry for its part is also trying 
to win round the Manchester School by the newspaper stamp Bill 
(to which we shall return  d). The idea of a campaign designed to be a 
mere display of force, of a European war not to endanger the hostile 
power but to save one's own prestige, of a war resembling a 
spectacular show, must certainly disconcert every sober Englishman. 
Query: is this not one of the  idées  napoléoniennes"  as understood and 
bound to be understood by the restored empire? 
Written on March 24, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 145, March 27, 1855 Published in English for the first 
Marked with the sign x time 
Lord John Russell.— Ed. 
Victoria.— Ed. 
Prince Jerome Bonaparte, Jr.— Ed. 
d See this volume,  121-23.—  Ed. 
An allusion to Louis Bonaparte's book Des idées napoléoniennes published in 
1839.—  Ed. 

=====第151页=====
121 
Karl Marx 
NAPOLEON 
AND BARBES.— THE NEWSPAPER STAMP 
London, March 27. We learn from the best source that 
Bonaparte's visit to St. James's Palace 106—expected on April 
16—will occasion a great counter-demonstration. For the Chartists 
have invited the French refugee Armand Barbes also to visit 
London on April 16, when he is to be received with a public 
procession and a big meeting. There is, however, some question 
whether his state of health will permit a sea voyage. 
The Bill to abolish the newspaper stamp passed its second 
reading in the House of Commons yesterday. The main articles of 
this Bill are as follows: 1. The compulsory newspaper stamp is 
abolished; 2. Periodicals printed on stamped paper will continue to 
enjoy the privilege of free distribution through the post. A third 
clause concerns the size of printed matter distributed through the 
post, and another decrees that stamped newspapers will have to 
furnish security in case of any action for libel. The old newspaper 
duty system is sufficiently characterised by two facts. The 
publication of a daily paper in London requires a capital of at least 
£50,000 to £60,000. The whole English press, with very few 
exceptions, raises a shameless and disgraceful opposition to the 
new Bill. Is further proof needed that the old system was a 
protective tariff system for the established press and a system 
prohibiting free mental production? Press freedom in England 
up to now -has been the exclusive privilege of capital. The few 
weekly journals which represent the interests of the working 
class—daily papers were, of course, out of the question—manage 
to survive thanks to the weekly contributions of the workers, who in 
England are making very different sacrifices for public purposes 

=====第152页=====
122 Karl Marx 
than those on the Continent. The tragicomic, blustering rhetoric 
with which the Leviathan of the English press— The Times—fights 
pro aris et focis* i. e., for the newspaper monopoly, now modestly 
comparing itself with the Delphic oracle, now affirming that England 
possesses only one single institution worth preserving, namely The 
Times; now claiming absolute rule over world journalism, and, 
without any Treaty of Kuchuk-Kainardji, 107 a protectorate over all 
European journalists. 
All this cantb by The Times was properly disposed of in yesterday's 
sitting of the Lower House by the whimsical Drummond: 
"Nowadays the press was a mercantile speculation, and nothing else.... Why 
Messrs. Walter", the principal shareholders of The Times, "should not set up a 
manufactory of gossip just as well as Mr. Bright should set up a manufactory of 
calico?... The Times seemed to him to carry on their business [...] better than their 
rivals [...]. The Walter family have always found a convenient man [...] — a seven 
years'  barrister or some one of that stamp, who was ready to take up anything. [...] 
There was Barnes, Alsager, Sterling, Delane, Morris, Lowe and Dasent. [...] These 
gentlemen were all of different opinions. Now, the foolish papers who did not 
understand the matter, like The Morning Chronicle, for instance, took up with some 
108 • • 
particular party. One was a Peelite ; another a Derbyite, etc. When the Peelite party 
was thriving the paper throve too, but when the Peelites went down, down went the 
paper. It was quite clear these were not men of business. The thing was to get a set of 
gentlemen of different opinions"—and The Times is a master of this—"and to set 
them writing. Of course, you could accuse no one man of inconsistency; he might 
always have held the same opinions; and so individually these were most consistent, 
while, collectively, nothing in the world could be more inconsistent. It seemed to him 
that the very perfection of journalism was—individual honesty, and collective 
profligacy, political and literary. There was [...] a great advantage in this, and The 
Times newspaper always put him very much in mind of one of his farmers. When 
he suggested draining a bit of bog the farmer [...] replied, 'No, no! don't drain it. 
In wet weather there's something for the cow, and if there's nothing for the 
cow there's something for the pig, and if there's nothing for the pig, there's some­
thing for the goose.' [...] As to the bribery of newspapers there was positive proof 
respecting The Times of which Napoleon said, 'You have sent me The Times,—that 
infamous Times, the journal of the Bourbons'—and it was stated in a work by 
Mr. O'Meara0 that the Bourbons paid The Times 6,000 f. [...] a month. He had 
found the receipt for the money, signed by the editor. Mr. O'Meara also stated that 
before he was exiled to Elba Napoleon received several offers [...] from the editors 
of newspapers, and among them offers from The Times, to write for them. Napoleon 
declined to accept the offers made to him, but afterwards regretted the course 
he took." 
For hearth and home. The reference is to an article on the Bill to lift stamp 
duty, published in The Times, No.  22011,  March 26, 1855.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
O'Meara's diary Napoleon in Exile, or A Voice from St. Helena, published in 
1822.—  Ed. 
Drummond made this speech in the House of Commons on March 26, 1855. 
The Times, No. 22012, March 27,  1855.—  Ed. 

=====第153页=====
Napoleon and Barbes 123 
In this context we merely observe that in 1815 The Times urged 
that Napoleon, whom it presented as the centre of European 
demagogy109 should be shot under martial law. In 1816 this same 
paper wanted to bring the United States of North America, "this 
disastrous example of successful insurrection", back under English 
despotism. 
Written on March 27, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 151, March 30, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 

=====第154页=====
124 
Karl Marx 
THE COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY 
London, March 28. The Committee of Inquiry of the Commons 
has now held more than a dozen meetings, and the results of its 
findings are in great part available to the public. Witnesses from 
the most divers walks of life have been heard, from the Duke of 
Cambridge to Mr. Macdonald of The Times, and rarely has a 
hearing of witnesses been distinguished by so much agreement of 
the testimony. The various branches of the administration have 
been reviewed and all have been found to be not only deficient 
but in an appallingly shocking state. The Army  Staff,  the Medical 
Department, the Board of Ordnance, the Commissariat, the 
Transport Service, the Hospital Administration, the Health Inspec­
tion, and the Harbour Police of Balaklava and Constantinople 
have all been condemned without any opposition. But bad as every 
department was shown to be on its own, the full glory of the 
system was displayed only in their contact and collaboration with 
each other. The regulations were so beautifully arranged that as 
soon as they came into force nobody knew where his authority 
began and ended, or to whom to turn. Read the descriptions of 
the condition of the hospitals, of the infamous brutalities 
committed through neglect or indolence on the sick and wounded 
in the transport ships and on arrival at their destination. Nothing 
more horrible occurred on the retreat from Moscow. 3 And these 
things happened in Scutari, opposite Constantinople, a big city 
with multifarious resources, not during a hasty retreat with 
Cossacks on the heels of the fleeing soldiers, cutting off their 
supplies but as a result of an up-till-then successful campaign, in a 
place secure from all hostile attack, in the big central depot where 
a The retreat of Napoleon's army in 1812.— Ed. 

=====第155页=====
The Committee of Inquiry 125 
Great Britain stores its supplies for the army. And those who 
caused all these horrors were no barbarians but gentlemen 
belonging to the "Upper Ten Thousand", mild men in their way. 
Fiat the regulations, pereat the army3! "Turn to another depart­
ment, the matter is not our responsibility." "But to whom should 
we turn?" "It is no part of our responsibility to know which 
department is responsible, and even if it was, we would not be 
authorised to tell you." "But the sick need shirts, soap, bedding, 
housing, medicines, arrowroot,b port. They are dying in their 
hundreds." "I am indeed very sorry to hear that the best blood of 
England is so rapidly ebbing away, but we are unable to help. We 
cannot provide anything, even if we have it, without the necessary 
requisitions, signed by half a dozen persons, of whom two-thirds 
are absent in the Crimea or elsewhere." And like Tantalus, the 
soldiers had to die in the face, even within smelling distance of the 
comforts which could have saved their lives. Not a single man 
there possessed the energy to break through the network of 
routine, to act on his own responsibility, as the needs of the 
moment demanded, and in defiance of the regulations. Only one 
person dared to do that, and that was a woman, Miss Nightingale. 
Once she had made sure that the things required were there, she 
chose a number of sturdy fellows and committed what amounted 
to burglary of Her Majesty's stores. She told the horror-stricken 
suppliers: 
"Now I have got what I needed. Now go and report at home what you have 
seen. I take it all upon  myself." 
The old wives in authority in Constantinople and Scutari, far 
from being capable of such a bold enterprise, were cowards to a 
degree which would seem incredible if we did not have their own 
candid admissions. One of them, a certain Dr. Andrew Smith, for 
example, for a time chief of the hospitals, was asked by the 
Committee of Inquiry whether there were no funds available in 
Constantinople for purchases and no markets where the necessary 
commodities could be procured? 
"Oh yes," he replied. "But after forty years of routine and drudgery at home I 
assure you that it was months before I could convince myself that such a power 
to spend money was vested in me." 
Let there be regulations, though the army perish—a paraphrase of the Latin 
saying, Fiat justitia—pereat mundus (Let justice be done though the world 
perish).— Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
c "The State of the Army before Sebastopol", The Times, No 22007, March 21, 
1855.—  Ed. 

=====第156页=====
126 Karl Marx 
And it was to such old wives that the British Army was 
entrusted! Indeed, the most eloquent descriptions in the press and 
in Parliament seem colourless compared with the reality as it 
unfolds in the witnesses' evidence. And what shall we say of the 
Herberts, the Gladstones, the Newcastles and tutti quanti, 3 of Peel's 
fashionable clerks b who in Parliament repeatedly denied all the 
facts that have now been proved, rejecting them with a passionate 
bitterness with which these "eminent" gentlemen had not hitherto 
been credited! These dandies of Exeter Hall, the elegant Puseyites, 
for whom the difference between "transubstantiation" and "real 
presence" is a life-and-death question,110  with their characteristically 
modest arrogance, undertook the conduct of the war and were so 
successful with the "transubstantiation" of the British Army that 
its "real presence" was nowhere. "Yes, it is somewhere," 
Gladstone replied. "On January  1 the British Army in the Crimea 
amounted to 32,000 men." Unfortunately, we have the evidence 
of the Duke of Cambridge that on November 6, after the battle of 
Inkërman, 111 the British Army did not number 13,000 bayonets, 
and we know that since November and December it has lost about 
3,000 men. 
In the meantime the news of the uproar in the Commons 
against the Ministers, of Roebuck's Committee and of the popular 
indignation in England, has reached the Crimea. Welcomed by the 
soldiers with jubilation, it struck the generals and department 
heads with horror. A week later the news arrived that commission­
ers were on their way with authority to investigate and to 
negotiate. This had the effect of a galvanic battery on paralytics. 
Meanwhile the railway workers set to work unfettered by 
precedence, regulations or office habits. They secured a landing 
place, set shovels in motion, erected wharves, huts, dams, and 
before the quaint old gentlemen had any idea the first rail had 
been laid. Insignificant as the railway probably is for the siege—all 
its advantages could be obtained more cheaply and simply—it 
proved of the greatest use by the mere example, by the live 
contrast of modern industrial England to the helpless England of 
routine. The "Forward" operations of the railwaymen broke the 
spell which had held the whole British Army paralysed, the spell 
generated by an illusion of phantastic impossibilities which had 
brought British officers and men close to the stolid fatalism of the 
Turks,  and induced them calmly to watch certain ruin as if it were 
The whole lot.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第157页=====
The Committee of Inquiry 127 
an inescapable fate. With the railway workers the adage Aide-toi et 
le ciel t'aidera* revived in the army. Within six weeks everything 
took on a new look. Raglan and his  staff,  divisional and brigade 
generals are daily in the trenches, inspecting and giving orders. 
The Commissariat has discovered horses, carts and drivers, and 
the troops have found means of bringing their sick under cover, 
and some of the troops as well. The medical staff has removed the 
most flagrant horrors from the hospital tents and barracks. 
Ammunition, clothing, even fresh meat and vegetables are 
beginning to be available. A certain degree of order has begun to 
prevail, and though a great deal of the old trouble still remains, 
the improvement in the conditions is indisputable and amazing. 
Written on March 28, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 153, March 31, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time 
Marked with the sign X 
a "God helps those who help themselves." — Ed. 

=====第158页=====
128 
Karl Marx 
THE BRITISH ARMY 1 
We have  now  before  us the  report  of some dozen sittings  of the 
famous Committee appointed  by the  House  of Commons  to 
investigate  the  condition  of the  British army  in the  Crimea. 
Witnesses have been examined  of every rank  and  station, from  the 
Duke  of Cambridge down,  and  their testimony  is surprisingly 
unanimous.  All  departments  of the  administration have been 
passed  in review,  and all  have been found  to be not  only deficient, 
but scandalously  so. The staff, the  medical department,  the 
purveyor's department,  the  commissariat,  the  transport service,  the 
hospital administration,  the  sanitary  and  disciplinary police,  the 
harbor police  of Balaklava, have  one and all  been condemned 
without  an opposing voice. 
Bad as every department  was in itself, the  full glories  of the 
system were, however, developed only  by the  contact  and 
cooperation  of all. The  regulations were  so beautifully arranged 
that as soon  as they came  to be put in  force, when  the troops first 
landed  in Turkey, nobody knew where  his  authority began  nor 
where  it ended,  nor to  whom  to apply  for  anything;  and  thus, 
from  a wholesome fear  of  responsibility, everybody shifted 
everything from  his own  shoulders  to those  of somebody else. 
Under this system,  the  hospitals were scenes  of infamous brutality. 
Indolent neglect  did its  worst upon  the  sick  and  wounded  on 
board  the  transports  and  after their arrival.  The  facts revealed  are 
incredible; indeed, there  was  nothing more horrible  in the  retreat 
from Moscow.3  And yet,  they actually happened  at Scutari, within 
sight  of Constantinople,  a large city, with  all its  resources  in labor 
and material comforts. They happened,  not on a  hasty retreat, 
Of Napoleon's army  in 1812.— Ed. 

=====第159页=====
The British Army 129 
with the Cossacks at the heels of the fugitives and cutting off 
their supplies, but in the course of a partially successful campaign, 
at a place sheltered from all hostile attack, at the great central 
depot where Great Britain had heaped up her stores for the army. 
And the authors of all these horrors and abominations are no 
hard-hearted barbarians. They are, every one of them, British 
gentlemen of good extraction, well-educated, and of mild, 
philanthropic and religious dispositions. In their individual capaci­
ty, they no doubt were ready and willing to do anything; in their 
official capacity, their duty was to look coolly and with folded arms 
upon all these infamies, conscious that the case was not provided 
for in any part of her Majesty's regulations affecting themselves. 
Perish a thousand armies sooner than infringe upon her Majesty's 
regulations! And Tantalus-like, the soldiers had to die within sight, 
almost within reach of the comforts which would have saved their 
lives. 
Not a man on the spot had the energy to break through the 
net-work of routine, to act upon his own responsibility as the 
necessities of the case demanded, and in the teeth of the 
regulations. The only party who has dared to do this is a woman, 
Miss Nightingale. Having once ascertained that the things wanted 
were in store, she is reported to have taken a handful of stout 
fellows and to have actually committed a burglary upon the 
Queen's store-houses! The old women in authority at Constan­
tinople and Scutari, far from being capable of such daring, were 
cowards to a degree we could scarcely credit, were it not openly 
admitted by themselves. One of them, Dr. Andrew Smith, for a 
time chief of the hospitals, was asked if there were in Constan­
tinople no funds to buy, and no market to supply, many of the 
things wanted? 
"Oh, yes," he replied, "but after forty years' routine and drudgery at home, I assure 
you I could hardly for some months realize the idea that I actually had funds placed at my 
command!" 
The very blackest descriptions of the state of matters which had 
been given in both newspapers and Parliamentary speeches, are 
far outdone by the reality, as it now is brought before us. Some of 
the most glaring features had been broached, but even these now 
receive a gloomier coloring. Although the picture is» as yet far 
from complete, we can see enough of it to judge of the whole. 
Excepting the female nurses sent out, there is not one redeeming 
feature in it. One group is as bad and as stupid as the other, and 
a "The State of the Army before Sebastopol", The Times, No. 22007, March 21, 
1855.—  Ed. 

=====第160页=====
130 Karl Marx 
if the Committee, in their report, have the courage to speak out 
according to evidence, they will be embarrassed to find in the 
English language words strong enough to express their condemna­
tion. 
In view of these disclosures it is impossible to repress a strong 
glow of indignation and contempt not only for the immediate 
actors, but above all for the Government which arranged the 
expedition, and which, with the facts staring it in the face, had the 
impudence to declare they were mere fictions. Where, now, is that 
great Coalition of All the Talents,113  that galaxy of statesmen with 
whose advent the Golden Age was to dawn upon England? 
Between Whigs and Peelites, Russellites and Palmerstonians, 
Irishmen and Englishmen, Liberal Conservatives and Conservative 
Liberals, they have been huckstering and bargaining among 
themselves, and every man they have put into place turns out to 
be an old woman or an unmitigated fool. These statesmen were so 
sure the machine they had been managing for thirty years would 
work admirably, that they did not even send out a person invested 
with extraordinary powers for unforeseen circumstances; un­
foreseen circumstances, of course, could never occur under a 
well-regulated Government! Subalterns by nature and by habit, 
these British ministers, suddenly placed in a position of command, 
have achieved the utter disgrace of England. There is old Raglan, 
all his life a head-office-clerk to Wellington; a man that never was 
permitted to act upon his own responsibility; a man bred to do 
just as he was bid, up to his 65th year; and this man is all of a 
sudden appointed to lead an army against the enemy, and to 
decide everything at once and for  himself!  And a pretty mess he 
has made of it. Vacillation, timidity, total absence of  self-
confidence, firmness and the initiative, mark every one of his 
steps.  We know now how feebly he behaved in the council of war 
where the Crimean expedition was resolved upon. To be taken in 
tow by a blustering blackguard like St. Arnaud, whom old 
Wellington would have silenced forever with one dry, ironical 
word! Then his timid march to Balaklava, his helplessness at the 
siege 3 and during the sufferings of the winter, when he found 
nothing better to do than to hide  himself.  Then there is Lord 
Hardinge, equally subaltern in character, who commands the army 
at home. An old campaigner as he is, one would judge from his 
administration, and the way he defends it in the Lords, that he 
had never been out of his barracks or his office. To say he is 
Of Sevastopol.— Ed. 

=====第161页=====
The British Army 131 
totally ignorant of the very first requisites of an army in the field, 
or too lazy to recollect them, is the most favorable aspect that can 
be given to his case. Then come Peel's clerks— Cardwell, 
Gladstone, Newcastle, Herbert, and tutti quanti. They are well-
bred, good-looking young gentlemen, whose elegance of manners 
and refinement of feeling do not permit them to handle a thing 
roughly, or to act with even a show of decision in the matters of 
this world. "Consideration" is their word. They take everything 
into consideration; they keep everything under consideration; they 
hold everybody in consideration; in consideration of which they 
expect to be held in consideration by everybody. Everything with 
them must be round and smooth. Nothing is so objectionable as 
the angular forms which mark strength and energy. 
Whatever reports came from the army as to its being ruined by 
mismanagement were impudently denied by these mild, veracious 
and pious gentlemen, who being a priori convinced of the 
perfection of their Government, had the best authority for such 
denials; and when the subject was persevered in, and even the 
official reports from the seat of war compelled them to admit part 
of these statements, their denials were still made with a degree of 
acrimony and passion. Their opposition to Roebuck's motion for 
an inquiry is^the most scandalous instance on record of public 
perseverance in untruth. The London Times, Layard, Stafford, 
and even their own colleague, Russell, gave them the lie,3 but 
they persevered. The whole House of Commons, by a majority of 
two out of three, gave them the lie, and they still persevered. Now 
they stand convicted before Roebuck's Committee; but, for aught we 
know, they are persevering still. But their perseverance has now 
become a matter of small account. With the truth disclosed to the 
world in all its horrible reality, it is impossible that there should not 
be a reform in the system and administration of the British Army. 
Written on March 28, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4364, April 14, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1032, April 17, 1855 as a 
leading article 
a This refers to the speeches made by Layard, Stafford and Russell in the 
House of Commons on January 26 and 29, 1855 during the discussion of 
Roebuck's motion for setting up a committee to inquire into the condition of the 
army at Sevastopol. The Times, Nos. 21962 and 21964, January 27 and 30, 
1855.—  Ed. 
6* 

=====第162页=====
132 
Frederick Engels 
PROGRESS OF THE WAR 
While the diplomats assembled at Vienna are discussing the fate 
of Sevastopol, and the Allies are trying to make peace on the best 
terms they can, the Russians in the Crimea, profiting by the 
blunders of their opponents, as well as by their own central 
position in the country, are again taking the offensive on every 
point. It is a curious state of things, considering the boasts with 
which the Allies began their invasion, and looks like a vast satire 
on human presumption and folly. But though it thus has its comic 
side,  the drama is deeply tragic, after all; and we once more invite 
our readers to a serious examination of the facts, as they are 
disclosed by our latest advices received here on Sunday morning 
by the America's mails.114 
At Eupatoria, Omer Pasha is now actually hemmed in on the 
land side. Their superiority in cavalry permits the Russians to 
place their picquets and videttes close to the town, to scour the 
country by patrols, intercepting supplies, and in case of a serious 
sally, to fall back upon their infantry. Thus they are doing what 
we predicted they would do—holding the superior force of 
Turks in check by a body perhaps not more than one-fourth or 
one-third their number.3 Accordingly Omer Pasha is waiting for 
additional cavalry to come up, and in the meantime has been to 
the Anglo-French camp to inform his allies that for the present he 
can do nothing, and that a reenforcement of some 10,000 French 
troops would be very desirable. No doubt it would; but no less 
desirable to Canrobert  himself,  who, by this time, must have found 
out that he has both too many troops, and too few—too many for 
the mere carrying on of the siege, such as it is, and for the 
See this volume, pp.  82-85.—  Ed. 

=====第163页=====
Progress of the War 133 
defense of the Chernaya; but not enough to debouch from the 
Chernaya, drive the Russians into the interior, and invest the 
North Fort. To send 10,000 men to Eupatoria, would not enable 
the Turks to take the field with success; while their absence would 
cripple the French army at the time when, with the reenforce-
ments arriving in spring, it is expected to take the field. 
The siege is now becoming a very sorry affair, indeed. The 
night attack of the Zouaves on Feb. 24, was even more disastrous 
in its results than we stated a week ago.3 It appears from 
Canrobert's own dispatch that he did not know what he was about 
when he ordered this attack. He says: 
"The purpose of the attack being now attained, our troops retired, as nobody 
ever could think of our establishing ourselves on a point so completely commanded 
by the fire of the enemy." 
But what was the purpose thus attained? What was there to do 
if the point could not be held? Nothing whatever. The destruction 
of the redoubt was not accomplished, and could not have been 
accomplished under the enemy's fire, even if the Zouaves, as the 
first report pretended, had for a moment exclusive possession of 
the work. But that they never had; the Russian report denies it 
most positively, and Canrobert does not pretend to anything of 
the kind. What, then, was meant by this attack? Why, plainly this: 
that Canrobert, seeing the Russians establishing themselves in a 
position very embarrassing and equally humiliating to the be­
siegers, without any reflection, without giving himself the trouble of 
examining the probable issue of the affair, sent his troops to the 
charge. It was a downright, useless butchery, and will leave a 
serious stain upon Canrobert's military reputation. If any excuse 
can be found, it is only in the supposition that the French troops 
having become impatient for the assault, the General intended 
giving them a slight foretaste of what the assault would be. But 
this excuse is quite as discreditable to Canrobert as the charge 
itself. 
By the affair of Malakoff the Russians ascertained their 
superiority on the ground immediately in front of their defenses. 
The work situated on the crest of the hill, and vainly attacked by 
the Zouaves, is called by them the Selenghinsk redoubt, from the 
regiment which defended it. They at once proceeded to follow up 
their advantage and act upon the certitude thus obtained. 
Selenghinsk was enlarged and strengthened, guns were brought 
See this volume, pp. 115-16.— Ed. 
Canrobert's dispatch of February 27, 1855 was published in The Times, 
No. 22008, March 22, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第164页=====
134 Frederick Engels 
up to it, though they must have passed under the heaviest fire of 
the besiegers, and counter-approaches were made from it, 
probably with a view to erect one or two minor works in its front. 
On another spot, too, in front of the Korniloff bastion, a series of 
new redoubts was also thrown up 300 yards in advance of the old 
Russian works. From former British reports, the possibility of such 
a step seems astonishing, for we were always told the Allies had 
thrown up their own trenches at less than that distance from the 
Russian lines. But as we were enabled to state, upon first-rate 
professional authority about a month since, the French lines were 
still some 400 yards from the Russian outworks, and the British 
even twice that distance. Now, at last, The Times' correspondent's3 
letter of March 16 confesses that even up to that date the British 
trenches were, still 600 to 800 yards off, and that, in fact, the 
batteries about to open upon the enemy were but the same which opened 
their fire on the 17th of October last!h This, then, is that great 
progress in the siege—that pushing forward the trenches, which 
cost two-thirds of the British army their lives! 
Under such circumstances, there was plenty of room for 
erecting these new Russian works in the intermediate space 
between the two lines of batteries; but it nevertheless remains a 
most unparalleled act, the boldest and most skilful thing that was 
ever undertaken by a besieged garrison. It amounts to nothing 
less than opening a fresh parallel against the Allies, at from 300 to 
400 yards from their works; to a counter-approach on the grandest 
scale against the besiegers, who thereby are at once thrown back 
into a defensive state, while the very first essential condition of a 
siege is that the besiegers shall hold the besieged in the defensive. 
Thus the tables are completely turned, and the Russians are 
strongly in the ascendant. 
Whatever blunders and fantastical experiments the Russian 
engineers may have made under Schilder, at Silistria, 115 the Allies 
have,  here at Sevastopol, evidently a different set of men to deal 
with. The justness and rapidity of glance—the promptness, 
boldness, and faultlessness of execution, which the Russian 
engineers have shown in throwing up their lines around Sevas­
topol—the indefatigable attention with which every weak point 
was protected as soon as discovered by the enemy—the excellent 
arrangement of the line of fire, so as to concentrate a force, 
superior to that of the besiegers, upon any given point of the 
ground in front—the preparation of a second, third and fourth 
a W. H. Russell.— Ed 
h The Times, No. 22014, March 29, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第165页=====
Progress of the War 135 
line of fortifications in rear of the first—in short, the whole 
conduct of this defense has been classic. The late offensive 
advances on Malakoff hill and to the front of the Korniloff bastion 
are unparalleled in the history of sieges, and stamp their 
originators as first-rate men in their line. It is but just to add that 
the Chief Engineer at Sevastopol is Col. Totleben, a comparative­
ly obscure man in the Russian service. But we must not take the 
defense of Sevastopol as a fair specimen of Russian engineering. 
The average between Silistria and Sevastopol is nearer the reality. 
People in the Crimea, as well as in England and France, now 
begin to discover, though very gradually, that there is no chance 
of Sevastopol being taken by assault. In this perplexity the 
London Times has applied to "high professional authority," and has 
been informed that the proper thing to do is to act on the offensive, 
either by passing the Chernaya, and effecting a junction with Omer 
Pasha's Turks, before or after a battle against the Russian Army of 
Observation, or by a-diversion against Kaffa, which would force the 
Russians to divide themselves. 3 As the allied army is now supposed to 
number from 110,000 to 120,000 men, such movements should be in 
their power. Now, nobody knows better than Canrobert and Raglan 
that an advance beyond the Chernaya and a union with Omer 
Pasha's army would be most desirable; but, unfortunately, as we have 
proved over and over again,b the 110,000 to 120,000 Allies on 
the hights before Sevastopol do not exist, and have never existed. 
On the 1st of March they did not number above 90,000 men fit 
for duty. As to an expedition to Kaffa, the Russians could wish for 
nothing better than to see the allied troops dispersed over three 
different points, from 60 to 150 miles distant from the center one, 
while at neither of the two points which they now hold have they 
sufficient strength to perform the task before them! Surely, the 
"high professional authority" must have been hoaxing The Times 
in seriously advising it to advocate a repetition of the Eupatoria 
expedition! 
Written about March 30, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4366, April 17, 1855 and in 
the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, 
No. 1032, April 17, 1855 as a leading 
article 
a See "The last accounts from the Crimea...", The Times, No. 22012, March 27, 
1855.—Ed. 
See, e.g., this volume, pp.  32-33.—  Ed. 

=====第166页=====
136 
Frederick Engels 
THE SITUATION IN THE CRIMEA 1 
London, March 30. The reports on the progress of the peace 
negotiations fluctuate wildly from one day to the next. Today 
peace is certain, tomorrow war. Palmerston's article in the Post 
bristles with swords and cannon—evidence that he would like to 
make peace as soon as possible.3 Napoleon orders his press to 
write hymns of peace—the surest proof that he intends to 
continue the war. The course of events in the Crimea by no means 
indicates that the fall of Sevastopol is imminent. Omer Pasha is 
now in fact firmly trapped at Eupatoria, on the land-side. The 
superiority of their cavalry allows the Russians to station their 
pickets and mounted sentinels quite close to the town, to despatch 
patrols into the surrounding territory to cut off supplies and, in 
the event of a serious attack, to fall back on the infantry stationed 
further off. As we assumed earlier,b they are succeeding in 
keeping a superior Turkish force in check with a quarter or a 
third of their number. The attack made by the Turkish cavalry 
under Iskander Bey (the Pole Ilinski, who earned himself such a 
glorious reputation at Kalafat117) was repulsed by a simultaneous 
charge by three Russian detachments which attacked from three 
different points. Like all cavalry which is badly trained and lacking 
in confidence the Turks, instead of charging headlong at the 
Russians with sabres drawn, halted at a respectful distance and 
began firing their carbines. This clear sign of indecision drove the 
Russians onto the offensive. Iskander Bey attempted an attack 
with one squadron but was left in the lurch by everybody except 
the bashi-bazouks118 and had to force his retreat right through the 
"The discussion upon the Third Point...", The Morning Post, No. 25348, 
March 30,  1855.—  Ed 
A reference to the German version of Engels' article "The Results in the 
Crimea" (see the English version in this volume, pp. 81-85).— Ed. 

=====第167页=====
The Situation in the Crimea 137 
ranks of the Russians. Omer Pasha awaits the arrival of cavalry 
reinforcements and has been in the meantime to the Anglo-French 
camp to inform the allies that for the moment he can do nothing, 
and that reinforcements of some 10,000 French troops would be 
very desirable. No doubt, but it is no less desirable for Canrobert 
himself,  who has already discovered that he has at one and the 
same time too many and too few troops at his disposal. Too many 
to besiege Sevastopol in the old way and to defend the Chernaya; 
not enough to sally forth from the Chernaya, to drive the Russians 
into the interior and surround the northern fortress.3 Detaching 
10,000 men to Eupatoria would not enable the Turks to enter the 
battle successfully, but would weaken the French army for 
operations in open country. The siege is daily becoming a more 
critical affair for the besiegers. 
We have seen that, on February 24 the Russians held the 
redoubt on the Sapun hill (in front of the Malakhov fortifica­
tions).15  They have now extended and strengthened this redoubt, 
mounted cannon on it, and have made counter-approaches from it. 
Similarly a series of new redoubts have been constructed in front of 
the Kornilov bastion, 300 yards beyond the old Russian fortifica­
tions.  The reader of The Times must find this inexplicable, for 
according to that newspaper the allies had long since thrown up their 
own trenches at less than that distance from the Russian lines. Now at 
last, e. g. in his letter of March 16, the Times correspondent0 admits 
that even at the time of his latest reports the British trenches were 
still 600-800 yards away, and that the  batteries  on the point of firing on 
the enemy are the same ones that  opened  fire on October 17 last year.d This 
then is the great progress, made in the siege, these are the advances 
made with the building of trenches, which cost two-thirds of the 
English army their lives or their health. Under these circumstances 
there was sufficient space between the two lines of batteries to 
construct the new Russian fortifications. This can be regarded as the 
opening-up of a new parallel against the besiegers at a distance of 
300-400 yards from their fortifications, as a counter-approach on the 
largest scale against the besieging army. Thus the besiegers are 
forced onto the defensive, whereas the first and most essential 
condition for a siege is that the besiegers should force the besieged 
onto the defensive. 
In the Neue Oder-Zeitung: the "town side".— Ed 
A reference to the German version of Engels' article "A Battle at Sevastopol" 
(see the English version in this volume, pp. 113-17).— Ed. 
c W. H. Russell.— Ed. 
d The Times, No. 22014, March 29, 1855.—Ed. 

=====第168页=====
138 Frederick Engels 
Just as in the camp at Sevastopol people in England are now 
beginning to discover that there is no likelihood of taking 
Sevastopol by storm. In this awkward situation The Times has 
sought the aid of a "high military authority" and learned that it is 
necessary to take the offensive, either by crossing the Chernaya 
and effecting a link-up with the Turks under Omer Pasha, 
whether it be before or after a battle with the Russian observation 
army, or by means of a diversion towards Kaffa which would force 
the Russians to split up. As the allied army now numbers 
110,000-120,000 men movements of this kind must be within its 
capabilities. Thus says The Times.3 
Now no one knows better than Raglan and Canrobert that a 
link-up with Omer Pasha's army is highly desirable, but unfortu­
nately the allies do [not] as yet have 110,000-120,000 men at their 
disposal on the heights above Sevastopol, but at the outside 
80,000-90,000 men fit for service. As for an expedition to Kaffa 
the Russians could not wish for anything better: the allied troops 
dispersed in three, different locations, 60-150 miles from the 
central point, whilst not being strong enough at either of the two 
positions they are holding to carry out the task before them! It 
would appear that The Times has taken its advice from "Russian" 
military experts. 
Since at least some of the men of the 11th and 12th French 
divisions are on their way and the rest as well as the 13th and 
14th divisions and the two Piedmontese divisions are about to 
follow, the allied army will by the end of May be brought up to a 
strength which will both enable it and force it to advance from its 
defensive position on the Chernaya. The troops will be concen­
trated at Constantinople and probably shipped together, so that 
they will have to spend as little time as possible on the ill-starred 
Chersonese. This measure will cause some delay but will bring 
great advantages. The reinforcements, which up to now were sent 
to the Crimea in small detachments—although when taken 
together they form a whole army—never strengthened the 
expeditionary forces sufficiently to enable them to launch offensive 
operations. 
Written on March 30, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 155, April 2, 1855 Published in English for the first 
• time 
Marked with the sign X 
"The last accounts from the Crimea...", The Times, No. 22012, March 27, 
1855.—  Ed. 

=====第169页=====
139 
Karl Marx 
A SCANDAL IN THE FRENCH LEGISLATURE.— 
DROUYN DE LHUYS' INFLUENCE.— 
THE STATE OF THE MILITIA 
London, April 3. We are informed by a correspondent in Paris: 
"In the Bonapartist corps législatif there occurred a  scene,  which has failed to get 
into the English press. During the debate on the Replacement Law Granier de 
Cassagnac jumped up—after Montalembert's speech—and in his fury he let the cat 
out of the bag. Only when this law comes into force, he said, will the army become 
what it ought to be, dedicated to law and order and the Emperor, and we shall 
never again witness the shameful sight of soldiers turning their muskets round" 
(soldats à baionnettes renversées). "The conclusion of this speech, in which the 
janissary system was openly preached as an ideal for the army, provoked loud 
protests even in this assembly, and Granier was obliged to sit down. Another 
member of the legislature jumped to his feet and made a scathing attack on 
Granier. The scandal was so great that even Morny had to challenge Cassagnac" (it 
is well known that he was called le roi des drôles a by Guizot when he was still editing 
his little rag, the Globe) "to explain  himself.  Granier made a formal  apology  with the 
greatest meekness, and personally moved that the incident be passed over in silence 
in the Moniteur. The sitting was as stormy as in the finest days of Louis Philippe's 
Chamber of Deputies." 
"The British public," writes The Morning Chronicle today, "have come to the 
conclusion that M. Drouyn de Lhuys is gone to Vienna to act as a kind of 
prompter or fly-flapper to Lord John Russell whose proceedings hitherto have 
not given satisfaction either to his own compatriots or to our Allies. [...] The noble 
lord is famous for his fits and starts of patriotism and liberalism; for his extreme 
public spirit while in Opposition, or when in need of political capital, and his 
sudden collapses when the immediate necessity is over. Something of this kind 
seems to have happened to him on the present occasion; and the people are 
beginning to grumble. Since M. Drouyn de Lhuys has come to London a more 
decided tone is perceptible in high quarters. It has even transpired that his mission 
has so far been successful, that the peaceful aspirations of Lord John Russell have 
been officially frustrated, and that our 'man of vigour'" (Palmerston) "has 
King of the rascals.— Ed. 
b April 3, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第170页=====
140 Karl Marx 
reluctantly assented to an ultimatum which Russia [...] is likely to reject with 
disdain." 
The English Army has vanished, and the English militia is in the 
process of vanishing. The militia, which was created by Act of 
Parliament in 1852 under Lord Derby, should by law not be called 
up for more than 28 days each year under normal circumstances. 
In the case of a war of invasion, however, or for any other 
important and urgent reason, it could be incorporated into the 
army for permanent service. But by an Act of Parliament of 1854 
all men recruited after May 12, 1854 were obliged to serve for the 
duration of the war. The question has now been raised what the 
obligations were of those recruited under the Act of 1852. The 
Crown lawyers declared that they considered this category also to 
be liable for permanent service during the war. But a few weeks 
ago Lord Panmure in contradiction with this juridical decision, 
issued an order permitting all those recruited before the Act of 
1854 to leave but granting them a cash-payment of £1 if they 
re-enlist for a further five years. As at present the cash-payment 
for recruits enlisting for two years in the regular army is £7 for 
the infantry and £10 for the cavalry, a payment of £1 for five 
years'  service in the militia was the most infallible means of 
dissolving it. Lord Palmerston, who hesitated to call up the militia 
for almost a year, seems to want to be rid of it again as soon as 
possible. Accordingly we learn that in the last fortnight one militia 
regiment after the other has lost from 2/3 to 5/8 of its strength. 
Thus in the First Regiment of the Somerset Militia 414 men out of 
500 have left, in the North Durham Militia 770 out of 800, in the 
Leicester Militia 340 out of 460, in the Suffolk Artillery 90 out of 
130, etc. 
Written on April 3, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 163, April 7, 1855 
Marked with the sign x Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第171页=====
141 
Karl Marx 
PROSPECT IN FRANCE AND ENGLAND 1 
London, Tuesday, April 10, 1855 
Allow me once more to resume my long-interrupted correspon­
dence with the Tribune. Yesterday and to-day will most likely be 
the first two decisive days in the Vienna Conferences,121  as they 
were to open on the 9th in the presence of Mr. Drouyn de Lhuys, 
and as, at the same time, the Russian Embassador 3 was expected to 
have received his instructions relative to the Third and Fourth 
Points. The journey of Drouyn de Lhuys was at first puffed up on 
every Stock Exchange as a certain symptom of peace; for such an 
eminent diplomatist, it was said, surely would not go to take 
personal part in these debates unless he were sure of success. As 
to the "eminence" of this diplomatist, it is of a very mythical cast, 
and exists principally in the paid newspaper articles by which he 
magnifies himself into a second Talleyrand, as though his long 
career under Louis Philippe had not long since established his 
"eminent" mediocrity. But the real reason of his journey is this: 
Lord John Russell has managed within a few weeks, through his 
notorious ignorance of the French language, to embroil the Allies 
in concessions which he never intended to make, and which it will 
take extraordinary efforts to retrieve. Lord John's French is of the 
real John Bull species, such as "Milord" speaks in Fra Diavolo, b 
and other theatrical pieces formerly popular in France; it begins 
with "Monsieur l'Aubergiste," 0 and ends with "Très bien;" and if 
he understands but one-half of what is said to him, he is revenged 
in the consciousness that other people understand still less of what 
* A. M. Gorchakov.— Ed. 
Lord Cokbourg, a character in a comic opera by the French composer 
D. F. E. Auber (libretto by A. E. Scribe).— Ed. 
"Mr. Innkeeper".— Ed. 

=====第172页=====
142 Karl Marx 
he utters. It was for this very reason that his friend and rival, 
Lord Palmerston, sent him to Vienna, considering that a couple of 
blunders on that stage would be sufficient finally to demolish poor 
little John. And so it has turned out. Half the time he could not 
make out what was going on, and a quick and unexpected 
interpolation from Gorchakoff or Buol was sure to draw an 
embarrassed "Très bien" from the unfortunate diplomatic début­
ant. In this way Russia, and to some degree Austria, lay claim that 
several points are settled, at least so far as England is concerned, 
which poor Lord John never intended to concede. Palmerston, of 
course, would have no objection to this, as long as the blame falls 
exclusively upon his hapless colleague. But Louis Bonaparte 
cannot afford to be cheated into peace that way. To put a stop to 
this sort of diplomacy, the French Government at once resolved to 
bring matters to an issue. They fixed upon an ultimatum, with 
which Drouyn de Lhuys went to London, got the adhesion of the 
British Government, and then took it with him to Vienna. Thus, at 
present, he may be considered the joint representative of France 
and England, and there is no doubt that he will use his position to 
the best interest of his master. And as the only, the exclusive 
interest of Louis Bonaparte is not to conclude peace until he has 
reaped fresh glory and fresh advantages for France, and until the 
war has served to the full its purpose, as a "moyen de 
gouvernement," 3 Drouyn's mission, far from being peaceful, will 
turn out, on the contrary, to have for its object to secure a 
continuance of the war under the most decent pretext available. 
With the middle-classes both of France and England this war is 
decidedly unpopular. With the French bourgeoisie it was so from 
the beginning, because this class was ever since the 2d of 
December b in full opposition against the government of the 
"savior of society." In England, the middle-class was divided. The 
great bulk had transferred their national hatred from the French 
to the Russians; and although John Bull can do a little annexation 
business himself now and then in India, he has no idea of allowing 
other people to do the same in other neighborhoods in an 
uncomfortable proximity to himself or his possessions. Russia was 
the country which in this respect had long since attracted his 
anxious notice. The enormously increasing British trade to the 
Levant, and through Trebizond to Inner Asia, makes the free 
navigation of the Dardanelles a point of the highest importance to 
"Means of government".— Ed 
December 2, 1851, the date of Louis Bonaparte's coup d'état in France.— Ed. 

=====第173页=====
Prospect in France and England 143 
England. The growing value of the Danubian countries as 
granaries forbids England to allow their gradual absorption into 
Russia, and the closing of the navigation of the Danube by the 
same power. Russian grain forms already a too important item in 
British consumption, and an annexation of the corn-producing 
frontier-countries by Russia would make Great Britain entirely 
dependent upon her and the United States, while it would 
establish these two countries as the regulators of the corn-market 
of the world. Besides, there are always some vague and alarming 
rumors afloat about Russian progress in Central Asia, got up by 
interested Indian politicians or terrified visionaries, and credited 
by the general geographical ignorance of the British public. Thus, 
when Russia began her aggression upon Turkey, the national 
hatred broke forth in a blaze, and never, perhaps, was a war as 
popular as this. The peace-party was for a moment interdicted 
from speaking; even the mass of its own members went along with 
the popular current. Whoever knew the character of the English 
must have felt certain that this warlike enthusiasm could be but of 
short duration, at least so far as the middle-class was concerned; as 
soon as the effects of the war should become taxable upon their 
pockets, mercantile sense was sure to overcome national pride, and 
the loss of immediate individual profits was sure to outweigh the 
certainty of losing, gradually, great national advantages. The 
Peelites,122 adverse to the war, not so much out of a real love of 
peace, as from a narrowness and timidity of mind which holds in 
horror all great crises and all decisive action, did their best to 
hasten the great moment when every British merchant and 
manufacturer could calculate to a farthing what the war would 
cost him, individually, per annum. Mr. Gladstone, scorning the 
vulgar idea of a loan, at once doubled the income-tax and stopped 
financial reform. The result came to light at once. The peace-
party raised their heads again. John Bright dared popular feeling 
with his own well-known spirit and tenacity, until he succeeded in 
bringing the manufacturing districts round to him. In London the 
feeling is still more in favor of the war, but the progress of the 
peace-party is visible, even here; besides, it must be recollected 
that the peace-society123 never, at any time, commanded any 
mentionable influence in the capital. Its agitation, however, is 
increasing in all parts of the country, and another year of doubled 
taxation, with a loan—for this is now considered to be unavoid­
able—will break down whatever is left of warlike spirit among the 
manufacturing and trading classes. 
With the mass of the people in both countries, the case is 

=====第174页=====
144 Karl Marx 
entirely different. The peasantry in France have, ever since 1789, 
been the great supporters of war and warlike glory. They are sure, 
this time, not to feel much of the pressure of the war; for the 
conscription, in a country where the land is infinitesimally 
subdivided among small proprietors, not only frees the agricultur­
al districts from surplus labor, but also gives to some 20,000 young 
men, every year, the opportunity of earning a round sum of 
money, by engaging to serve as substitutes. A protracted war only 
would be severely felt. As to war-taxes, the Emperor cannot 
impose them upon the peasantry, without risking his crown and 
his life. His only means of maintaining Bonapartism among them, 
is to buy them up by freedom from war-taxation; and thus, for 
some years to come, they may be exempted from this sort of 
pressure. In England, the case is similar. Agricultural labor is 
generally over-supplied, and furnishes the mass of the soldiery, 
which only at a later period of the war receives a strong admixture 
of the rowdy-class from the towns. Trade being tolerably good, 
and a good many agricultural improvements being carried out, 
when the war began, the quota of agricultural recruits was, in this 
instance, supplied more sparingly than before, and the town-
element is decidedly preponderant in the present militia. But even 
what has been withdrawn has kept wages up, and the sympathy of 
the villagers is always accompanying soldiers who came from 
among them, and who are now transformed into heroes. Taxation, 
in its direct shape, does not touch the small farmers and laborers, 
and until an increase of indirect imposts can reach them, sensibly, 
several years of war must have passed. Among these people, the 
war-enthusiasm is as strong as ever, and there is not a village 
where is not to be found some new beer-shop with the sign of 
"The Heroes of the Alma," or some such motto, and where are 
not, in almost every house, wonderful prints of Alma, Inkermann, 
the charge at Balaklava,124 portraits of Lord Raglan and others, to 
adorn the walls. But if in France, the great preponderance of the 
small farmers (four-fifths of the population), and their peculiar 
relation to Louis Napoleon, give to their opinions a great deal of 
importance, in England the one-third of the population forming 
the countrypeople has scarcely any influence, except as a tail and 
chorus to the aristocratic landed proprietors. 
The industrial working population has, in both countries, almost 
the same peculiar position with regard to this war. Both British 
and French proletarians are filled with an honorable national 
spirit, though they are more or less free from the antiquated 
national prejudices common, in either country, to the peasantry. 

=====第175页=====
Prospect in France and England 145 
They have little immediate interest in the war, save that if the 
victories of their countrymen flatter their national pride, the 
conduct of the war, foolhardy and presumptuous as regards 
France, timid and stupid as regards England, offers them a fair 
opportunity of agitating against the existing governments and 
governing classes. But the main point, with them, is this: that this 
war, coinciding with a commercial crisis, only the first develop­
ments of which have, as yet, been seen, conducted by hands and 
heads unequal to the task, gaining at the same time European 
dimensions, will and must bring about events which will enable the 
proletarian class to resume that position which they lost, in France, 
by the battle of June, 1848,125 and that not only as far as France is 
concerned, but for all Central Europe, England included. 
In France, indeed, there can be no doubt that every fresh 
revolutionary storm must bring, sooner or later, the working-class 
to power; in England, things are fast approaching a similar state. 
There is an aristocracy willing to carry on the war, but unfit to do 
so, and completely put to the blush by last winter's mismanage­
ment. There is a middle class, unwilling to carry on that war which 
cannot be put a stop to, sacrificing everything to peace, and 
thereby proclaiming their own incapacity to govern England. If 
events turn out the one, with its different fractions, and do not 
admit the other, there remain but two classes on which power can 
devolve: the petty Bourgeoisie, the small trading class, whose want 
of energy and decision* has shown itself on every occasion when it 
was called upon to come from words to deeds—and the 
working-class, which has been constantly reproached with showing 
far too much energy and decision when proceeding to action as a 
class. 
Which of these classes will be the one to carry England through 
the present struggle, and the complications about to arise from it? 
Written on April 10, 1855 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4375, April 27, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1036, May 1, 1855 
Signed: Karl Marx Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第176页=====
146 
Frederick Engels 
NAPOLEON'S APOLOGY 1 
Napoleon III, in his quality as chief editor of the Moniteur, has 
published a long leading article on the Crimean Expedition, 3 the 
important portions of which we have duly published. The purpose 
of this manifesto is evidently to console the French nation for the 
failure of the enterprise, to shift the responsibility of it from the 
Imperial shoulders, and at the same time to reply to the famous 
pamphlet lately issued by Prince Napoleon.b In that half familiar, 
half dignified style, characteristic of the man who writes at the 
same time for French peasants and for European Cabinets, a sort 
of history of the campaign is given, with the alleged reasons for 
each step. Some of these reasons merit a special examination.0 
The Imperial adventurer informs usd that the allied troops were 
brought up to Gallipoli, because otherwise the Russians might 
have crossed the Danube at Rustchuk, and turning the lines of 
Varna and Shumla, passed the Balkan and marched upon 
Constantinople. This reason is the worst ever given for the landing 
See "Paris, le 10 avril. Expédition d'Orient", Le Moniteur universel, No. 101, 
April 11, 1855. In the Neue Oder-Zeitung this passage is preceded by the following 
words: "The public, even in France, seems to have uncovered the mysteries 
surrounding the siege of Sevastopol. Therefore Louis Bonaparte...".— Ed. 
De la conduite de la guerre d'Orient... (see this volume, pp.  76-77).—  Ed. 
Instead of this sentence the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "The document is in the 
highest degree unpolitical because it is exceedingly feeble and inadequate. Yet the 
'pressure from without' must have been dangerously strong if Bonaparte has had 
to come forward in this way and defend  himself."  The phrase "pressure from 
without" is in English in the original.— Ed. 
In the Neue Oder-Zeitung this sentence begins as follows: "After a ponderous 
introduction he recounts part of the instructions received by St. Arnaud at the 
beginning of the campaign and explains...".— Ed. 

=====第177页=====
Napoleon's Apology 147 
at Gallipoli. In the first place Rustchuk is a fortress, and not an 
open town, as the illustrious editor of the Moniteur seems to 
fancy. 3 As to the danger of such a flank march of the Russians, it 
is well to recollect that an army of 60,000 Turks, firmly established 
between four strong fortresses, could not safely be passed without 
leaving a strong corps to observe them; that such a flank march 
would have exposed the Russians, in the ravines of the Balkan, to 
the fate of Dupont at Baylen, and of Vandamme at Culm 128; that 
in the most favorable case they could not bring more than 25,000 
men to Adrianople; and that whoever thinks such an army 
dangerous to the Turkish metropolis, may have his opinions 
corrected by reading Major Moltke's well-known observations on 
the campaign of 1829 lately republished in English at London.b 
In case there should be no danger to Constantinople, the Allies 
were, as we learn from the Moniteur, to push some divisions to 
Varna, and to end any attempt at besieging Silistria. This done, 
two other operations would offer themselves—a landing near 
Odessa, or the seizure of the Crimea. Both were to be discussed by 
the allied Generals on the spot. Such were the instructions to St. 
Arnaud, which wound up with some sound military advice in the 
form of maxims and apothegms: — 
Always know what your enemy is doing; keep your troops together, divide them 
on no account; or if you must divide them, manage so that you can reunite them 
on a given point in twenty-four hours—and so forth. 
Very valuable rules of conduct, no doubt, but so trite and 
common-place, that the reader must at once conclude St. Arnaud 
to have been, in the eyes of his master, the greatest dunce and 
ignoramus in the world. After this, the instructions wind up with: 
"You have my entire confidence, Marshal. Go, for I am certain that, under your 
experienced leadership, the French eagles will earn new glory!" 
As to the main point, the Crimean Expedition, Mr. Bonaparte 
confesses that it was certainly a favorite idea with him, and that at 
a later period he sent another batch of instructions to St. Arnaud 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung further has the following sentence, which does not 
occur in the New-York Daily Tribune: "This recalls the historical howler made by 
the Moniteur in its obituary for Emperor Nicholas [Le Moniteur universel, No. 86, 
March 27, 1855] in which, in particular, the Treaty of Adrianople was confounded 
with the Treaty of Kuchuk-Kainardji." —Ed. 
H. K. B. Moltke, Der russisch-türkische Feldzug in der europäischen Türkei 1828 
und 1829. The English translation appeared in London in 1854 under the title The 
Russians in Bulgaria and Rumelia.... There is no reference to it in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung. — Ed. 

=====第178页=====
148 Frederick Engels 
respecting it. But he denies having elaborated the plan in its 
details, and sent it to headquarters; according to him the Generals 
still had the choice of landing near Odessa. As a proof of this, a 
passage from his fresh instructions is given. In it he proposes a 
landing at Theodosia (Kaffa), on account of its offering a safe and 
capacious anchorage to the fleets, which must form the base of 
operations of the army. What a base of operations is he had 
explained to St. Arnaud in his first instructions, in terms which 
leave no doubt that the illustrious Marshal was supposed never to 
have read any standard work whatever upon his profession. From 
this point—Kaffa—the army was to march upon Sympheropol, 
drive the Russians into Sevastopol, before the walls of which a 
battle would probably be fought, and, finally, to besiege Sevas­
topol. "Unfortunately" this "plan was not followed up by the 
allied generals"—a circumstance very fortunate for the Emperor, 
as it allows of his shuffling off the responsibility of the whole 
affair, and leaving it on the shoulders of the generals. 
The plan of landing 60,000 men at Kaffa and marching thence 
upon Sevastopol is indeed original. Taking as a general rule that 
the offensive strength of an army in an enemy's country decreases 
in the same ratio as its distance from its base of operations 
increases, how many men would the Allies have brought to 
Sevastopol after a march of more than 120 miles? How many men 
were to be left at Kaffa? How many to hold and fortify 
intermediate points? How many to protect convoys, and to scour 
the country? Not 20,000 men could have been collected under the 
walls of a fortress requiring three times that number barely to 
invest it. If Louis Napoleon ever goes to the war  himself,  and 
conducts it upon this principle, he may as well order quarters at 
Mivart's Hotel,129 London, at once, for he will never see Paris 
again.3 
As to the safety of the anchorage at Kaffa, every mariner in 
the Black Sea knows, and every chart shows that it is an open 
roadstead, with shelter against northerly and westerly winds alone, 
while the most dangerous storms in the Black Sea are from the 
south and south-west. Of this the storm of the 14th of November 
is an instance. Had the fleets then been at Kaffa they would have 
been driven upon a lee-shore.b In this way our hero clears himself 
In the Neue Oder-Zeitung the end of this sentence reads as follows: "and 
conducts it upon this principle, then one and the same family will certainly 
represent the most astounding contrast in the history of wars."—Ed 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung further has a sentence which does not occur in the 
New-York Daily Tribune: "Now comes the most ticklish part of the article." — Ed 

=====第179页=====
Napoleon's Apology 149 
from the responsibility thrown upon him by his cousin3 ; but it 
would never do to sacrifice Raglan and Canrobert. Accordingly, to 
show the cleverness of the said Generals, a very decent sketch is 
given of siege-operations according to Vauban—a sketch which, 
from the total ignorance of the subject it supposes in the reader, 
might have been written for the benefit of Marshal St. Arnaud.* 3 
This sketch, however, but serves to show how Sevastopol was not 
to be taken, for it winds up with the assertion that all these rules 
were inapplicable to Sevastopol. For instance, 
"in a common siege where one front is attacked, the length of the last parallel 
would be about 300 yards, and the whole length of trenches would not exceed 
8,000  yards; here the extent of parallel is 3,000 yards, and the whole linear length 
of all the trenches is 41,000 yards." 
This is all true enough, but the question here is why has this 
enormous extent of attack been adopted, when every circumstance 
called for the greatest possible concentration of fire upon one or 
two determined points? The answer is: 
"Sevastopol is not like any other fortress. It has but a shallow ditch, no masonry 
scarps, and these defenses are replaced by abattis and palisades; thus our fire could 
make but little impression on the earth breastwork." 
If this was not written for St. Arnaud, it is surely written for the 
French peasantry alone. Every sub-lieutenant in the French army 
must laugh at such nonsense. Palisades, unless at the bottom of a 
ditch, or at least out of the sight of the enemy, are very soon 
knocked over by shot and shell. Abattis may be set on fire, and 
must be at the foot of the glacis, about 60 or 80 yards from the 
breastwork, else they would obstruct the fire of the guns. 
Moreover, these abattis must be large trees laid on the ground, the 
pointed branches toward the enemy, and the whole firmly 
connected together; but where such trees could have come from, 
in a woodless country like the Crimea, the Moniteur does not say. 
The absence of masonry scarps has nothing to do with the 
protracted siege, for according to the description in the Moniteur 
itself,  they only come into play when the breaching batteries have 
been established on the top of the glacis—a position from which 
the Allies are yet far distant. 0 That palisades are an improvement 
upon masonry scarps, is certainly new; for these wooden ramparts 
a Prince Napoleon (Jerome Bonaparte, Jr.), the presumed author of the 
pamphlet De la conduite de la guerre d'Orient.... —Ed. 
In the Neue Oder-Zeitung the end of this sentence beginning with the words 
"according to Vauban" does not occur.— Ed. 
This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第180页=====
150 Frederick Engels 
can be very easily destroyed by enfilading fire, even at the bottom 
of the ditch; and thus they allow of an assault as soon as the 
defending guns are silenced. 
In conclusion, we are told by this new military authority, that all 
the facts show that the allied generals have done what they 
could—have done more than, under the circumstances, could 
have been expected from them—and have, indeed, covered 
themselves with glory.3 If they could not properly invest Sevas­
topol—if they could not drive away the Russian army of 
observation—if they are not yet in the place—why, it is because 
they are not strong enough. This is also true: but who is 
responsible for this greatest of all faults? Who but Louis 
Bonaparte! Such is the final conclusion which the whole French 
public must inevitably draw from this wordy, round-about, 
shuffling, and ridiculous explanation of their Emperor.b 
Written about April 14, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4377, April 30, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1036, May 1, 1855 and the 
New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 712, May 5, 
1855 as a leading article; the German 
version was first published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, No. 177, April 27, 1855, 
marked with the sign x 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung further has: "Dubious glory if it needs to be  proved, 
and is proved in this manner!"—Ed. 
Instead of this last sentence the article in the Neue Oder-Zeitung has the 
following concluding passage: "That is the inevitable conclusion following from the 
leading article in the Moniteur. What impression it produced in Paris is shown by 
the following passage from the letter of the otherwise servile Paris correspondent 
of The Times: 'There are persons [...] who [...] consider it as [...] preliminary to the 
abandonment of the Crimea altogether [...] and in some Legitimist circles [...] these 
words have been made use of:—"We were led to expect a war à la Napoleon; but it 
seems we are now to have a peace à la Louis Philippe." On the other hand [...] an 
impression of a similar kind' " prevails " 'in the minds of the working classes of the 
Faubourg St. Antoine.'" They "'interpret it as an avowal of weakness [...]'." (The 
Times, No. 22028, April 14, 1855.)—Ed. 

=====第181页=====
151 
Frederick Engels 
THE SIEGE OF SEVASTOPOL 
The siege of Sevastopol continues to drag on its weary course, 
barren of events and decisions, scarcely enlivened, now and then, 
by some resultless encounter or desultory attack, every one of 
which looks exactly like all its predecessors and successors. Always 
excepting the superiority evinced by the defense in the engineer­
ing department, it is certain that very few campaigns have been 
carried on for an equal length of time with such a degree of 
mediocrity in the commanding officers as has now been dev­
eloped. The whole affair is becoming a public nuisance to the 
world in general, and to those, in particular, who have to expose, 
in the Press, the different phases assumed by this eminently 
stationary operation.3 
The French and English reports of the affair of March 23 we 
published some days ago; a Russian detailed report we have not 
yet received. As usual, the dispatches of the Allied Generals are 
conceived in so obscure a style that we cannot learn anything 
distinct from them. With the help of private letters published in 
Europe and the reports of newspaper-correspondents, of which we 
now have several at hand, we are enabled to make out the 
following summary view of the facts. 
The "right attack" of the Allies, directed against the south­
eastern fronts of Sevastopol, from the head of the inner harbor to 
that of the Careening Bay, has been carried forward to the 
distance of some 600 yards from the first Russian line, by three 
lines of approaches or zig-zags, connected with each other at their 
a This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第182页=====
152 Frederick Engels 
ends by what is called the second parallel. Beyond this, the three 
zig-zags are still being pushed forward, though irregularly and 
slowly, and it is intended to unite them by a third parallel, and to 
form, on the central approach, a place d'armes, or covered 
rallying-ground, spacious enough to hold a reserve force. Of these 
three approaches, the middle one is in the hands of the English, 
and the right and left are occupied by the French. These two 
flank approaches have been pushed on rather quicker than the 
central one, so that the French trenches here are, perhaps, fifty 
yards nearer to the place than the position occupied by the 
English. 
Before daybreak of the 23d of March, a considerable Russian 
force, amounting to about twelve battalions, advanced from the 
town upon the siege-works. Well aware that the trenches had been 
constructed with an utter neglect of the habitual and prescribed 
precautions, that their flanks were neither thrown back sufficiently 
nor defended by redoubts, that consequently a bold dash upon the 
extreme flanks of the parallel must lead the assailants into the 
trenches, the Russians began their attack by a sudden and rapid 
movement, by which the eastern and western extremities of the 
parallel were turned. A front attack occupied the trench-guard 
and their reserves, while the outflanking columns, gallantly but 
vainly resisted by the French, descended into the works and swept 
the trench until they came upon the central position defended by 
the British. The British lines being secure from serious annoyance 
in front, were not molested until the fusillade going on to the 
right and left had brought up part of their reserves; and even 
then, the front attack was of no great vehemence, as the strength 
of the sortie was concentrated in the turning columns. But these 
too, from the great extent of trench they had overrun, had 
already spent their first ardor, and when they came upon the 
British, their officers had to bear constantly in mind the chance of 
ultimate retreat. Accordingly, the struggle very soon came to a 
point where each party held its ground, and that is the moment 
when a sallying detachment should look out for a safe retreat. 
This the Russians did. Without attempting seriously to dislodge 
the British, they maintained the fight until most of their troops 
had got a fair start homeward, and then the rearguard, heavily 
pressed, by this time, by the French and British reserves, made the 
best of its way toward Sevastopol. 
The Russians must have expected to find many guns and a deal 
of ammunition and other material in the second parallel, for to 
destroy such could have been the only purpose of this sortie. But 

=====第183页=====
The Siege of Sevastopol 153 
there was very little of the sort, and thus the only advantage they 
gained by the attack was the certainty that at this distance from 
their own lines they might still, in the first hour or two of a sortie, 
and before the enemies' reserves could come up, show the 
strongest front. This is worth something, but hardly worth the 
losses of such an attempt. The material damage done to the 
siege-works was repaired in a day or two, and the moral effect 
gained by this sortie was null. For, as every sortie must necessarily 
end in a retreat, the besiegers will always believe that they have 
been the victors; and unless the losses of the besieged are 
disproportionately small compared with those of the besiegers, the 
moral effect is generally more encouraging to the latter than 
otherwise. In this instance, when Raglan and Canrobert were more 
than ever in want of an apparent success, this sally, with its 
comparatively worthless fruits, and its final precipitate retreat, was 
a real godsend for them. The French troops give themselves 
enormous credit for having followed up the enemy to the very 
lines of Sevastopol—which in such a case is not so difficult, as the 
guns of the place cannot play for fear of hitting their own troops; 
while the British, passing over in silence their exceptional retired 
position, which gave them the character of a reserve more than 
that of a body of troops in the front line of battle, are again, with 
less cause than ever, blustering about their own invincibility and 
that unflinching courage which forbids the British soldier ever to 
give way a single inch. The few British officers in the hands of the 
Russians, taken in the midst of these unflinching soldiers and 
carried off safely into Sevastopol,3 must know what all these big 
words mean. 
In the meantime, the great strategists of the British press have 
gone on declaring, with considerable emphasis, that before the 
storming of Sevastopol could be thought of, the new outworks 
erected by the Russians must needs be taken; and that they hoped 
they would be taken shortly. This assertion is certainly as true as it 
is common-place; but the question is, How are they to be taken, if 
the Allies could not prevent their being completed under their 
very batteries? The attack upon the Selenghinsk redoubtb showed 
clearly enough that, with great sacrifice of life, such a work can be 
taken for a moment; but of what use that is to be, when it cannot 
even be held for the time necessary to destroy it, it is not easy to 
The words "Colonel Kelley and others" are added in commas in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitüng.—- Ed. 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung further has: "(on Mount Sapun)".— Ed. 

=====第184页=====
154 Frederick Engels 
see. The fact is, that these new Russian works,3  being flanked and 
commanded in the rear by their main line, cannot be taken unless 
the same means are put into operation against them as against the 
main line. Approaches will have to be made up to a convenient 
distance, covered parallels with places d'armes will have to be 
completed, and batteries to engage the Russian main line will have 
to be erected and armed, before an assault of, and lodgment in, 
these outworks can be seriously thought of. The London 
Times, which was foremost in its outcry for the capture of these 
works, has not attempted to specify the new method by which 
this very desirable but very difficult object was to be accomplished 
"within the very few hours" within which it expected, the other 
day, to hear of the feat having been performed. But unfortunate­
ly, hardly had that journal uttered this fond hope, b when a letter 
arrived from its Crimean correspondent stating that the new 
Russian outworks not only appeared quite untakable, but that they 
were evidently the first landmarks only of an intended further 
advance of Russian counter-approaches.c  The rifle-pits in front of 
the Mamelon redoubt d have been connected with each other by a 
regular trench, thus forming a new line of defense. Between the 
Mamelon redoubt and Mount Sapun, or the Selenghinsk redoubt, 
a rather curiously-shaped trench has been dug out, forming three 
sides of a square and enfilading part of the French approaches, by 
which, in part, it is said again to be enfiladed. The situation and 
line of this new work are, however, so incompletely described that 
neither its exact position nor its intended use can be as yet clearly 
made out. e Thus much is certain, that a complete system of 
advanced works is contemplated by the Russians, covering 
Malakoff on both sides and in front, and aiming, perhaps, even at 
an ultimate attempt at a lodgment in the allied trenches, which, if 
obtained, would of course be tantamount to a breaking through of 
the siege lines on that side. If during six months the Allies have 
barely held their ground, and rather strengthened than advanced 
their batteries, the Russians have in one single month advanced 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung further has: "which form an integral part of the 
Russian defences".— Ed. 
b The Times, No. 22028, April 14, 1855.— Ed. 
This refers to a report by W. H. Russell published anonymously in The Times, 
No. 22028 (second edition), April 14, 1855.— Ed. 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung further has: "(called Kamchatka by the Russians)".— Ed. 
This sentence and the end of the preceding one beginning with the words "by 
which, in part" do not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第185页=====
The Siege of Sevastopol 155 
considerably upon them and are still advancing. Surely, if many a 
defense has been quite as glorious as that of Sevastopol, not a 
single siege can be shown in the annals of war, since that of Troy, 
carried on with such a degree of incoherence and stupidity. 
Written about April 15, 1855 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4377, April 30, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1036, May 1, 1855 as a 
leading article; the German version was 
first published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 179, April 18, 1855, marked with the 
sign X Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第186页=====
156 
Frederick Engels 
GERMANY AND PAN-SLAVISM 131 
I 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 185, April 21, 1855] 
We are assured by the best of sources that the present Tsar of 
Russia has sent certain courts a dispatch saying, among other 
things: 
"The moment Austria irrevocably allies itself with the West, or commits any 
openly hostile act against Russia, Alexander II will place himself at the head of the 
Pan-Slav movement and transform his present title, Tsar of all the Russians, into that 
of Tsar of all the Slavs." (?) 
This declaration by Alexander, if authentic, is the first straight 
word since the outbreak of war. It is the first step towards giving 
the war the European character which until now has been lurking 
behind all manner of pretexts and allegations, protocols and 
treaties, sections from Vattel and citations from  Pufendorf. 3 The 
independence, even the existence of Turkey has thereby been 
pushed into the background. The question is no longer who is to 
govern in Constantinople, but who is to rule the whole of Europe. 
The Slav race, long divided by internal disputes, pushed back 
towards the East by the Germans, subjugated, partly, by Germans, 
Turks and Hungarians, quietly reuniting its branches after 1815, 
by the gradual growth of Pan-Slavism, now for the first time 
asserts its unity and thus declares war to the death on the 
Roman-Celtic and German races, which have hitherto dominated 
Europe. Pan-Slavism is not merely a movement for national 
independence, it is a movement that strives to undo what the 
history of a thousand years has created, which cannot attain its 
ends without sweeping Turkey, Hungary and half Germany off 
E. Vattel, Le Droit des gens... and S.  Pufendorf,  De jure naturae et gentium.—Ed. 

=====第187页=====
Germany and Pan-Slavism 157 
the map of Europe, a movement which—should it achieve this 
result—cannot ensure its future existence except by subjugating 
Europe. Pan-Slavism has now developed from a creed into a 
political programme, with 800,000 bayonets at its service. It leaves 
Europe with only one alternative: subjugation by the Slavs, or the 
permanent destruction of the centre of their offensive force— 
Russia. 
The next question we have to answer is: how is Austria affected 
by Pan-Slavism which has been uniformed by Russia? Of the 70 
million Slavs who live east of the Bohemian forest and the 
Carinthian Alps, approximately 15 million are subject to the 
Austrian sceptre, including representatives of almost every variety 
of the Slavonic language. The Bohemian or Czech branch (6 
million) falls entirely under Austrian sovereignty, the Polish is 
represented by about 3 million Galicians; the Russian by 3 million 
Malorussians (Red Russians, Ruthenians)132 in Galicia and North-
East Hungary—the only Russian branch outside the borders of 
the Russian Empire; the South Slav branch by approximately 3 
million Slovenians (Carinthians and Croats)133 and Serbs, including 
scattered Bulgars. The Austrian Slavs thus fall into two categories: 
one part consists of the remnants of nationalities whose own 
history belongs to the past and whose present historical develop­
ment is bound up with that of nations of different race and 
language. To crown their sorry national plight these sad remains 
of former grandeur do not even possess a national organisation 
within Austria, but rather they are divided between different 
provinces. The Slovenians, although scarcely  1,500,000  in number, 
are scattered through the various provinces of Carniola, Carinthia, 
Styria, Croatia and Southwest Hungary. The Bohemians, al­
though the most numerous branch of the Austrian Slavs, are 
partly settled in Bohemia, partly in Moravia and partly (the Slovak 
line) in Northwest Hungary. Therefore these nationalities, though 
living exclusively on Austrian territory, are in no way recognised 
as constituting distinct nations. They are regarded as appendages 
of either the German or the Hungarian nation, and in fact they 
are no more than that. The second group of the Austrian Slavs 
consists of fragments of different tribes which in the course of 
history have been separated from the main body of their nation, 
with their focal points therefore lying outside Austria. Thus the 
Austrian Poles have their natural centre of gravity in Russian 
Poland, the Ruthenians in the other Malorussian provinces united 
with Russia, and the Serbs in Turkish Serbia. It goes without 
saying that these fragments detached from their respective 

=====第188页=====
158 Frederick Engels 
nationalities gravitate towards their natural centres, and this 
tendency becomes more conspicuous as civilisation and hence the 
need for national-historical activity becomes increasingly wide­
spread amongst them. In both cases the Austrian Slavs are merely 
disjecta membra,* striving for re-unification, either amongst them­
selves or with the main body of their particular nationalities. This 
is the reason why Pan-Slavism is not a Russian invention but an 
Austrian one. In order to achieve the restoration of each particular 
Slav nationality the various Slavonic tribes in Austria are beginning 
to work for a link-up of all the Slavonic tribes in Europe. Russia, 
strong in  itself,  Poland, conscious of the indomitable tenacity of its 
national life and furthermore openly hostile to Slavonic Russia— 
clearly neither of these two nations were apt to invent Pan-
Slavism. The Serbs and Bulgars of Turkey, on the other hand, 
were too barbaric to grasp such an idea; the Bulgars quietly 
submitted to the Turks, while the Serbs had enough on their 
hands with the struggle for their own independence. 
II 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 189, April 24, 1855] 
The first form of Pan-Slavism was purely literary. Dobrovsky, a 
Bohemian, the founder of the scientific philology of the Slavonic 
dialects, and Kollâr, a Slovak poet from the Hungarian Car­
pathians, were its inventors. Dobrovsky was motivated by the 
enthusiasm of the scientific discoverer, in Kollâr political ideas 
soon predominated. But Pan-Slavism was still finding its satisfac­
tion in elegies; the splendour of the past, the ignominy, the 
misfortune and the foreign oppression of the present were the 
main themes of its poetry. "Is there then, O God, no man on 
earth who will give the Slavs justice?" The dreams of a Pan-Slav 
empire, dictating laws to Europe, were as yet hardly even alluded 
to. But the period of lamenting soon passed, and with it the call 
for mere "justice for the Slavs". Historical research, embracing the 
political, literary and linguistic development of the Slav race, made 
huge progress in Austria. Safafik, Kopitar and Miklosich as 
linguists, Palacky as an historian placed themselves at the head, 
followed by a swarm of others with less scientific talent, or none 
whatsoever, such as Hanka, Gaj, etc. The glorious epochs of 
Bohemian and Serbian history were depicted in glowing colours, 
Separated members. Paraphrase of Horace's expression, disjecti membra 
poetae—"the limbs of the dismembered poet" (Satirae, liber I, IV, 62).— Ed. 

=====第189页=====
Germany and Pan-Slavism 159 
in contrast to the downtrodden and broken-spirited present of 
these nationalities; and just as politics and theology were subjected 
to criticism under the cloak of "philosophy" in the rest of 
Germany, so in Austria, before the very eyes of Metternich, 
philology was employed by the Pan-Slavists to preach the doctrine 
of Slav unity and to create a political party whose unmistakable 
goal was to transform the conditions of all the nationalities in 
Austria and to turn it into a great Slavonic empire. 
The linguistic confusion prevailing east of Bohemia and 
Carinthia to the Black Sea is truly astonishing. The process of 
de-nationalisation among the Slavs bordering on Germany, the 
slow but continuous advance of the Germans, the invasion of the 
Hungarians, which separated the North and South Slavs with a 
compact mass of 7 million people of Finnish race, the interposition 
of Turks, Tartars and Wallachians in the midst of the Slavonic 
tribes,  have produced a linguistic Babel. The language varies from 
village to village, almost from farm to farm. Bohemia itself counts 
among its 5 million inhabitants 2 million Germans alongside 3 
million Slavs, and is furthermore surrounded on three sides by 
Germans. This is also the case with the Austrian Slavonic tribes. 
The restitution of all originally Slavonic territory to the Slavs, the 
transformation of Austria except for the Tyrol and Lombardy into 
a Slavonic empire, which was the goal of the Pan-Slavists, 
amounted to declaring the historical development of the last 
thousand years null and void, cutting off a third of Germany and 
all Hungary and turning Vienna and Budapest into Slav cities—a 
procedure with which the Germans and Hungarians in possession 
of these districts could hardly be expected to sympathise. In 
addition, the differences between the Slavonic dialects are so great 
that with few exceptions they are mutually incomprehensible. This 
was amusingly demonstrated at the Slav Congress at Prague in 
1848, 134 where after various fruitless attempts to find a language 
intelligible to all the delegates, they finally had to speak the tongue 
most hated by them all—German. 
So we see that Austrian Pan-Slavism lacked the most vital 
elements of success: mass and unity. Mass, because the Pan-Slavist 
party, limited to a section of the educated classes, exerted no 
influence on the people and therefore did not have the power to 
offer resistance simultaneously to the Austrian government and to 
the German and Hungarian nationalities which it was challenging. 
Unity, because its principle of unity was purely an ideal which 
collapsed on its first attempt at realisation on account of the fact 
of linguistic diversity. As long as Pan-Slavism remained a purely 

=====第190页=====
160 Frederick Engels 
Austrian movement it constituted no great danger, but the 
centre of mass and unity which it needed was very soon found 
for it. 
The national movement of the Turkish Serbs at the beginning 
of the centuryI35 soon drew the attention of the Russian 
government to the fact that in Turkey some 7 million Slavs were 
living whose language resembled Russian more than any other 
Slavonic dialect, whose religion and holy language—Old or 
Church Slavonic—was completely identical to that of the Russians. 
It was among these Serbs and Bulgars that Russia first began a 
Pan-Slavist agitation, helped by its position as head and protector 
of the Greek Church. When the Pan-Slavist movement had gained 
some ground in Austria, Russia soon extended the ramifications 
of its agencies into the area of its ally. Where it encountered Ro­
man Catholic Slavs, the religious aspect of the issue was dropped and 
Russia simply depicted as the centre of gravity of the Slav race, as 
the kernel around which the regenerated Slavonic tribes were to 
crystallise, as the strong and united people, destined to make a 
reality of the great Slavonic empire from the Elbe to China, from 
the Adriatic Sea to the Arctic Ocean. Here, then, they had found 
the unity and mass that had been lacking! Pan-Slavism immediate­
ly fell into the trap. It thus pronounced its own sentence. In order 
to re-assert imaginary nationalities the Pan-Slavists declared their 
readiness to sacrifice 800 years of actual participation in civilisation 
to Russian-Mongolian barbarism. Was not this the natural result of 
a movement that began with a determined reaction against the 
course of European civilisation and sought to turn back world 
history? 
Metternich, in the best years of his power, recognised the 
danger and saw through the Russian intrigues. He suppressed the 
movement with all the means at his disposal. All his means, 
however, could be summarised in one word: repression. The only 
appropriate means, free development of the German and Hun­
garian spirit, more than sufficient to scare off the Slavonic spectre, 
had no place in the system of his petty politics. Consequently, after 
Metternich's fall in 1848, the Slav movement broke out stronger 
than ever and embracing wider strata of the population than ever 
before. But at this point its thoroughly reactionary character 
straightway emerged into the open. While the German and 
Hungarian movements in Austria were decidedly progressive, it 
was the Slavs who saved the old system from destruction, and 
enabled Radetzky to march on the Mincio and Windischgrätz to 
conquer Vienna. In order to complete the dependence of Aus-

=====第191页=====
Germany and Pan-Slavism 161 
tria on the Slav race, the great Slav reserve, the Russian Army, 
had to descend on Hungary in 1849 and there dictate peace 
to her. 
But if the adhesion of the Pan-Slav movement to Russia was its 
self-condemnation, Austria likewise acknowledged its lack of 
viability by accepting, indeed by asking for this Slav aid against the 
only three nations among its possessions which have and 
demonstrate historical vitality: Germans, Italians and Hungarians. 
After 1848 this debt to Pan-Slavism constantly weighed on Aus­
tria, and her awareness of it was the mainspring of Austrian 
policies. 
The first thing Austria did was to act against the Slavs on its 
own ground, and that was only possible with a policy that was at 
least partly progressive. The privileges of all the provinces were 
abolished, a centralised administration supplanted a federal one; 
and instead of the different nationalities an artificial one, the 
Austrian, was to be the only one recognised. Although these 
innovations were partly aimed at the German, Italian and 
Hungarian elements too, their greatest weight fell on the less 
compact Slavonic tribes, giving the German element a position of 
considerable ascendancy. If the dependence on the Slavs inside 
Austria had thus been eliminated, there remained the depen­
dence on Russia, and the necessity of breaking this direct and 
humiliating dependence, at least temporarily and to some extent. 
This was the real reason for Austria's anti-Russian policy in the 
Eastern question, a policy which although vacillating was at least 
publicly proclaimed. On the other hand Pan-Slavism has not 
disappeared; it is deeply offended, resentful, silent and, since the 
Hungarian intervention, regards the Tsar of Russia as its 
predestined Messiah. It is not our purpose here to inquire 
whether Austria—should Russia emerge openly as the head of 
Pan-Slavism—can reply with concessions to Hungary and Poland, 
without jeopardising its existence. This much is certain: it is no 
longer Russia alone, it is the Pan-Slavist conspiracy that threatens 
to found its empire on the ruins of Europe. The union of all 
Slavs,  because of the undeniable strength which it possesses and 
may yet acquire, will soon force the side confronting it to appear 
in an entirely new form. In this context we have not spoken of the 
Poles — most of whom are to their credit definitely hostile to 
Pan-Slavism — nor of the allegedly democratic and socialist form of 
Pan-Slavism, which ultimately differs from the common, honest 
Russian Pan-Slavism solely in its phraseology and its hypocrisy. 
Neither have we discussed the German speculation, which from 
7—3754 

=====第192页=====
162 Frederick Engels 
lofty ignorance has sunk to being an organ of Russian conspiracy.3 
We shall deal in detail with these and other questions relating to 
Pan-Slavism later. 
Written about April 17, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
Nos.  185 and 189, April 21 and 24, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign x 
An allusion to Bruno Bauer, who propounded Pan-Slavist ideas in his 
pamphlets Russland und das Germanenthum (1853), Deutschland und das Russenthum 
(1854),  Die jetzige Stellung Russlands (1854), Russland und England (1854) and 
others.— Ed. 

=====第193页=====
163 
Frederick Engels 
THE EUROPEAN STRUGGLE 1 
The all-absorbing facts in the news brought by the Atlantic, are 
the breaking off of the Vienna Conferences,137 and the partial if 
not total separation of Austria from the Allies. For both of these 
events we were not unprepared. The rejection by Russia of any 
plan of settlement which should not substantially admit all she 
claimed before the war, was, in the present state of that war, a 
matter of course. The return of Austria to her old expectant, 
wavery policy was also the result of certain circumstances of great 
importance, which we proceed to explain. 
The French Government discovered some time since, and the 
fact could not be denied by the British Cabinet, that Lord John 
Russell had committed a great blunder at Vienna3 in allowing 
those of the points before the Conference in which Austria was 
directly interested to be first disposed of. These points were the 
freedom of the Danube and the question of the Principalities. 
From this moment Austria appeared satisfied. Expecting, as she 
does,  to share sooner or later in the partition of Turkey — Servia, 
Bosnia, and Albania are provinces which she cannot allow to fall 
into any other hands than her own. It is her interest to keep the 
question respecting the Christians in Turkey an open one. And as 
she can never expect to cope with Russia's naval power in the 
Black Sea, she has but little interest in humiliating her in that 
quarter. From this point of view, then, Austria has every reason to 
be satisfied with what she has obtained, and to turn the weight of 
her seemingly impartial arbitration against England and France. 
But this diplomatic success has very little to do with her present 
a On Russell's role at the Conference of Vienna see this volume, pp. 141-45.— Ed. 

=====第194页=====
164 Frederick Engels 
wavering. The cause of this is of a far more overpowering nature. 
Some six months ago we alluded to the private and confidential 
dispatch by which Nicholas informed both Austria and Prussia, 
that in case they allied themselves with the West against him he 
would reply to such a treaty of alliance by a proclamation of 
Hungarian independence and Polish restoration.3 At that time, 
and whenever we have considered the chances of a war in Poland 
and Volhynia, we have always taken into consideration the great 
military advantage which such a proclamation might give to 
Russia, if put forth after the conquest of Galicia and from the 
hights of the Carpathians, with Hungary open to her victorious 
armies. On that account, especially, we have always pointed out 
the fact that Austria could not undertake a war against Russia 
unless she was in a state at once to take the offensive and to parry, 
by successful battles and an advance upon Russia, the effects of 
such a proclamation.b So long, therefore, as the Austrian army 
in Galicia and the Principalities was strong enough to march 
upon Warsaw or Kiev there was little immediate danger from such 
a step. 
This dispatch of Nicholas has, however, as we now learn, lately 
been followed up by another from his successor, which contains 
quite different and far more serious menaces. The moment 
Austria shall irrevocably ally herself to the West, it says, or commit 
any overt act of hostility against Russia, Alexander II will place 
himself at the head of the Panslavist movement, and change his title of 
Emperor of all the Russians into that of Emperor of all the 
Slavonians. 
At last! Let Alexander take such a step, and the struggle 
concerning the Christians in Turkey, the independence of the 
Porte, Sevastopol, the Principalities, and other such local trifles, 
may now be considered at an end. This declaration of Alexander's 
is the first plain-spoken word since the war began; it is the first 
step toward placing the war upon the continental theater, and 
giving it, frankly and openly, that European character which has 
hitherto been lurking behind all sorts of pretexts and pretenses, 
protocols and treaties, Vattel phrases and Pufendorf quotations.0 
Turkey—her independence and existence—is thrown into the 
back-ground. Who is to rule in Constantinople? would then no 
The reference is presumably to the article "Progress of the War" by Marx 
and Engels (see present edition, Vol. 13, pp. 546-52).— Ed. 
See this volume, pp. 37-39.— Ed. 
E. Vattel, Le Droit des gens... and S.  Pufendorf,  De jure naturae et gentium.— 
Ed. 

=====第195页=====
The European Struggle 165 
longer be the question—but who is to command all Europe? The 
Slavonic race, long divided by internal contests; repelled toward 
the East by Germans; subjugated, in part, by Turks, Germans, 
Hungarians; quickly reuniting its branches, after 1815, by the 
gradual rise of Panslavism, would then for the first time assert its 
unity, and, in doing so, declare war to the knife against the 
Romano-Celtic and Germanic races which have hitherto ruled the 
Continent. Panslavism is not a movement which merely strives 
after national independence; it is a movement which, thus acting 
upon Europe, would tend to undo what a thousand years of 
history have created; which could Hot realize itself without 
sweeping from the map Hungary, Turkey and a large part of 
Germany. Moreover, it must subjugate Europe in order to secure 
the stability of these results, if they are ever obtained. Panslavism 
is now, from a creed, turned into a political programme, or rather 
a vast political menace, with 800,000 bayonets to support it. 
Nor are these 800,000 soldiers all the forces it could command. 
A word from the Russian Emperor at the head of an army, 
marching upon the Carpathians, and nine or ten millions of 
Slavonians in Austria would be agitated as in 1848; a victory over 
the Austrians, and they would be in full insurrection; while 
Hungary and Italy would be hardly less plowed by revolutionary 
agitation. Here is a danger which might well make Francis Joseph 
pause; for unless he could at once defeat the great Slavonian army 
on his frontiers and carry the war into the enemy's country, he 
might as well give up the contest before entering the lists. 
Written about April 17, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4382, May 5, 1855, reprinted 
in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 
1038,  May 8, 1855 and in the New-York 
Weekly Tribune, No. 713, May 12, 1855 as a 
leading article 

=====第196页=====
166 
Karl Marx 
ON THE HISTORY OF POLITICAL AGITATION 
London, May 7. In times of major political agitation in England 
the City of London has never been able to put itself in the 
vanguard. Up to now the fact that it joined a campaign merely 
indicated that the purpose of the agitation had been achieved and 
become a fait accompli. So it was with the Reform Movement, in 
which Birmingham took the initiative. So it was with the Anti-Corn 
Law Movement, which was led from Manchester. The Bank 
Restriction Act of 1797 138  was an exception. The meetings of the 
bankers and merchants of the City of London made it easier for 
Pitt at that time to prohibit the Bank of England from continuing 
cash-payments—after the directors of the Bank had informed him 
a few weeks earlier that the Bank was tottering on the brink of 
bankruptcy and could only be saved by a coup d'état, by a fixed rate 
of exchange for bank-notes. Circumstances at the time required 
just as much resignation on the part of the Bank of England to 
letting itself be prohibited from making cash-payments, as on the 
part of the city merchants, whose credit stood or fell with the 
Bank, to supporting Pitt's prohibition and recommending it to the 
country man.* The salvation of the Bank of England was the 
* It is incredible that even in the most recent histories of political economy the 
conduct of the City at that time is cited as evidence of English patriotism. It is even 
more incredible that in his work on Russia (3rd vol., 1852) Herr von Haxthausen is 
gullible enough to maintain that by suspending the cash-payments of the Bank, Pitt 
was preventing the money from going abroad. What may a man who is so 
credulous have swallowed in Russia? And what indeed are we to think of the Berlin 
criticism who believe implicitly in Herr von Haxthausen, and by way of proof 
plagiarize him? 
A. Haxthausen, Studien über die innern Zustände, das Volksleben und  insbesondere 
die ländlichen Einrichtungen Russlands, Dritter Theil. — Ed. 

=====第197页=====
On the History of Political Agitation 167 
salvation of the City. Hence their "patriotic" meetings and their 
"agitational" initiative. The initiative taken by the City at present 
with the meetings held last Saturday3 in the London Tavern and 
the Guildhall, and the founding of an "Association for Administra­
tive Reform",™9 has the merit of novelty, the merit, rare in 
England, of having no precedent. Moreover, there was no eating 
or drinking at these meetings, which is also a new feature in the 
annals of the City, whose "turtle-soup patriotism" has been 
immortalised by Cobbett. Finally another novelty was the fact that 
the meetings of the City merchants in the London Tavern and the 
Guildhall were held in business hours, in broad daylight. The 
current stagnation in business may have something to do with this 
phenomenon, as indeed it may altogether form a leaven in the 
fermentation of the City mind, and a considerable leaven too. For 
all that, the importance of this City movement cannot be denied, 
however hard the West End may try to laugh it off. The bourgeois 
reform papers—The Daily News, The Morning Advertiser, and The 
Morning Chronicle (the last having belonged to this category for 
some time now) — seek to demonstrate to their adversaries the 
"great future" of the City Association. They overlook the more 
obvious aspects. They have failed to realise that very vital, very 
decisive points have already been decided by the mere fact of 
these meetings: 1. The breach between the ruling class outside 
Parliament and the governing class within it; 2. a dislocation of 
those elements of the bourgeoisie that have hitherto set the tone in 
politics; 3. the disenchantment with Palmerston. 
As we know, Layard has announced that he intends to table his 
reform proposals in the House of Commons tonight. As we know, 
about a week ago he was shouted down, hissed and booed in the 
House of Commons. The princes of the English merchant world 
in the City replied at their meetings with frantic cheers for 
Layard. He was the hero of the day at the London Tavern and the 
Guildhall. The cheers of the City are a provocative retort to the 
groansb of the Commons. If the House of Commons proves tonight 
to have been intimidated, its authority is lost, it abdicates. If it 
repeats its groans, the cheers of its opponents will resound all the 
more loudly. And from the tale of the Abderiten0 we know to what 
happenings the rivalry between cheers and groans may lead.140 The 
City meetings were a blatant challenge to the House of Commons, 
a May 5, 1855.— Ed. 
b Here and below Marx uses the English words "cheers" and "groans".— Ed. 
c Ch. M. Wieland, Die Abderiten, eine sehr wahrscheinliche Geschichte. —Ed. 

=====第198页=====
168 Karl Marx 
similar to Westminster's election of Sir Francis Burdett in the first 
decade of this century.141 
Until now, of course, the Manchester School with its Brights and 
Cobdens has stood at the head of the movement of the English 
bourgeoisie. The manufacturers of Manchester have now been 
ousted by the merchants of the City. Their orthodox opposition to 
the war convinced the bourgeoisie, which in England can never 
remain static for a moment, that they have at least temporarily lost 
their vocation to lead it. At present the Manchester gentry can 
only maintain their "hegemony" by outbidding the City gentle­
men. This rivalry between the two most important factions of the 
bourgeoisie actually demonstrated by the City meetings, from 
which the Brights and Cobdens were excluded and from which 
they excluded themselves, augurs well for the popular movement. 
In evidence of this we can already cite the fact that the secretary 
of the City committee3 has addressed a letter to the Chartists in 
London requesting them to appoint a member to its standing 
committee. Ernest Jones has been delegated by the Chartists to 
this committee. The merchants do not, of course, stand in such 
direct opposition to the workers as do the manufacturers, the 
millocracy,b and thus they are able, at least initially, to take joint 
action, which the Chartists and the Manchester men could not do. 
Palmerston—this is the last major fact emerging from the City 
meetings—has, for the first time, been booed and hissed by the 
most important constituency in the country. The magic of his 
name has been dispelled forever. What brought him into discredit 
in the City was not his Russian policy, which is older than the 
Thirty Years' War.142 It was the careless disdain, the pretentious 
cynicism, and above all the "bad jokes" with which he affected to 
cure the most terrible crisis England has ever known. This 
outraged the bourgeois conscience, however well it may go down 
in the corrupt House of "Commons".0 
Administrative reform with a Parliament such as now constitut­
ed: everyone recognises the illogical nature of these pious wishes 
at first glance. But our century has seen reforming popes.143 We 
have seen reform banquets headed by Odilon Barrot.14 No wonder, 
J. Acland. His letter to the Chartists mentioned below and their reply to it are 
quoted in the article "London Organisation Committee" published in The People's 
Paper, No. 157, May 5, 1855.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English term. For its meaning see Note  55.—  Ed. 
A pun in the original: Haus der Gemeinen can mean both "House of Commons" 
and "House of base, or vulgar fellows".— Ed. 

=====第199页=====
On the History of Political Agitation 169 
then, that the avalanche that will sweep away Olde England 
appears at the outset as a snowball in the hand of the reforming 
City merchants. 
Written on May 7, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 215, May 10, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign x 

=====第200页=====
170 
Frederick Engels 
FROM SEVASTOPOL 
The mails of the America, received here on Saturday evening, 
once more enable us to lay before our readers some clear account 
of the state of the war in the Crimea, though still the contradictory 
and indefinite nature of the official reports as well as of the 
newspaper letters renders our task no easy one. It is manifest that 
the failure of Vienna was attended by greater alertness and activity 
in the allied camp at Sevastopol, and that though the bombard­
ment may be said to have been given up on April 24, yet the 
fortnight succeeding was not wholly unimproved. Still it is very 
difficult to say what advantages have been gained; indeed one 
writer pretends that the Russian advanced works, Selenghinsk, 
Volhynsk and Kamtchatka, as well as the rifle trenches in front of 
the whole line, have been abandoned by the defense. 146 As this is 
certainly the very utmost advantage obtained by the Allies we will 
for the present assume it to be true. Some correspondents report 
that the Flagstaff bastion itself had been stormed by the French 
and a lodgment effected therein,3 but this deserves no credit. It is 
a mere ignorant exaggeration of the affair of April 21, when the 
French, by blowing up mines, formed an advanced trench in front 
of that bastion.b 
Reports on the bombardment of the Flagstaff bastion by the Allies appeared 
in The Times, Nos. 22043-22045, May 2-4, 1855.— Ed 
Instead of this opening paragraph the version published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung has: "As far as the public is concerned, the opening of telegraphic 
communication from Balaklava to London and Paris has so far only served to make 
the information offered to it more confused. 
"The British Government publishes nothing at all or at most vague assurances 
about successes achieved; the French Government publishes dispatches under the 

=====第201页=====
From Sevastopol 171 
We will then assume it to be correct that the Russians are 
thrown back upon their original line of defense, although it is very 
remarkable that no reports of the occupation of Mount Sapun and 
the Mamelon by the Allies have yet been received. But even if the 
redoubts on these hills are no longer in the hands of the Russians, 
nobody can dispute the great advantages they have drawn from 
them. They have held Sapun from Feb. 23, and the Mamelon 
Kamtschatka redoubt from March 12 to the end of April, during 
which time the allied trenches were either enfiladed or taken 
under close front fire by them, while the key of the whole 
position — Malakoff—was completely sheltered by them during the 
fifteen days' cannonade. After having turned them to such good 
use, the Russians could afford to lose them. 
The various night attacks by which the Allies made themselves 
masters of the Russian rifle-trenches and counter-approaches, 
need not be described here, no more than the sally undertaken by 
the Russians to recover them. Such operations possess no tactical 
interest except for such as know the ground from personal 
inspection, being mainly decided by the intelligence, the dash and 
tenacity of the subaltern officers and soldiers. In these qualities 
the Anglo-French are superior to the Russians, and consequently 
they have made good their footing in some places close to the 
Russian works.a The distance between the combatants has been 
reduced, here and there, to the range of hand-grenades, that is to 
some twenty or thirty yards from the Russian covered way, or 
from forty to sixty yards from the main rampart. The Russians say 
name of Canrobert, but cut and distorted to such an extent that it is almost 
impossible to glean anything from them. For example, the bastion against which 
the main French attack is directed was hitherto invariably called the Flagstaff 
Bastion or Bastion du Mât. Now we learn that great advantages have been gained in 
action against the Central Bastion, and then against Bastion No. 4. A careful 
collation of these dispatches with earlier reports, particularly Russian ones, has 
shown that what is meant is still our old acquaintance, the Bastion du Mât, but it is 
given different names and appellations. This kind of mystification is thoroughly 
tendentious and therefore, to a certain extent, also 'providential'. 
"But if the telegraph holds no benefits for the public, it has indisputably 
brought some life to the allied camp. Beyond doubt the first dispatches received by 
Canrobert contained strict orders to act more resolutely and achieve some sort of 
success at any cost. An unofficial report asserts that the Russians have evacuated all 
advanced works, Selenghinsk, Volhynsk and Kamchatka, as well as the rifle trenches 
in front of their whole  line."  — Ed. 
In the Neue Oder-Zeitung the passage beginning with the words "After having 
turned them to such good use" and ending with the words "close to the Russian 
works" does not occur. The next sentence begins: "Through the Allies' latest successes 
the distance between the combatants...'." — Ed. 

=====第202页=====
172 Frederick Engels 
the besiegers are at thirty sagenes3 or sixty yards from it.b This is 
the case especially in front of the Flagstaff bastion, the Middle 
bastion and the Redan, where the ground forms dead angles, with 
hollows so situated that the Russian guns cannot be sufficiently 
depressed to plunge their shot into them. As the Russian artillery 
is anything but silenced, the communications with these hollows 
and the turning them into a complete system of trenches is a 
matter of great difficulty, and the flanking fire of the Russians will 
be very sorely felt by the Allies.c Indeed, so long as the allied 
batteries are about four or five hundred yards to the rear of the 
advanced trenches, it is not to be explained how they expect to 
hold such exposed positions against sallies undertaken on a 
sudden and with a sufficient force; and after the acknowledged 
failure of the bombardment it will be some time before new and 
more advanced batteries can be brought into play. 
This sudden advance of the Allies to the very foot of the 
Russian ramparts, different as it looks from their previous sloth 
and indecision, is yet quite of a piece with it. There never was 
either system or steady consistency in the conduct of this siege; 
and as a siege is essentially a systematic operation in which every 
step gained must be at once turned to some fresh advantage, 
under penalty of proving fruitless, it is plain that the Allies have 
conducted this upon the worst possible plan. Notwithstanding the 
disappointment in the minds of the allied generals when they first 
beheld the place, notwithstanding the errors committed last 
Autumn, during what we may call the first siege, they might yet 
have made greater progress. We leave the north side of the town 
entirely out of the question, as the allied generals did so 
themselves. They had once for all made up their minds to attack 
the south side separately and to run the risk of getting into a place 
commanded by a fortress to them inaccessible. But here an 
alternative arises: either the allied generals felt themselves strong 
enough to take the south side, and then they must now admit that 
they were unpardonably mistaken; or they felt themselves too 
weak, and then why did they not procure reenforcements? The 
fact is now beyond denial that blunder has succeeded blunder in 
this "memorable and unparalleled" siege. The hardships of the 
Winter-quarters appear to have imparted a spirit of unconquera-
3 An old Russian unit of length equal to 2.1336 metres.— Ed. 
This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 
This sentence and the end of the preceding one beginning with the words 
"where the ground forms dead angles" do noL occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung.— 
Ed. 

=====第203页=====
From Sevastopol 173 
ble drowsiness, apathy and languor to both army and generals. 
When the Russians, in February, boldly came out of their lines 
and formed fresh ones in advance, it should have been a sufficient 
incentive to them to muster up their energies; yet Canrobert could 
use this very serious admonition to no other purpose than to cool 
the zeal of the Zouaves by an attack which he knew beforehand 
could lead to no good. The work in the trenches was resumed, but 
more in order to form covered roads for storming columns than 
to push the batteries nearer to the enemy. Even after six months 
spent before the place, every act shows that no definite plan had 
been settled, no point of chief attack singled out, nay, that the old 
fixed idea of taking Sevastopol by a coup de main 3 still reigned 
supreme in the heads of the Allies, crossing every sensible 
proposal, frustrating every attempt at systematic progress. And 
what little was done was executed with three times the slowness of 
regular siege operations, while the inconsistency and want of plan 
characterizing the whole, did not even impart to it the certainty of 
success inherent in such regular operations.b 
But everything was expected from the late opening of the fire. 
That was the great excuse for all delays and do-nothingisms. 
Though it is difficult to say what was expected from this grand 
event—from batteries at from 600 to 1,000 yards from their 
object, at last the fire did open. About 150 rounds per gun the 
first two or three days, then 120 rounds, then 80, then 50, finally 
30 were fired; after which the cannonade was suspended. The 
effect was hardly visible, except in the used-up guns and emptied 
magazines of the Allies. Five days cannonading with full force 
would have done more harm to the Russians and opened more 
chances of advantage to the Allies than fifteen days of a fire 
beginning with great fury and slackening down as fast as it was 
Sudden attack.— Ed. 
Instead of this paragraph the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "Even this sudden 
advance of the Allies is only another in the series of desultory moves characteristic 
of this siege, in which systematic blockade, assault in force and wishful coups de 
main go together in utter confusion. The very first bombardment of October 17 to 
November 5 was preceded by the Allies' decision to leave the north side of the 
town entirely out of account and attack the south side separately, thus running the 
risk of getting into a position commanded by a fortress impregnable to them. 
Moreover, in that first bombardment the fire, instead of being concentrated upon one 
or two points, was dispersed over an enormous front. The five months between the 
first and the second bombardment were not used to single out main points of attack, 
but merely to work out in detail, and with maximum sluggishness, the plan for a 
simultaneous attack on all points of a huge semicircle, which meant a repetition of the 
original error."—Ed. 

=====第204页=====
174 Frederick Engels 
begun. But with their ammunition spent and their guns rendered 
unserviceable, would the Allies have been in a position to seize 
these favorable chances? Quite as much as now, while the 
Russians, from witnessing the slackening of the fire and from 
being spared the infliction of a hail of 50,000 projectiles per day 
during five successive days, are in a far better position than they 
would have been.3 This prolongation of the cannonade, by 
reducing its intensity is so great and unaccountable a deviation 
from all military rules, that political reasons must be at the bottom 
of it. When the first and second days' fire had disappointed the 
expectations of the Allies, the necessity of keeping up a semblance 
of a cannonade during the Vienna Conferences must have led to 
this useless waste of ammunition. 
The cannonade ends, the Vienna Conferences are suspended, 
the telegraph is completed. At once the scene changes. Orders 
arrive from Paris to act promptly and decisively. The old system of 
attack is given up; partial assaults, lodgments by mining explo­
sions,  a struggle of rifles and bayonets, succeed the resultless roar 
of artillery. Advanced points are gained and even maintained 
against a first sally of the besieged. But unless it is found 
practicable to construct batteries within short distances from the 
Russian lines, and to make these lines too hot for the besieged, 
nothing is gained. The advanced points cannot be held without 
great and daily repeated losses, and without regularly recurring 
combats of doubtful and wavering issue. And supposing even that 
these batteries of the second and third parallel are to be 
constructed, and that it was necessary for their opening first to 
dislodge the Russians from their rifle-trenches—how long will it 
be before these fresh batteries will have guns enough to reply 
successfully to that Russian fire which in two cannonades has 
proved equal to that of the Allies? The nearer the batteries are 
placed to the enemy's works, the more destructive a crossfire can 
be concentrated upon them, and the more confined becomes the 
space for placing guns; in other words, the more equal becomes 
the fire of the attack to that of the defense, unless the latter has 
been previously subdued by the more distant batteries, which here 
is not the case.b 
How, then, has it been possible for the Russians so successfully 
to withstand the attacks of the Allies? First, by the mistakes and 
vacillations of the Allies themselves; secondly, by the bravery of 
The last two sentences do not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 
The German version of this article, published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, ends 
here.—  Ed. 

=====第205页=====
From Sevastopol 175 
the garrison and the skill of the directing engineer, Col. 
Todtleben; thirdly, by the natural strength of the position. For it 
must be admitted that the position is a strong one. The bad maps 
which up to a very recent period have alone been accessible 
represented Sevastopol as situated at the lower end of a slope and 
commanded by the hights in the rear; but the latest and best maps 
prove that the town stands on several rounded, isolated hills, 
separated by ravines from the slope of the plateau, and actually 
commanding quite as much of it as has any command over the 
town. This disposition of the ground seems fully to justify the 
hesitation to assault the place in September last; though it has 
appeared much too imposing to the allied generals, who did not 
even attempt to make the enemy show what strength he could 
muster for the defense. The Russian engineer has turned these 
natural advantages to the greatest possible use. Wherever Sevas­
topol presents a slope toward the plateau, two and even three rows 
of batteries have been constructed on its sides, one above the 
other, doubling and trebling the strength of the defense. Such 
batteries have been constructed in other fortifications (for instance 
on the slope of Mont Valerien at Paris), but they are not generally 
approved of by engineers, who call them shell-traps. It is true that 
they offer a larger object of aim to the besieger, whose shot may 
hit the battery above or below, if they miss the one they are fired 
at, and they will always cause greater losses to the defense on this 
account; but where a fortress is not even invested, like Sevastopol, 
such a drawback counts for nothing against the enormous strength 
they impart to the defending fire. After this siege of Sevastopol, 
we fancy we shall have very few complaints about these shell-traps. 
For fortresses of the first order, containing plenty of material and 
difficult to invest, they can be most advantageously used where the 
ground favors them. Beside these shell-traps, the Russians have 
deviated in another point from the usual engineering routine. 
According to the old-fashioned systems of bastioned fortifications, 
fifteen or seventeen bastions would have been insufficient to 
encircle the place and would have defended it very badly. Instead 
of this, there are only six bastions on projecting hights, while the 
curtains connecting them are broken in such angular lines as to 
give a flanking fire independent of that of the bastions, and heavy 
guns from these salient points sweep the ground in front. These 
curtains are armed with guns for nearly their whole extent, which 
again is an innovation, as the curtains in regular bastioned 
fortresses are generally armed with one or two guns only for 
special purposes, and the whole of the defense by fire is intrusted 

=====第206页=====
176 Frederick Engels 
to the bastions and demi-lunes. Without entering into further 
technical details, it will be seen from the above that the Russians 
have made the most of their means, and that if ever the Allies 
should come into possession of the Flagstaff or Malakoff bastions, 
they may be sure to find a second and a third line of defense 
before them which they will have to put all their wits together to 
reduce. 
Written about May 8, 1855 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4401, May 28, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1045, June 1, 1855 and the 
New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 716, June 2, 
1855 as a leading article; an abridged 
German version was published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, No. 217, May 11, 1855, 
marked with the sign x Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第207页=====
177 
Karl Marx 
PIANORI.— DISSATISFACTION WITH AUSTRIA 
London, May 9. The Morning Chronicle, Advertiser, The Daily 
News, etc., all end their philippics against the assassin Pianori 147 
with more or less timid criticisms of the issue of the Moniteur* 
which published the indictment of Pianori at the same time as the 
decree ordering to pay the Napoleonic legacy of 10,000 francs 
to the former French N.C.O. Cantillon, now on the shelf in 
Brussels, as the reward for his attempted assassination of 
Wellington. Especially amusing are the twists and turns of the 
Chronicle, a paper that is serious by profession. Napoleon III, it 
says,  must be ignorant of this strange, and at the present moment 
so tactless tribute to Napoleon I. The name "Cantillon" must have 
strayed into the morally spotless columns of the Moniteur by a 
lapsus  f>ennae. h Or some officious junior civil servant must have 
endowed Cantillon with the 10,000 francs off his own bat, etc.c 
The worthy Chronicle seems to imagine that the French bureaucra­
cy is formed on the English pattern,where it is indeed possible, as 
we have seen from the last hearing of the parliamentary Committee 
of Inquiry, for a junior civil servant of the Board of Ordnanced to 
place an order for a certain type of rocket, involving thousands of 
pounds, of his own accord and without informing his superiors or, 
as Palmerston has told the House of Commons, for diplomatic 
documents to be withheld from Parliament for weeks because the 
"person" in the Foreign Office entrusted with the translation of 
Le Moniteur universel, No. 126, May 6, 1855.— Ed. 
Slip of the pen.— Ed. 
c "The trial of the assassin...", The Morning Chronicle, No.  27571,  May 9, 
1855.—  Ed. 
Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 

=====第208页=====
178 Karl Marx 
the said documents happens to be suffering from a cold or from 
rheumatism. 
For the last few days the London press has been trying to edge 
away from its admiration for Austria and prepare its readership 
for an abrupt transition into an opposite key. As usual it is left to 
"our own correspondents"3 to break the ice. Thus The Morning 
Chronicle carries the following report from Berlin: 
"No positive act of deception or formal breach of promise can be laid to the 
charge of the Prussian Cabinet [...]. 
"If Western Cabinets have been deceived, it has been their own fault, or those 
whose business it is to open their eyes. But can the same be said of Austria? Has 
her conduct been as undisguised [...] as that of Prussia? The latter has done all 
the mischief in her power to the West openly and undisguisedly. She defies and laughs 
at us without mask or restraint. The former has dallied with England and France 
during twenty months; laughed at us [...] in her sleeve; held out hopes officially as well 
as privately; lured us on from concession to concession ; given assurances of the most 
formal character; and, as long since predicted by those who were not blinded by 
overweening confidence, is now on the eve, it appears, of leaving us in the lurch if we 
do not assent to conditions of peace, [...] upon terms the most advantageous to Russia, 
and utterly [...] detrimental to France and England [...]. So, in fact, Austria after 
having served as a shield to Russia on the Pruth, and enabled Gorchakoff to detach 
nearly the whole of his force from Bessarabia to the Crimea, is to step forward and 
insist on a peace, which shall 'leave things as they are' [...]. If this be all we have to 
expect from Austrian friendship, then the sooner the mask is thrown aside the 
better."0 
On the other hand, The Times carries this report from Viennad: 
"...Baron Hess, the Commander-in-Chief of the 3rd and 4th armies, has recently 
drawn up and presented to his Imperial master6 a memorial, in which it is 
demonstrated that it would not, under present circumstances, be advisable for Austria 
to declare war against Russia. A cry will probably be raised against me for thus publicly 
touching on such a delicate matter, but in my opinion it is a service rendered to the 
British and French nations to tell them that they must depend on their own resources, 
and that Austria is not likely to come to their assistance. If she could have persuaded 
Prussia and the Bund to cover her left flank with an army of 100,000 men, she would 
probably, in spite of numerous impediments [...] long since have pledged herself to 
assume the offensive against Russia. It is not positively known what arguments Baron 
Hess employed in his memorial, but the Austro-Russians, who [...] are always best 
informed on such matters, say that it contained matter something like the following: 
The Western Powers, having proved to demonstration that they require all their own 
resources and those of Turkey in order to make head against the Russians in 
Marx uses the English words "our own correspondents".— Ed. 
b The Neue Oder-Zeitung has "from commission to commission". Presumably a 
misprint.— Ed 
"Banks of the Spree, May 6", The Morning Chronicle, No.  27571,  May 9, 
1855.—  Ed. 
From its own correspondent Bird T. O'M. The report was dated May 4 and 
published in The Times, No. 22049, May 9,  1855.—  Ed. 
Francis Joseph I.— Ed. 

=====第209页=====
Pianori.— Dissatisfaction with Austria 179 
the Crimea, it would be highly imprudent for Austria, unless she can induce her 
federal allies to support her, to engage in a war with Russia. It is acknowledged [...] 
that the latter has an army of 250,000 men, including the Guard and Grenadier 
Corps, in Poland; and, as it is posted within the rayon of seven of the strongest 
fortresses in the empire, no force that was not at least twice as large could hope to 
obtain any advantage over it. It is also said that mention is made of the disordered 
state of the finances, of the inability of France to place a hundred thousand men 
at Austria's disposal, of the helplessness displayed by the British Government, and 
of the little reliance that can be placed on Prussia. Since Sunday last another 
argument has been added to the foregoing, [...] on the mutability of things in gen­
eral, [...] the uncertainty of the life of man, and [...] the dilemma Austria would be 
in should anything happen to Louis Napoleon while she was engaged in a war 
with Russia." 
Written on May 9, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 219, May 12, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 

=====第210页=====
180 
Frederick Engels 
THE NEW MOVE IN THE CRIMEA 1 
The letter of our Paris correspondent published yesterday gave 
the outlines of the plan which, according to the best sources of 
information at Paris, the Allies propose to follow in the Summer 
campaign in the Crimea; and a scheme substantially the same 
having been divulged by Gen. Canrobert in the camp, we may 
fairly conclude that in this respect at least the truth is now known. 
It is simply that 25,000 men of the French reserves now 
distributed at Maslak, Gallipoli and Adrianople, are to be brought 
to the Crimea, to be followed by from 30,000 to 40,000 additional 
troops — Piedmontese and French. As soon as the reserves arrive, 
and without waiting for the additional reenforcements, the French 
army will proceed to cross the Chernaya, flog the Russians on the 
field if it can penetrate to Sympheropol and then with the coming 
reenforcements to help out the operation, go on to clear the 
peninsula of Russians, and to occupy and fortify Perekop; after 
which the main army will return and finish the siege of Sevastopol 
at leisure. 3 In the mean time the steamers of the fleets are to 
attack Kaffa and Kertch, and if they succeed in reducing those 
Instead of the preceding text, the version published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung 
has: "London, May 11. The impatience of the French army has forced Canrobert to 
divulge the Allies' plan of operations. The 25,000 men of the reserve army are to 
be brought to the Crimea, to be followed by another 30,000 to 40,000 
men — French and Piedmontese. As soon as the reserve army arrives the French 

=====第211页=====
The New Move in the Crimea 181 
places, to occupy them as possible pivots or points of retreat for 
the active army in the field. 
This is certainly the only thing to be done by the Allies if they 
expect ever to bring the operations in the Crimea to a satisfactory 
conclusion. But thus to act in the field requires that the balance of 
forces should be considerably in their favor; otherwise they cannot 
expect to obtain any important advantage over the Russian army 
of observation. How, then, does the balance of strength stand at 
present? 
The French have in the Crimea nine divisions of infantry and 
one brigade of cavalry (Chasseurs d'Afrique 3). At 7,000 men to a 
division, this gives a force of 63,000 infantry and 1,500 cavalry. 
The English have five divisions of infantry amounting at a very 
high estimate to 6,000 men each, and a division of say 2,000 
horse. Then there are the remains of the Turkish force originally 
sent to the Crimea, which cannot possibly exceed 6,000 infantry. 
Add to these the troops which Omer Pasha can withdraw from 
Eupatoria, where he must leave at least 15,000 men to garrison 
the extensive works erected there, and we shall increase the 
number of the allied army by say 20,000 infantry and perhaps 
3,000 or 4,000 cavalry. These troops, as we learn from our 
correspondent at London, have already been transported to the 
Chersonese and are encamped at Kadikoi, back of Balaklava, 
ready for the expected field movements. This is a much more 
judicious disposition than to attempt to effect a junction by a 
separate inland movement of both the Anglo-French and Turkish 
armies, exposing them to be separately attacked by a superior 
Russian force. Our correspondent states the number of men Omer 
has brought to Kadikoi at a higher figure than we have estimated 
it, but he allots a corresponding English force to make up the 
garrison at Eupatoria, so that on the whole his estimates do not 
vary from ours. b With these forces we must take into our account 
20,000 men of the French army of reserve who may be expected 
to arrive by the time Canrobert intends to take the field, and the 
4,000 Piedmontese landed on the 9th of May. The allied strength in 
the Chersonese will then be as follows: 
will take the field, cross the Chernaya, attack the Russians wherever they encounter 
them, try to link up with Omer Pasha's troops somewhere near the Alma and 
Kacha and then act according to circumstances."—Ed. 
African riflemen.— Ed. 
In the Neue Oder-Zeitung the text beginning with the words "Add to these the 
troops" and ending with the words "do not vary from ours" does not occur.— Ed. 

=====第212页=====
182 Frederick Engels 
French Infantry and Artillery 83,000 Cavalry 1,500 
English " " 30,000 " 2,000 
Turks " " 26,000 " 4,000 
Piedmontese " " 4,000 
Totals 143,000 7,500* 
Whether the French reserves have any cavalry with them we do 
not know, or if they have, whether it will arrive in season for the 
commencement of operations is uncertain; however, to make as 
liberal a calculation as possible for the Allies, let us add 2,000 
horse to the above figures, which would give a total cavalry force 
of 9,500.b 
A part of the plan is to continue to carry on the siege, and for 
this at least as many troops will be required as are now engaged in 
that service—that is to say: 
lour French divisions at 7,000 each 28,000 men 
Three English divisions at 6,000 each 18,000 men 
Total 46,000 men 
To this number must be added the sailors and the troops 
intrusted with guarding Balaklava and the line of intrenchments to 
Inkermann, and who at the same time serve as an army of reserve 
to the besieging corps. We put these down at a low estimate at 
12,000. Estimating the sailors and marines at 4,000, we shall 
therefore have to deduct 56,000 men from the above 143,000, 
leaving available for field operations 87,000 infantry and artillery 
and 9,500 cavalry, or altogether about 96,500 men.0 And this, as we 
have said, is a very liberal computation. 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung gives the following figures: 
"French infantry 83,000 Cavalry 1,500 
English " 30,000 " 2,000 
Turkish " fi.000 " 
Total: Infantry  1  19,000 cavalry 3,500."— F.d. 
b In the Neue Oder-Zeitung: "5,500".— Ed. 
c The Neue Oder-Zeitung gives the following calculation: "Estimating the sailors 
and marines at 4,000, we shall have to deduct 54,000 from the total of 119,000, 
leaving available for field operations 65,000 infantry and  5,500  cavalry, altogether 
somewhat more than 70,000." 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung further has: "One should also take into account Omer 
Pasha's corps at Eupatoria, roughly 35,000 infantry and 3,000 or 4,000 cavalry. Of 
these, 15,000 must stay back for garrison duty, so that Omer Pasha will probably 
take the field with 20,000 infantry and 4,000 cavalry, 24,000 all told. 

=====第213页=====
The New Move in the Crimea 183 
Now, according to a Russian military correspondent of the 
Augsburg Gazette, who has always put down the Russian forces at 
very low estimates, the Russians have now in the Crimea, of 
Regular Infantry 93,000 Regular and irregular 
Sailors, Marines, &c  8,000  Cavalry 20,000 
Chornomorski Cossacks ... 6,000 
Artillery, Engineers, &c. .. 13,000  
Total Infantry 120,000 Total Cavalry .20,000 b 
The distribution of this force may be approximatively stated as 
follows: 
For the defense of the south side of Sevastopol (infantry, 
artillery, &c), men 26,000 
As Garrison to the North Fort and Intrenched Camp 24,000 
Total 50,()00c 
This leaves as available for the field, 70,000 infantry and 
artillery and 20,000 cavalry. 
In point of infantry the Allies will thus have a striking 
superiority, their numbers exceeding those of their antagonists by 
26,500 men.d As to the relative strength in artillery we are in the 
dark; but from the difficulty the Allies have always found in 
procuring horses, and from the large proportion of guns 
accompanying every Russian army, it is probable that the Russians 
will be superior to their opponents. In cavalry they will certainly 
have the advantage. Even if from their 20,000 horse we must 
subtract  8,000  Cossacks, who would at all events come in for 
patrolling, outpost and orderly duties, they still retain 12,000 
cavalry intact from detachment service, against 9,500 of the Allies, 
"Hence we have the following sum total of allied troops for field operations in 
two separate corps: 
infantry Cavaln Total 
Atmv at Sevastopol 63,000  5,500  70,500 
Ainu at Kupatoiia 1>0.000 4,000 24,000 
85,000 0,500 94,500."— Ed. 
Black Sea.— Ed. 
The source in question — the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 125 (supple­
ment),  May 5,  1855 —  gives the following figures: infantry, 90,000; artillery, 
15,000.— Ed. 
Instead of the two preceding paragraphs the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "At the 
lowest estimate, the one the Russians themselves give of their present forces in the 
Crimea, we get 120,000 infantry and 20,000 cavalry. One must deduct 50,000 of 
these for the defence of Sevastopol  — 26,000 for the south side and 24,000 as 
garrison for the North Fort and the entrenched camp."—Ed. 
This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第214页=====
184 Frederick Engels 
of which number, on a day of battle, no more than 7,000 can be 
brought forward in line.a 
The advance of the Allies toward the interior can hardly be 
made otherwise than on the road toward Mackenzie's farm and 
the space between this road and the head of Sevastopol Bay or 
Inkermann; because east of Mackenzie's farm the steep ridge 
encircling the Baidar Valley extends south-eastward until it joins 
the southern ridge of the Crimea near Yalta, forming a rocky 
barrier impassable for cavalry and artillery, and practicable for 
infantry by a few footpaths only. From Yalta there is indeed a 
road crossing the hills, but this can be defended by a very few 
troops, and has no doubt been fortified by the Russians long since, 
as well as the footpath passes. Besides, the direction of this road, 
the distance of Yalta from Balaklava, and the chance it offers to 
the Russians to cut off any corps operating on this line, will hardly 
admit of its being used by the Allies as their main line of 
operations.b 
The road by Mackenzie's farm to the Alma and Sympheropol is 
defended by a double row of intrenchments; first on the ridge 
overhanging the Chernaya, and secondly on the north side of a 
ravine running down from the edge of the rocky range, near 
Mackenzie's farm, to the head of Sevastopol Bay. This second and 
main line of defense, which is not more than two English miles in 
extent, is said to be very strongly intrenched, and here the first 
decisive action will have to be fought—an action deciding whether 
the Allies are to continue imprisoned on the Heracleatic Cherson­
ese or to gain the interior of the country. This position will cost a 
harder struggle to carry than the Alma, for the forces will be more 
equally balanced, unless the Russians commit the mistake of 
dispersing their troops. They can easily concentrate 75,000 men 
Instead of the last sentence the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "As regards infantry, 
the Allies' joint forces are superior to the Russians', but separately each of their 
two fighting corps is weaker. The Russians' greatest advantage, however, is their 
position. Deployed over the triangle between the Alma, Sevastopol and Simferopol, 
they hold a consolidated position against Omer Pasha along that river in the North, 
which can be maintained with 15,000 infantry along the front, while a flanking 
movement of the Russian cavalry threatens to cut off the Turks from Eupatoria. If 
therefore Omer Pasha himself advanced up to the Alma, he would never be able to 
cross it until the English and the French had thrown the Russians back to 
Simferopol and thus forced them to give up the Alma. In this case the two corps 
could link up. An advance of the Anglo-French army is therefore the basic 
condition of any success."—Ed. 
The text beginning with the words "and the space between this road" to the end 
of the paragraph does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第215页=====
The New Move in the Crimea 185 
for the defense of these intrenchments, and if the Allies attack 
with from 80,000 to 90,000 men, this superiority will in a great 
measure be made up by the intrenchments, and by the narrow 
front on which the Allies must necessarily act. If the Russians 
behave as they should, they must here check the advance of the 
Allies at once and force them back into their stronghold on the 
Chersonese.3 But if the Russians are defeated and the position 
carried, there remains nothing for them but to retire upon the 
Belbek and attempt to hold that line.b In this case the garrison of 
the north side of Sevastopol would have to be observed by the 
Allies, whose army in the field would thereby be weakened by 
some  8,000  or 10,000 men; and if even then the Russians suffered 
a second defeat, their superiority in cavalry would secure them a 
safe retreat, although their line of retreat would lie in the 
prolongation of their left wing—a very unfavorable position 
unless made up for by some countervailing advantage. 
These are a few of the considerations offering themselves on 
this new turn of affairs in the Crimea. They are far from 
exhausting the subject, to which we shall therefore soon return.0 
Written about May 11, 1855 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4402, May 29, 1855; re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1045, June 1, 1855 as a 
leading article; the German version was 
first published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 221, May 14, 1855, marked with the 
sign x 
a Instead of the text beginning with the words "This position will cost" and 
ending with the words "their stronghold on the Chersonese", the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung has: "The narrow front on which the Allies must act here is to the 
Russians' advantage."— Ed. 
*"' The Neue Oder-Zeitung further has: "while a detached corps keeps the Turks 
in check on the Alma".— Ed. 
In the Neue Oder-Zeitung the article ends as follows: "Even if the Russians were 
defeated here, their superiority in cavalry and the Allies' inadequate transport 
facilities making it impossible for the latter to take up positions far from the coast, 
would enable the Russians to retreat from the area controlled by the Allies. Their line 
of retreat would lie in the prolongation of their left wing, which is of course a very 
unfavourable route. However, it is probable that the Russians will try from the 
beginning to keep the Allies busy on the Chernaya and throw the bulk of their forces 
against Omer Pasha in order to encircle and crush him with their cavalry and then 
turn their total forces against the Anglo-French troops."—Ed. Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第216页=====
186 
Karl Marx 
THE MORNING POST VERSUS PRUSSIA. 
— THE CHARACTER OF THE WHIGS AND TORIES 149 
London, May 14. Palmerston's private organ, The Morning Post, 
today carries a threatening article against Prussia,3 which includes 
the following: 
"It was in the month of April, 1854, that permission was given, by an Order in 
Council, to import Russian produce into the United Kingdom in neutral bottoms, 
and of this permission we find that Prussia availed herself with astonishing rapidity. 
The following returns" (taken from official tables presented to Parliament) "will 
show the comparative amount of our imports of tallow, hemp, and flax, from the 
last-named country, during the years 1853 and 1854; the difference clearly 
indicating'the quantity of Russian produce which has found its way through Memel 
and Danzig to the British market, notwithstanding our strict blockade of the 
Russian ports in the Baltic: 
"Imported from Prussia into the United Kingdom 
1853 1854 
Tallow 54 cwts 253,955 cwts 
Hemp 3,447 " 366,220 " 
Flax 242,383 " 667,879 " 
Flax-and linseed 57,848 qrs 116,267 qrs 
"These figures sufficiently indicate the value of this new traffic to Prussia [...]. 
The result is that in spite of our blockade Russia is enabled to sell her produce as freely 
as in time of peace, while we have to pay some 50 per cent more for it, in the shape of 
dues and profits to the Prussian trader  [...].We  admit that our present policy is grossly 
inconsistent, but the remedy is to be sought not by raising the blockade of the enemy's 
ports,  but by stopping to the utmost of our power the overland traffic through the 
Prussian dominions." 
a The Morning Post, No. 25386, May 14, 1855.— Ed. 
The Morning Post has: "the enemy's ports".— Ed. 

=====第217页=====
The Morning Post versus Prussia 187 
The anti-aristocratic movement in England can only have one 
immediate result: to bring the Tories, i. e. the specifically aristocratic 
party, to the helm. If not, it must necessarily subside at first into a 
few Whig platitudes, a few administrative mock-reforms not worth 
mentioning. Layard's announcement of his motion on the "state of 
the nation"3 and the reception that announcement received in the 
House of Commons, produced the City meetings. But close on the 
heels of the City meetings followed Ellenborough's motion 150 in 
the House of Lords,b whereby the Tories appropriate the new 
reform agitation, and transform it into a ladder to office. Layard 
himself has altered the words "aristocratic influence" in his motion 
to "family influence"—a concession to the Tories. Every movement 
outside the House assumes, inside the House, the form of the 
squabble between the two factions of the governing class. In the 
hands of the Whigs the Anti-Corn Law League became a means of 
bringing down the Tories.151 In the hands of the Tories, the 
Administrative Reform Association 152 became a means of bringing 
down the Whigs. Only one must not forget that in this way one 
base of the old regime after another was sacrificed alternately by 
the two factions — and the regime itself remained intact, we may 
add. We have already stated our view that only the Tories are 
forced to make major concessions, because only under them does 
the pressure from without assume a threatening, indeed re­
volutionising character^ The Whigs represent the real oligarchy in 
England, the domination of a few great families such as the 
Sutherlands, Bedfords, Carlisles, Devonshires, etc.; the Tories 
represent the squireocracy,d they are the Junker party, if you will, 
although broad demarcation lines must be drawn between the 
English squire and the North German Junker. The Tories are 
therefore the receptacles of all the old English prejudices 
regarding Church and State, protection and anti-Catholicism. The 
Whigs, the oligarchs, are enlightened, and have never hesitated to 
discard prejudices standing in the way of their hereditary tenancy 
of the offices of state. By their friendship the Whigs have 
constantly prevented the middle classes from moving; by their 
friendship the Tories have always thrown the masses into the arms 
of the middle classes, who put them at the disposal of the Whigs... 
a A. H. Layard's speech in the House of Commons on April 27, 1855. The Times, 
No. 22040, April 28, 1855.—Ed. 
b E. L. Ellenborough's speech in the House of Lords on May 14, 1855. The Times, 
No. 22054, May 15, 1855.— Ed. 
See this volume, pp.  50-51.—  Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第218页=====
188 Karl Marx 
At the present moment there is no longer any difference between 
Whigs and Tories except that the latter represent the plebs of the 
aristocracy and the former its haute-volée? The old aristocratic 
phrase is on the side of the aristocratic plebs; the liberal phrase on 
the side of the aristocratic haute-volée: In fact, however, since the 
High Tories (Lord Bolingbroke, etc.) quit the scene the Tory Party 
has always been ruled by parvenus such as Pitt, Addington, 
Perceval, Canning, Peel and Disraeli. The homines novi b were 
always to be found in the ranks of the Tories. When Derby 
(himself a renegade Whig) formed his ministry, it contained, apart 
from  himself,  perhaps two other old names. All the others were 
plain squires plus one man of letters. On the other hand, the 
Whigs, who never hesitated for a moment to trim their sails and 
their views to the wind and who apparently forever renewed and 
metamorphosed themselves, needed no new men. They were able 
to perpetuate the family names. If one surveys English history 
since the "glorious" revolution of 1688, one finds that all the laws 
directed against the mass of the people have been initiated by the 
Whigs, from the Act for a Seven-Year Parliament to the latest 
Workhouse 153 and Factory legislation. But the Whig reaction has 
always taken place in agreement with the middle classes. The Tory 
reaction has been directed even more against the middle class than 
against the masses. Hence the Whigs' reputation for liberality. 
Written on May 14, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 227, May 18, 1855 
Marked with the sign X Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 
Upper crust.— Ed. 
New men.— Ed. 

=====第219页=====
189 
Karl Marx 
A SITTING OF THE HOUSE OF LORDS 
London, May 15. The galleries of the House of Lords were 
packed full yesterday afternoon before the sitting even com­
menced. A sensational show had been announced—Lord Ellen-
borough's motion, and a regular battle between the Ins and Outs.a 
In addition to this, it was piquant to see with one's own eyes the 
hereditary legislators playing the part of crusaders against the 
aristocracy. The performance was a poor one. The actors kept 
forgetting what parts they were playing. The play began as drama 
and ended in farce. During the mock-battle not even the illusion, 
the artistic illusion, was maintained. It was evident at first glance 
that the noble warriors were trying reciprocally to preserve not 
only themselves but even their weapons unscathed. 
Insofar as the debate revolved around the criticism of the 
conduct of the war up to now it failed to rise to the level of any 
run-of-the mill debating clubh in London, and it would be sheer 
waste of time to dwell on it for a moment. We will attempt, 
however, to indicate in a few strokes how the noble lords 
conducted themselves as the champions of administrative reform, 
as the opponents of the aristocratic monopoly of government and 
as an echo of the City meetings. The right man in the right place, 
cried Lord Ellenborough.c And as proof that honour falls to merit, 
and merit alone, he cited the fact that he (Ellenborough) and Lord 
Marx uses the English words "Ins" and "Outs" (referring to the party in the 
government and the opposition).— Ed. 
Here and below Marx uses the English words "debating club".— Ed. 
The debate in the House of Lords on May 14, 1855 was repoited in The 
Times, No. 22054, May 15, 1355.— Ed. 

=====第220页=====
190 Karl Marx 
Hardwicke sat in the Lords because their fathers had worked their 
way into the House of Lords by their own merit. This seems, 
on the contrary, to be precisely an instance of how men can be­
nefit from the merits of others, namely their fathers, to secure 
not merely a post for life but the dignity of a legislator of England. 
And what were the meritsby which the Lord Chief Justice of the Queen's 
Bench* Ellenborough senior, and Mr. Charles Yorke, Lord 
Hardwicke's father, made their way into the House of Lords? The 
story is an instructive one. The late Ellenborough, an English lawyer 
and subsequently judge, managed to earn himself the reputation of a 
Jeffreys en miniature in the press trials, conspiracy trials and police-spy 
trials that were constantly taking place under Pitt and his successors. 
Under Ellenborough's leadership the special jury b attained a 
reputation in England that even the "jurés  probes  et libres" c of Louis 
Philippe never possessed. That was the merit of Ellenborough senior, 
and that paved his way into the House of Lords. As for Mr. Charles 
Yorke, the ancestor of Lord Hardwicke, he has even outdone old 
Ellenborough in the matter of merit. This Charles Yorke, the 
Member for Cambridge for twenty years, was one of the chosen band 
entrusted by Pitt, Perceval and Liverpool "to do the dirty work for 
them". d Each of the "loyal" terror measures of that time found its 
Pindar in him. In every petition against the openly practised sale of 
seats in the House of Commons, he discerned "Jacobin machina­
tions".  Every motion opposing the shameless system of sinecures, at 
a time when pauperism was coming into being in England, was 
denounced by Charles Yorke as an attack on the "blessed comforts of 
our sacred religion". And on what occasion did this Charles Yorke 
celebrate his Ascension to the House of Lords? In 1810 the 
Walcheren expedition 154 had produced similar effects in England as 
the Crimean expedition did in 1855. Lord Porchester tabled a 
motion in the House of Commons to set up a committee of 
investigation. Charles Yorke opposed it violently, he spoke of plots, 
the stirring up of discontent, etc. Nevertheless, Porchester's motion 
was carried. But then Yorke decided to withhold the inquiry findings 
from the public, insisting, on the basis of an old and absurd 
parliamentary privilege, that the public galleries be cleared of 
listeners and reporters. This was done. A Mr. Gale Jones, the 
Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English words "special jury".— Ed. 
"Honest and free  juries."  — Ed. 
Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 

=====第221页=====
A Sitting of the House of Lords 191 
chairman of a London debating club, then published an advertise­
ment announcing that the subject to be discussed at the next meeting 
of the club would be the infringement of the freedom of the press 
and Charles Yorke's gross insult to public opinion. Charles Yorke 
promptly had Gale Jones summoned before the House of Commons 
for libel of a Member and breach of "parliamentary privilege", 
whence, in contravention of all English laws, he was immediately 
dispatched to Newgate Prison, without inquiry or reference to a 
judge, "to be confined there as long as it should please the 
Commons". While performing these heroic deeds, Charles Yorke 
assumed great airs of independence. He claimed to be acting only as 
an upright "country squire", as a "friend of the King", as a "loyal 
anti-Jacobin". Not three weeks had elapsed since his closing of the 
gallery before it became known that meanwhile he had presented his 
account to the Perceval ministry and obtained a lifetime sinecure as 
Teller of the Exchequer"1 (similar to "The Guardian of the Green 
Wax"),  i. e. a life emolument of £2,700 per annum. On accepting 
this sinecure Charles Yorke had to submit himself to his constituents 
in Cambridge for re-election. At the election meeting he was greeted 
by booes and hisses, rotten apples and eggs, and was forced to run 
for it. As compensation for this indignity Perceval elevated him to 
the peerage. Thus it was that Charles Yorke was transformed into a 
lord, and thus, Lord Ellenborough informs Lord Palmerston, merit 
must be able to make its way in a well-ordered economy. Discounting 
this extremely naive and characteristic lapsus linguae,h Ellen-
borough—who bears an unmistakable likeness to the Knight of the 
Doleful Countenance0—adhered more to the phraseology of the 
City meetings. 
His friend Derby strove to restrict even the purely rhetorical 
concession. He rejected the rumour that he had allied himself with 
Layard. He whose entire talent consists of discretion, accused 
Layard of indiscretion. There was, he said, a lot of truth in the 
views of the City men, but they had proceeded to draw 
extravagant (!!) conclusions. A minister had to seek his colleagues 
in Parliament, and not merely in Parliament but in the party to 
which he belongs, and not merely in this party but within the 
circle of men in his party possessing parliamentary influence. 
Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
Slip of the tongue.— Ed. 
c Don Quixote.— Ed. 

=====第222页=====
192 Karl Marx 
Within this circle ability should, of course, be decisive, and this 
had hitherto often been neglected. The fault, Derby claimed, lay 
in the parliamentary reform of 1831. The "rotten places", "the 
rotten boroughs",3 had been expunged, and it was precisely these 
rotten boroughs155 that had furnished the sound statesmen of 
England. They had enabled influential men to introduce talented 
but impecunious young people into Parliament and thence into 
the service of the state. Thus even according to Lord Derby no 
administrative reform is possible without parliamentary reform — 
but, a parliamentary reform in the opposite sense, restoration of 
the "rotten boroughs". Derby's complaint does not seem entirely 
justified if one considers that 85 seats in the House of Commons 
still belong to some 60 little "rotten boroughs" (in England alone), 
none of which have more than 500 inhabitants, with some electing 
two members. 
Lord Panmure, on behalf of the ministry, brought the Lords 
debate back to the real point. You want, he stuttered, to exploit 
the cry outside the walls of Parliament in order to declaim us out 
of office and put yourselves in. Why did Derby not form a 
ministry three months ago when charged to do so by the Queen? 
Ah, replied Derby with a smirk, three months ago! Things have 
changed in the last three months. Three months ago Lord 
Palmerston was l'homme à la mode, h the great and indispensable 
statesman. Palmerston has discredited  himself,  and now it's our 
turn. 
The debate in the House of Lords has shown that neither side 
possesses the stuff that men are made of. As to the House of 
Commons, Ellenborough rightly observed that it has become 
insipid, that it has lost its credit and that political influence is no 
longer to be sought within the House, but outside it. 
The debates in the Lords clearly showed the mala fidesc of the 
aristocratic opposition, which intends to conjure away the 
bourgeois movement and simultaneously to use it as a battering-
ram against the ministry. In a subsequent letter we shall have the 
opportunity of similarly demonstrating the mala fides of the City 
reformers towards the working class, with whom they intend to 
play just as the aristocratic opposition does with them. From this 
one may draw the conclusion that the present movement in 
Here and below Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 
A popular man.— Ed. 
Insincerity.— Ed. 

=====第223页=====
A Sitting of the House of Lords 193 
England is extremely complex and, as we have indicated earlier,3 
simultaneously contains two antithetical and hostile movements. 
Written on May 15, 1855 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, paper 
No. 228, May 19, 1855 Published in English for the first 
Marked with the sign x time 
See this volume, pp. 186-88.— Ed. 

=====第224页=====
194 
Karl Marx 
THE AGITATION OUTSIDE PARLIAMENT 
London, May 16. The resentment of the bourgeois opposition 
caused by the vote in the House of Lords on the occasion of 
Ellenborough's motion is a symptom of weakness. On the contrary, 
they ought to celebrate the rejection of the motion as a victory. To 
force the House of Lords, the supreme council of the aristocracy, 
in solemn public debate to declare its satisfaction with the way the 
war has hitherto been conducted, loudly to acknowledge Palmer-
ston as their champion and representative, and definitely to reject 
mere pious wishes for administrative reform, for any kind of 
reform—what more favourable results could the enemies of the 
aristocracy expect from Ellenborough's motion? Above all they had 
to seek to discredit the House of Lords, the last bastion of the 
English aristocracy. But they complain that the House of Lords 
disdains fleeting popularity at the cost not of its privileges but of 
the existing cabinet. It is in the order of things for The Morning 
Herald to complain, being the Tory organ, the organ of all the 
prejudices of "our incomparable constitution". 11 For The Morning 
Herald it was a comforting prospect, after the Whig oligarchy 
performing as the friends of the bourgeoisie and of "liberal 
progress" for a century and a  half,  to see the roles change and the 
Tories now entrusted for another century and a half with the role 
of "aristocratic" representatives of the bourgeoisie and of "liberal 
progress". The Morning Herald has a right to complain, a good, 
solid right. But the bourgeois opposition? Did it perhaps imagine 
that a moderate demonstration of City merchants would be 
This refers to an article on the debate in the House of Lords on May 14, 
1855,  published by The Morning  Herald,  No. 22432, May 16, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第225页=====
The Agitation Outside Parliament  195 
enough  to force  the  aristocracy into committing suicide, into 
abdicating?  The  truth, however,  is that  the  bourgeoisie desires  a 
compromise, that  it expects flexibility from  the  other side  to 
enable  it too to be  flexible; that  it would like,  if possible,  to avoid  a 
real struggle.  As  soon  as the  struggle becomes  a real  one, the 
"million",  as they call  the  "lower" classes,  too,  will rush into  the 
arena,  not  just  as spectators,  not  just  as referees,  but as a  party. 
And the  bourgeoisie would like  to avoid this  at all  costs.  It was a 
similar reason that kept  the  Whigs  out of the  Cabinet from 
1808-1830. They wanted  to throw  out  their opponents  at any  price 
except  the  price  of real concessions  to the  bourgeoisie, without 
whose  aid the  Tories could  not be  thrown  out,  except  the  price  of 
a parliamentary reform.  We  have seen  the  ambiguous, off-hand 
way and the aloof,  ironically non-committal manner  in which 
Ellenborough  and  Derby  set themselves  up as  supporters  of the 
bourgeois administrative reform, while doing everything  to ward 
off their supposed allies.  We now see, on the  other hand,  how 
timidly  and  perfidiously  the  reforming businessmen  of the  City 
first tried  to forestall  any  opposition from  the  Chartists  and 
temporarily secure their silence,  so as to  juggle them  out of the 
positions they  had  voluntarily granted them.  In the  case  of the 
City merchants  no less than  in that  of the  Tories, fear  and  dislike 
of the  supposed ally outweighs hostility towards  the  supposed 
enemy.  The  course  of events  was  briefly this. 
The "Administrative Reform Association" feared opposition 
from  the  Chartists,  who, as the  reader will remember,  had got the 
better  of the  "National  and  Constitutional Association"  at two 
large meetings  in St.  Martins Hall  and  "Southwark, forcing  it to 
retreat from  the  territory  it had  chosen  itself.3 On  April  26 they 
sent Mr.  James Acland  (a former Anti-Corn  Law  lecturerb)  to the 
rooms  of Ernest Jones, where  he  announced himself  as an 
"envoy"  of the  Administrative Reform Association, which  was 
counting  on the  support  of the  Chartists,  it being  its wish  to 
abolish  the  "class legislation"  and  install  a popular government. 
He invited Ernest Jones  to a  meeting  the  next  day  with  the 
committee  of the  said administration.0 Jones declared that  he was 
not entitled  to reply  in the  name  of the  Chartist party.  He had to 
decline  to attend  the  meeting until  he had  consulted  the  London 
a Probably  a reference  to  Marx's article  "A  Meeting"  (see  this volume, 
pp. 98-100).—  Ed. 
Marx uses  the  English words "Anti-Corn  Law  lecturer".—  Ed. 
See this volume,  pp.  166-69.—  Ed. 
8* 

=====第226页=====
196 Karl Marx 
executive committee of the Chartists,156 which was to meet the 
following Sunday. 
On Sunday evening, April 29, Jones informed the Chartist 
committee of the whole affair. He was authorised to proceed with 
the negotiations. The following morning Jones had a meeting with 
Mr. Ingraham Travers, the leader of the City movement, who 
personally accredited Mr. James Acland as the authorised agent 
and representative of his party. Mr. I. Travers assured Jones that 
their intention was to form a popular government. The resolutions 
as printed in The Times 3 were only provisional; the means of 
achieving their goal had to be decided first by the executive 
committee to be elected at the London Tavern meeting. As 
evidence of their sympathy for the cause of administrative reform 
the Chartists should appoint a speaker to represent them at the 
meeting. He would be called upon by the chairman to support one 
of the resolutions. Further, the Chartists should appoint a 
representative who, at the suggestion of the provisional committee 
of the City merchants, would be appointed a permanent member 
of the executive committee of the Reform Association at the 
Tavern meeting. Finally it was agreed that, admittance being by 
ticket only, the Chartists would receive their due share of these 
tickets. Jones declined to let the matter be left to a purely verbal 
agreement and informed Mr. Ingraham [Travers] that he would 
have to put forward all the points mentioned in a letter to the 
Chartists' executive committee. 
This was done. The letter arrived, overflowing with assurances. 
However, when the time came for the delivery of the admission 
tickets, only 12 tickets arrived. When the Chartist committee 
complained about this breach of promise, the others apologised 
saying there were no more tickets left. However, if the Chartist 
committee would station two of its members at the door of the 
Tavern, they would be authorised to admit whoever they pleased, 
even without a ticket. Messrs. Slocombe and Workman were 
elected by the Chartists for this purpose and received Mr. 
Travers's authorisation. To eliminate all suspicion the Administra­
tive Reform Association sent a special messenger with a letter for 
Jones on the day of the meeting,0 a few hours before its 
commencement, to remind him that the chairman would request 
him to speak in favour of resolution 4, and that he would be 
proposed to the meeting as a member of the executive committee, 
in his status as representative of the Chartists. 
I "Administrative Reform", The Times, No. 22040, April 28, 1855.— Ed. 
b May 5, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第227页=====
The Agitation Outside Parliament 197 
About an hour before the meeting .large numbers of Chartists 
assembled outside the Tavern. As soon as the doors were opened, 
Messrs. Slocombe and Workman were forbidden to admit anyone 
without a ticket. Eight tickets were reluctantly distributed in 
order to gain time at a moment when the pressure from outside 
seemed to be getting serious. This time was used to bring along a unit 
of police waiting in readiness in a sidestreet. From this moment on 
nobody else was admitted except "well-known merchants and 
bankers". Indeed, people in working-class dress, in the familiar 
corduroy jackets, were turned away even if they had entrance 
tickets. To deceive the crowed of workers waiting in the street, the 
doors were suddenly locked and notices put up saying, "The hall 
is full. Nobody else will be admitted". At the time, however, the 
hall was not even half full, and "gentlemen" arriving in their 
carriages were admitted through the windows and by way of a 
back-door through the kitchen. The crowd of workers dispersed 
calmly, since they did not suspect any treachery. Although Ernest 
Jones showed his "platform ticket" at the meeting, he was not 
allowed up on the platform, much less permitted to speak of 
course. The Association had achieved two aims—to prevent any 
opposition from the Chartists, and to be able to point to the crowd 
in the street as their supporters. But these were only supposed to 
appear as extras in the street. 
Ernest Jones, in an appeal to the workers of England, relates this 
comedy of intrigues and on behalf of the Chartists throws down the 
gauntlet to the Administrative Reform Association.3 
Written on May 16, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 229, May 19, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign x 
E. Jones, "Political Felony. Infamous Chicanery and Fraud of Administrative 
Reform Association", The People's Paper, No. 158, May 12, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第228页=====
198 
Karl Marx 
QUESTIONS OF FINANCE 
London, May 19. According to the optimists of the press here the 
economic crisis in England has now ended, and commerce and 
industry are once again taking an upward course. They draw this 
consoling conclusion from the fact that there has been an easing of 
the money market. For on the one hand there has been an increase 
in the gold  reserve  in the vaults of the Bank of England, and on the 
other the bank has lowered its rate of interest. Whilst on January 
20, 1855, the value of the gold holdings was only £12,162,000, on 
May 12, 1855, it had risen to £16,045,000—an increase of 
£3,883,000. The rate of interest, which stood at 5 per cent on 
January 20, 1855, was lowered by the Bank to 4l/2 per cent on 
March 31, and to 4 per cent on April 28. However, those 
gentlemen have overlooked the fact that an accumulation of gold 
in the vaults of the Bank and a fall in its rate of interest can be 
caused by something other than an economic boom—namely the 
very opposite: stagnation of business and, linked with that, a 
falling-off in the demand for capital. That the latter is really the 
cause on this occasion is shown by the tables published every week 
by the Bank of England. Only one should not, like those optimists, 
look exclusively at two columns contained in the tables, gold 
holdings and rate of interest. One has to compare two other 
columns—those showing reserve  bank-notes  and discounted  bills.  As is 
generally known, the Bank of England is split into two different 
departments, the Issue Department3 and the Banking Department. 
We can describe the former as the mint of the Bank of England. It 
is engaged solely in manufacturing bank-notes. Robert Peel's Act 
Here and below Marx uses the English terms.— Ed. 

=====第229页=====
Questions of Finance 199 
of 1844 laid down legal limitations on the issue of bank-notes. 
That is to say, above the sum of £14 million, which is the amount 
of capital it is owed by the state, the Bank can issue no more 
bank-notes than there is gold in its vaults. If then, for example, 
the Bank issues bank-notes to the value of £20 million there has 
to be gold worth £6 million in its vaults. The Issue Department 
of the Bank is engaged solely in manufacturing and issuing 
bank-notes in accordance with the restrictions described. It 
transfers all the bank-notes it manufactures in this way to the 
Banking Department, the actual Bank, which does business with 
the public like any other deposit and discount bank, and which 
puts bank-notes into circulation by discounting bills, advancing 
money on interest-bearing papers, paying dividends to state 
creditors, paying off deposits it holds, etc. Robert Peel cleverly 
devised both this division of the Bank of England into two 
self-contained departments and this method of regulating the 
amount of notes to be issued, because he fancied this would make 
it possible to guard against any future monetary crisis arising, and 
to adjust the amount of paper currency to that of metallic 
currency by means of an automatic and mechanical law. What the 
celebrated statesman overlooked was the not insignificant fact that 
his restriction only regulated circulation between the Issue 
Department and the Banking Department, between two offices of 
the Bank of England, but by no means determined circulation 
between the Banking Department and the outside world. The 
Issue Department of the Bank transfers to the Banking Depart­
ment as many bank-notes as it is allowed by law to manufacture, 
for example £20 million if there are £6 million gold in its coffers. 
However, what proportion of these £20 million actually goes into 
circulation depends on the state of business, and on the 
requirements and demand in the world of commerce. The 
remainder, which the Bank cannot dispose of and which is thus 
left in the coffers of the Banking Department, appears in the 
accounts rendered by the Bank under the heading of reserve 
bank-notes. 
Seeing, as we have, that, from January 20, 1855, to May 12, 
1855,  the gold holdings of the Bank increased by £3,883,000, we 
also find that during the same period the quantity of bank-notes 
held in reserve rose from £5,463,000 to £9,417,000, i. e. by 
£3,954,000. The greater the quantity of reserve bank-notes, i. e. 
the notes left in the coffers of the Banking Department, the 
smaller is the quantity of notes actually circulating amongst the 
public. However, from the figure just quoted it follows that the 

=====第230页=====
200 Karl Marx 
accumulation of gold in the vaults of the Bank has been 
accompanied by a decline in the quantity of bank-notes circulating 
amongst the public. What is the reason for this contraction in 
circulation? Simply a decline in trade and a fall in business 
transactions. Any doubt as to the accuracy of this view will be 
dispelled when one sees from the same accounts rendered by the 
Bank that the value of bills discounted by the Bank was 
£25,282,000 on January 20, 1855, whereas on May 12, 1855 it had 
fallen to £23,007,000—a decrease of £2,275,000. But the value of 
bills discounted by the Bank is the most reliable gauge of the 
quantity of business transacted between the Bank and the world of 
commerce. The evidence is even more conclusive if one considers 
that the Bank lowered its rate of interest to 4 per cent on April 
28, and thus offered its commodity—capital—20 per cent cheaper 
than in the previous January. And from April 28, when the Bank 
lowered its rate of interest, to May 12 the quantity of bank-notes 
spent on discounting bills fell instead of rising—proof that under 
the present state of the economy capital is still too expensive at 
4 per cent to find even the demand it found at the beginning of 
January at 5 per cent; proof that the fall in the rate of interest 
cannot be ascribed to a greater influx of capital but rather to a 
reduced demand on the part of commercial and industrial 
enterprises;  proof,  finally, that the increase in the metal held in 
the vaults of the Bank is only an increase in idle capital which, at 
this moment, cannot be utilised. 
Written on May 19, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 233, May 22, 1855 
Marked with the sign X Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第231页=====
201 
Frederick Engels 
THE CRIMEAN WAR 
As we write, the field operations in the Crimea, to which we 
alluded some days since as in preparation, 3 must have commenced. 
With these operations, the war, so far as it is confined to the 
peninsula, enters into a new and probably decisive stage of 
development. The rapid arrival of the Piedmontese and French 
reserves, and particularly the sudden change by which Canrobert 
left his command for that of a single corps, while Pélissier takes 
the command in  chief,  are sure indications that the time for a 
change in the tactics of the Allies is at hand. 
For a general description of the ground to which the theater of 
operations is to be transferred and a general statement of the 
forces about to be engaged we refer to our former article. It will 
be recollected that the Russian army of observation in communica­
tion with the north side of Sevastopol has its main position on the 
plateau between Inkermann and the point where the road from 
Balaklava to Sympheropol crosses the mountain-ridge, separating 
the valleys of the Chernaya and the Belbek. This position, of great 
natural strength, has been completely intrenched by the Russians. 
It extends for about four miles between the head of the bay of 
Sevastopol and the impassable range of mountains, and the 
Russians will be able to concentrate there at least 50,000 or 60,000 
men, of infantry and artillery, which number is fully sufficient for 
the defense. 
To attack this position in front would require a great numerical 
superiority and involve terrible sacrifices, while the Allies cannot 
Here and below Engels refers to his article "The New Move in the Crimea" 
(see this volume, pp. 180-85).— Ed. 

=====第232页=====
202 Frederick Engels 
afford either. Even if they succeeded in carrying the intrench-
ments, their losses would be so severe as to disable them from an 
energetic continuance of the campaign. They must therefore 
attempt to draw a number of Russians away from it and to find 
means to turn it. For this purpose the mysterious expedition to 
Kertch was sent out. About 15,000 allied troops embarked, were 
seen by the Russians to pass Yalta, sailed to Kertch, and returned 
again. Why they did not attempt a landing is sought to be 
explained by a telegraphic order from Paris. At all events, this 
mere apology for a demonstration must be pronounced an utter 
failure; no General in his senses would be induced to divide his 
troops by an expedition which does not venture to show even a 
semblance of fight. An attempt on Kaffa, if even it was under 
contemplation at headquarters, seems also to have been finally 
abandoned. To transport troops to Eupatoria and sally forth from 
that place cannot be under consideration, else the Piedmontese 
and French reserves would have been sent thither at once. And, as 
there is no other harbor or good roadstead on the coast between 
Balaklava and Kaffa, nor between Sevastopol and Eupatoria, the 
idea of turning the Russians by sea seems to have been finally 
given up, and nothing remains but to turn them by land, which, as 
we have already stated, must prove an exceedingly difficult 
operation. 
There is, beside the road occupied by the Russians above 
Inkermann, but one other high road leading from Balaklava to 
Sympheropol. It runs along the south coast as far as Alushta, 
where it turns to the interior, passes the mountains east of Chatyr 
Dagh or Tent Mountain, the highest in the Crimea, at a point 
2,800 feet above the sea and descends to Sympheropol by the 
valley of the Salghir, the main river of the Crimea. From 
Balaklava to Alushta there are four marches, from Alushta to 
Sympheropol three—together about 95 English miles. But as no 
side-roads exist allowing the troops to march in several parallel 
columns, the whole army would have to advance on this one road 
in one enormously extended column, requiring them to march at 
least for four or five days in one continuous defile. Near Alushta 
and on the pass there are some old fortifications, and we may be 
sure that the pass itself will be found strongly intrenched. Instead 
of seven days the army would perhaps require twelve before even 
the pass of Chatyr Dagh could be crossed—time enough for the 
Russians to make an attempt on the corps remaining to protect the 
siege, or to march with the greater part of their forces against the 
enemy and meet him with superior numbers on debouching from 

=====第233页=====
The Crimean War 203 
the hills, while light, movable columns sent along the foot-paths of 
the Upper Katsha and Alma would fall upon his flank and rear. 
The greatest fault of a flank movement by way of Alushta 
would, however, be its utter want of a base of operations. The 
open roadstead of Alushta forbids the idea of turning that place 
even into a temporary base; so that even before Alushta is 
passed, Russian light infantry descending by the foot-paths across 
the hills, may interrupt the communication with Balaklava quite 
effectually. 
The march by Alushta, therefore, can hardly be undertaken. Its 
risks far outweigh its possible advantages. There is, however, 
another way of turning the Russians. If in the march by Alushta 
all the advantages offered to the Allies by the high road are far 
outweighed by the means of attack given to the Russians by the 
foot-paths, cannot these same foot-paths be turned to the same 
advantage by the Allies? This would imply an entirely different 
operation. In this case the Allies would place the main body of 
their field-troops, including the corps destined to invest the north 
side of Sevastopol, directly opposite the Russian camp above 
Inkermann, forcing their opponents thereby to keep the great 
body of their troops concentrated in the intrenchments. Meantime, 
Zouaves, Chasseurs, Light Infantry, British Rifles, and even the 
mounted Chasseurs d'Afrique, and what can be got together of 
mountain-artillery, would be formed into as many columns as 
there are foot-paths leading from the valley of Baidar and from 
the South Coast near Alupka, 30 miles from Balaklava, into the 
valleys of the Belbek and Katsha. A night march would 
conveniently bring the troops destined to turn the extreme 
Russian left across the valley of Baidar to the South Coast, where 
the enemy could no longer perceive them. Another march would 
bring them to Alupka. Above Alupka is the steep range of the 
Yaila mountains, forming on their northern slope an elevated 
plain about 2,000 feet above the sea, affording good pasturage for 
sheep, and descending by rocky precipices into the glens of 
the rivulets Biuk Uzen and Uzen Bash, which by their junction 
form the Belbek river. Three foot-paths lead up to this plain 
near Alupka, and pass into the glens of the two Uzens. All this 
ground is perfectly practicable for infantry such as the Zouaves and 
Chasseurs, who in Africa have got accustomed to mountain 
warfare of a far more difficult character. Then, from the valley of 
the Upper Chernaya, better known as the Baidar Valley, at least 
two foot-paths lead to the valley of the Upper Belbek, and finally 
one branches off from the Balaklava and Sympheropol road just 

=====第234页=====
204 Frederick Engels 
before the mountain pass, and traverses the ridge three miles 
south-east of Mackenzie's farm, leading immediately to the left of 
the Russian intrenched position. Now if these paths be ever so 
difficult they must be practicable for the French light troops from 
Africa. "Where a goat passes, a man can pass; where a man, a 
whole battalion; where a battalion, a horse or so may get through 
with a little trouble; and finally, you will perhaps manage even to 
pass a field-gun."a In fact we should not be at all astonished if 
these sheep-tracks and foot-paths marked on the maps, should 
even turn out to be country roads, bad enough, but quite 
practicable for a flanking movement, in which even artillery might 
accompany the columns. In that case the turning should be carried 
out with as large a force as possible, and then the Russians will 
soon have to give up their intrenchments, even without a serious 
front attack. But if these paths should be impracticable for 
field-guns (rockets and mountain howitzers can go anywhere), the 
turning parties will take the character of mere movable columns, 
drive back the Russian troops as far as they can from the upper 
valleys of the Belbek, pass into that of the Katsha, menace the 
Russian rear, intercept their communications, destroy their con­
voys,  collect trustworthy information, reconnoiter the country, 
draw upon themselves as many Russian detachments as possible, 
until that road which offers the least difficulties is made so far 
practicable as to admit of the passage of artillery. Then a strong 
force may be sent after them, and the Russian rear be so seriously 
menaced as to force an evacuation of the intrenchments. That an 
advance of mere infantry and light cavalry across these mountains 
on the left flank and rear of the Russians can have that effect we 
do not believe, as they could not seriously menace the Russian 
communications without descending into a country where artillery 
regains its full effect, and thereby secures the advantage to the 
party possessed of it. But there is no doubt that with a little 
ingenuity artillery can be made to follow the turning columns. At 
Jena,157 Napoleon exhibited what can be done with a simple 
foot-path winding up a steep hill; in five hours the road was wide 
enough for guns, the Prussians were taken in flank, and the next 
day's victory secured. And where a Crimean araba can pass, a 
field-gun can pass too; some of the pathways in question, 
particularly those from the Chernaya to the Belbek, appear to be 
such old araba country roads. 
But to carry out such a movement the possession of sufficient 
A free rendering of one of Napoleon I's principles of mountain warfare.— Ed. 

=====第235页=====
The Crimean War 205 
forces is the first condition. The Russians will certainly have the 
advantage of numbers and of the better knowledge of the ground. 
The first may be done away with by a bold advance of Omer 
Pasha from Eupatoria to the Alma. Though the Russian superiori­
ty in cavalry will not allow him to move fast or far, yet by good 
maneuvering and well-secured communications he may force 
Prince Gorchakoff to detach more infantry against him. But for 
the Allies to depend upon any such collateral operation would be 
a matter of great uncertainty. In order to carry out, therefore, the 
advance from Balaklava, the best thing for them would be to 
transfer (as they were some time since reported to have done3), a 
day or two before the actual attack, some 20,000 Turks to the 
Chersonese, where they would be worth twice their number in 
Eupatoria. This would allow them to attack the Russians with 
nearly 110,000 men, including about 6,000 cavalry, to which force 
the Russians could oppose about 65,000 or 75,000 infantry 
(including 15,000 to 20,000 men from the garrison of the north 
side) and 10,000 cavalry. But as soon as the turning corps should 
begin to tell upon the left flank and rear of the Russians, the force 
to be opposed to it would be comparatively weak, as the drafts 
from the north side could not expose themselves to be cut off 
from their intrenched camp around the citadel; and therefore the 
Allies, being enabled to employ the whole of their available 
field-army wherever they like, would have a great superiority. In 
this case then they might with certainty count upon success; but if 
they attack the Russians single-handed, and the numerical 
proportions of both armies as stated by the most trustworthy 
authorities be correct, they stand but little chance. Their flanking 
corps would be too weak, and might be entirely neglected by the 
Russians, who by a bold sally from their lines could drive the 
weakened Allies down the precipices into the Chernaya. 
Another movement on the part of the Allies has been 
suggested—an immediate assault on the south side of Sevastopol. 
We are even told that a peremptory order to undertake this 
assault had been telegraphed from Paris, and that Canrobert 
resigned because he did not feel warranted in executing a 
movement which in his opinion would imply a loss of 40,000 men. 
Now, from what we have seen of the military notions of Louis 
Bonaparte as displayed in his interference with the present 
campaign, it is not at all incredible that such an order should have 
a The words in parenthesis were probably added by the editors of the New-York 
Doih Tribune.—Ed. 

=====第236页=====
206 Frederick Engels 
been given. But what is less probable is that even a reckless 
sabreur3  like Pélissier should lend himself to execute such an order. 
The last month must have given the French soldiers a pretty good 
idea of what the resistance is like which they are to meet with on 
storming. And an operation which cannot be carried out without 
the loss of some 40,000 men—above one-third of the whole army 
available for the assault—has certainly very few favorable chances 
of success. Pélissier may eagerly wish to pick up the Marshal's 
baton which has slipped from the hands of Canrobert, but we very 
much doubt whether he is enough of a Bonapartist to stake his 
fortune and reputation against such odds. For supposing even that 
the assault was successful; that not only the first line of defense 
but also the second line was taken; that even the barricades, 
crenellated houses and defensive barracks forbidding the ap­
proach to the shore forts—that these shore forts too were carried 
and the whole of the south side in the hands of the Allies, at a loss 
we will say of only 30,000 to a Russian loss of 20,000—what then? 
The Allies would have lost 10,000 men more than the Russians, 
the place would instantly have to be abandoned; and the campaign 
in the field would become even more difficult than before. 
But there is one fact which at once precludes the idea of an 
immediate general assault. From some half-official reports we 
were induced in a former article on the siegeb  to admit, merely for 
argument's sake, that the Russians had been driven out of their 
new outworks in front of the place. We stated at the same time 
that we had every reason to doubt the correctness of such reports, 
as any such advantage gained would have been loudly and 
distinctly announced by the Allies. Now we are indeed positively 
informed by the Russians that the Kamtschatka (the Mamelon), 
Selenghinsk and Volhynsk redoubts are still in their possession, 
while evidence from the allied camp not only goes to confirm this, 
but also acknowledges that further outworks have been thrown up 
by the besieged. Thus the advantage gained by the Allies in 
pushing their advanced approaches nearer to the fortress 
has been fully made up for by the counter-approaches of the 
Russians, and the line where both parties can meet each other in 
equal strength is very distant yet from the main ditch. Now, an 
assault becomes advisable only when the line, where the force of 
the attack for common siege operations is equal to that of the 
defense, lies in the main ditch  itself;  otherwise it is clear that the 
a War-horse.— Ed. 
See this volume, p. 170.— Ed. 

=====第237页=====
The Crimean War 207 
storming columns would be broken down and shattered before 
they could reach the top of the breastwork. Thus as long as the 
Russians cannot be driven back across the main ditch, it will be 
impossible to assault the main rampart situated behind this main 
ditch. As to carrying the second line constructed behind that ditch, 
it is entirely out of the question at the present time. 
There may be a chance for partial assaults on the left or town 
side from the Quarantine to the Flagstaff Bastion where the main 
French attack is carried on. But here the policy of the French 
Government keeps us in utter darkness as to the extent and 
strength of the Russian outworks, and the recent Russian 
dispatches, of late being all telegraphic, contain no definite and 
detailed description. On the Flagstaff Bastion, however, it is 
acknowledged by the Russians themselves that the French works 
are close to the main rampart and that a mine has been sprung 
under it, though without any considerable results. Here, then, a 
local assault might be successful but from the salient position of 
this bastion and the commanding ground behind (the Russian 
Jasonovsky Redoubt3) it is very doubtful whether anything would 
be gained by the conquest of the bastion, which must have been 
isolated from the remainder of the works by one or two 
cross-ramparts in its rear, thereby preventing the storming 
columns from establishing themselves in it or at least from 
penetrating any further. 
Thus whether the assault is attempted, or field operations are 
undertaken, the Allies will have to struggle with considerable 
difficulties. But at any rate the drowsy style of warfare pursued 
since the arrival of the Allies before Sevastopol is drawing to a 
close; and more stirring events and operations of real military 
interest may now be looked for. 
Written about May 21, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4411, June 8, 1855; re­
printed in the New-York Weekly Tribune, 
No. 718, June 16, 1855 as a leading 
article 
a The New-York Daily Tribune has: "the Russian Garden Battery".— Ed. 

=====第238页=====
208 
Karl Marx 
ON THE REFORM MOVEMENT 
London, May 21. Today all the London newspapers publish an 
address from the City reformers, or rather their executive 
committee, to the "People of England". 3 The style of the 
document is dry, businesslike, not quite as lofty as that of the 
trade circulars that periodically emanate from the same source, 
offering for sale coffee, tea, sugar, spices and other products of 
the tropical countries in a more or less tastefully arranged fabric 
of phrases. The Association15 promises to provide the material for a 
veritable physiology of the various government departments and to 
disclose all the mysteries of Downing Street,0 Downing Street 
which is full of hereditary wisdom. This is what it promises. For its 
own part, it demands that the electoral districts of England send to 
Parliament candidates freely chosen according to their hearts' 
desire and recommended solely by merit, instead of, as hitherto, 
imposed on them by the aristocratic clubs. It thus recognises the 
existing privileged electoral districts as normal, the selfsame 
districts which, in their corruptibility, their reliance on a few clubs, 
their lack of independence, it admits to being the birthplace of the 
present House of Commons, and thus of the present government. 
It does not want to dissolve these exclusive districts, nor to extend 
them, but simply to moralise. Why not then appeal directly to the 
conscience of the oligarchy  itself,  instead of threatening it with the 
abolition of its privileges? It should at any rate be an easier job to 
convert the oligarchical heads than the oligarchical electoral 
Excerpts from this address were later published in The  People's  Paper, No. 160, 
May 26, 1855.— Ed. 
b The Administrative Reform Association (see this volume, pp. 166-69).— Ed. 
10 Downing Street is the British Prime Minister's official residence.— Ed. 

=====第239页=====
On the Reform Movement 209 
districts. The City Association would obviously like to bring into 
existence an anti-aristocratic movement, but a movement within 
the limits of the legal (as Guizot called it), the official England. 
And how do they intend to rouse the stagnant bog of electoral 
districts? How to drive them into emancipating themselves from 
interests and customs which make them the vassals of a few select 
clubs and the pillars of the governing oligarchy? With a physiology 
of Downing Street? Not entirely. Also by means of pressure from 
without, by mass meetings and the like. And how are they going to 
set the non-official, non-enfranchised masses in motion so as to 
influence the privileged circle of electoral districts? By inviting 
them to renounce the People's Charter (which basically contains 
nothing but the demand for universal suffrage and the conditions 
under which alone it can become a reality in England), and to 
acknowledge the privileges of these electoral districts which, by the 
admission of the City reformers themselves, are in the process of 
decay. The City Association must be aware of the example of the 
"financial and parliamentary reformers". It knows that this 
movement, headed by Hume, Bright, Cobden, Walmsley and 
Thompson, failed because it sought to replace the People's 
Charter by the so-called Little Charter,159 because it merely 
wanted to make concessions to the masses, merely to reach a 
compromise with them. Do they imagine that without concessions 
they can achieve what the others could not achieve despite their 
concessions? Or do they deduce from the Anti-Corn Law 
movement that it is possible to set the English people in motion 
for partial reforms? But the object of that movement was very 
general, very popular, very tangible. The symbol of the Anti-Corn 
Law League was, as is well known, a big thick loaf of bread in 
contrast to the diminutive loaf of the Protectionists. A loaf of 
bread, particularly in the famine year 1846, naturally speaks quite 
a different popular dialect from a "physiology of Downing 
Street". We need not recall a well-known booklet, The  Physiology  of 
the City.3 There it is demonstrated with the greatest precision that 
however well the gentlemen may run their own businesses, in the 
management of common enterprises, for example the various 
insurance companies, they more or less faithfully follow the official 
pattern of Downing Street. Their management of the railways; 
with the glaring frauds, swindles and total neglect of safety 
The reference is to D. M. Evans' pamphlet The City; or, the  Physiology  of London 
Business, published anonymously. Marx quotes a passage from it in Volume III of 
Capital.— Ed. 

=====第240页=====
210 Karl Marx 
precautions, is so notorious that the question has been raised more 
than once in the press, in Parliament and outside Parliament 
whether the railways should not be placed under direct state 
control and taken out of the hands of the private capitalists! The 
physiology of Downing Street, then, will accomplish nothing—as the 
English say, "This will not do, sir!"a 
Written on May 21, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 237, May 24, 1855 
Marked with the sign x 
Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 

=====第241页=====
211 
Karl Marx 
A CRITIQUE OF THE CRIMEAN AFFAIR.— 
FROM PARLIAMENT 
London, May 23. The menacing discontent in the allied Army 
and Navy outside Sevastopol caused by the recall of the Kerch 
expedition has found an echo, if only a weak, faint one, in the 
London press. People are beginning to fear that the unity and 
artistic course of the war drama in the Crimea are threatened less 
by the Russians than by the presumptuous and capricious 
intervention of a deus ex machina,* the military genius of Napo­
leon III. The exhibition of this genius in the well-known 
strategic didactical "essay" in the Moniteur b is in fact anything but 
soothing and reassuring. Until now, however, the distance between 
the theatre of war and the Tuileries has provided a kind of 
guarantee against actual interference by the military dilettantism 
of Paris. Now submarine telegraph has eliminated the distances, 
and with the distances the guarantee, and John Bull, who is wont 
to call himself "the most thinking people of the world", c is 
beginning to reflect, to grumble and complain that the British 
Army and Navy are expected to furnish the corpus viled for the 
inherited and providentially existing "military genius", to perform 
his experiments on. 
Literally "a god from a machine" (in the ancient Greek and Roman theatre, 
actors playing gods appeared on the stage with the help of machinery); in a 
figurative sense, a person or event that appears suddenly and solves a difficult 
situation.— Ed. 
This refers to the leading article "Paris, le 10 avril. Expédition d'Orient", 
published in Le Moniteur universel, No. 101, April 11, 1855. The article contained 
Napoleon Ill's instructions to Marshal Saint-Arnaud. For a critique of it see this 
volume, pp. 146-50.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English words.— Ed. 
Literally "worthless body".— Ed. 

=====第242页=====
212 Karl Marx 
Today's Morning  Herald 3 asserts positively that the expedition 
has been recalled because Bonaparte has revived his dangerous 
idea of storming Sevastopol from the south side. We do not doubt 
for a moment that the military genius of the Tuileries is obsessed 
by this idée fixe, but we cannot persuade ourselves that even a 
simple sabreur h such as Pélissier is capable of carrying out such a 
senselessly ruinous plan. Hence we believe that it has been decided 
to attempt a mass crossing of the Chernaya and that it was 
deemed inadvisable to split the main force by detaching a corps of 
12,000 men. In fact, instead of detaching these 12,000 men, just 
before the army sets out, 15,000-20,000 Turks ought to be embarked 
in Eupatoria and incorporated into the main army, only leaving 
behind a garrison of sufficient size to hold the place. As stated in an 
earlier letter, c the entire success of the campaign depends on the 
strength of the army that crosses the Chernaya. However that may 
be, the recall of the Kerch expedition is fresh evidence of the 
uncertainty and vacillation and the shilly-shallying bungling that are 
nowadays passed off as "idées napoléoniennes". d 
Meanwhile the heroes improvised for the purpose of the coup 
d'état wear out with incredible rapidity. The array was headed by 
Espinasse, who after his ignominious campaign in the Dobrudja 160 
was forced by the Zouaves to retreat head over heels to Paris. This 
Espinasse is the same man who, after being entrusted with 
guarding the building of the National Assembly, handed it over 
to its enemies.161  The second in the line of descent was Leroy, 
alias Saint-Arnaud, the War Minister of December 2. He was followed 
by Forey, so bold in the persecution of the unfortunate peas­
ants of south-east France, and so considerately humane towards 
the Muscovites. The army's suspicion that he was revealing the se­
crets of the French Council of War to the Russians made it neces­
sary to remove him from the Crimea to Africa. Finally Canrobert 
was demoted on account of notorious incompetence. The irony of 
history has appointed Pélissier as his successor, and thus more or 
less commander-in-chief of the Anglo-French army—the same 
Pélissier of whom in 1841 it was asserted over and over again in 
Parliament, in London officers' clubs and at country-meetings, 6 in 
The Times and in Punch, that no honourable English officer could 
a "Siege of Sebastopol", The Morning  Herald,  No. 22438, May 23, 1855.— Ed. 
War-horse.— Ed. 
See this volume, p. 137.— Ed. 
An allusion to Louis Bonaparte's book Des idées napoléoniennes published in 
Paris in 1839.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English words "country-meetings".— Ed. 

=====第243页=====
A Critique of the Crimean Affair 213 
ever serve alongside "that ferocious monster".* And now the 
British Army is not only serving alongside him, but under 
him—the entire British Army! Just after the Whigs and their 
Foreign Secretary Palmerston had been defeated by the Tories, 
Palmerston called a meeting of his constituents in Tiverton and 
proved his right to break the Anglo-French alliance and unite with 
Russia by the fact that the French government, that Louis Philippe 
was employing such a "monster" as Pélissier in his service. It must 
be admitted that while the French Army is paying dearly for its 
revolt in December, things are not all "roses" for England either, 
in its alliance with the restored empire. 
The Ministry suffered a defeat in the Commons yesterday, 
which proves nothing except that Parliament occasionally avenges 
itself on the Ministers for the scorn it enjoys "out of doors".b A 
certain Mr. Wise tabled the motion, that 
"it is the opinion of this House that complete revision of our diplomatic 
establishments recommended in the report of the Select Committee of 1850 on 
Official Salaries should be carried into effect".c 
Mr. Wise is a friend of Palmerston. His motion has been drifting 
about on the agenda of the House for about two years without 
coming up for discussion. Chance yesterday cast it before the 
discontented Commons. Wise made his speech, thinking that, after 
a few remarks by Palmerston, he would be able to play the usual 
game and withdraw his motion. But in contravention of the 
agreement Mr. Baillie picked up the motion that Wise had 
dropped and it was carried, despite Wise and Palmerston, by a 
majority of 112 to 57. This defeat did not in the least worry an 
old experienced tactician like Palmerston for he knows that in 
order to preserve an appearance of independence the House must 
occasionally condemn a ministerial motion to death and promote 
an anti-ministerial motion to life. Disraeli's motion, on the other 
hand, had the effect of an electric shock on the ministerial 
benches.162 Palmerston  himself,  a master at parliamentary play­
acting, congratulated "the writers and actors of this unforgettable 
scene". This was not irony. It was the involuntary tribute of an 
artist to his rival when the latter beats him at his own game. In the 
Monday sittingd Palmerston had toyed so skilfully with Milner 
a Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English words.— Ed. 
c Wise's motion in the House of Commons and the following debate were 
reported in The Times, No.  22061,  May 23, 1855.— Ed. 
d May 21, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第244页=====
214 Karl Marx 
Gibson and Gladstone and Herbert and Bright and Lord Vane 
that it seemed certain that all debates on foreign policy would be 
postponed until after Whitsun, the Ministry and House being 
obliged to proceed in a particular manner, and that the noble 
Viscount could be sure of a dictatorship of several weeks' 
duration. The only day still available for debate, Thursday,"1  was 
reserved for Layard's reform motion. So no one could prevent 
Palmerston from concluding peace over Whitsun and, as he has 
done more than once, surprising the House when it re-assembled 
with one of his notorious treaties. The House, for its own part, 
might not have been unwilling to submit to this fate of surprise. 
Peace made behind its back, even peace à tout prix, was acceptable 
with a few post festum gestures of protest for decency's sake. But 
the moment the House and the Ministry were obliged to declare 
their views before the adjournment, the latter could no longer 
spring any surprises, nor the former let itself be taken un­
awares. Hence the consternation when Disraeli got up and tabled 
his motion and Layard relinquished his day to Disraeli. This "con­
spiracy between Layard and Disraeli", as the Post called the 
affair, thus brought to naught all the skilful manoeuvring since 
the "end" of the Vienna Conference, which has not yet been 
concluded. 163 
Written on May 23, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 241, May 26, 1855 
Marked with the sign x Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a May 24, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第245页=====
215 
Frederick Engels 
THE NEW FRENCH COMMANDER 1 
It is certain that Gen. Canrobert's resignation of the command 
of the French army in the Crimea did not take place a moment 
too soon. The morale of the army was already in a very 
unsatisfactory and doubtful state. After they had been made to 
undergo the hardships and dangers of an unparalleled Winter 
campaign, the soldiers had been kept in something like order and 
good spirits by the return of Spring and by ever-repeated 
promises of a speedy and glorious termination of the siege. But 
day after day passed away without making any progress, while the 
Russians actually advanced out of their lines and constructed 
redoubts on the disputed ground between the two parties. This 
roused the spirit of the French soldiers, the Zouaves mutinied, and 
the consequence was that on February 23 they were led to the 
butchery on Mount Sapun. A little more bustling—it can hardly 
be called activity—was then shown on the part of the allied 
commanders; but there was evidently no distinct aim, and no 
definite plan was followed up consistently. 
Again, the spirit of mutiny among the French was kept down by 
the continued sallies of the Russians and by the opening of the 
second bombardment which was — positively for the last time—to 
end in the grand spectacle of the assault. But the fire went on, 
slackened, and slackened still more, and at last ceased without any 
attempt at an assault. Then came engineering operations, slow, 
difficult and barren of those results which keep up the spirits of 
soldiers. Soon they got tired again of nightly trench-fighting, 
where hundreds fell to no visible purpose. Again the assault was 
demanded, and again Canrobert had to make promises which he 
knew he could not fulfill. Then Pélissier saved him from a renewal 

=====第246页=====
216 Frederick Engels 
of disorderly scenes by the night attack of the 1st of May; it is 
stated that not only did Pélissier plan this attack, but even execute 
it in spite of a counter-order from Canrobert arriving the moment 
the troops were put in motion. This affair is said to have revived 
the courage of the soldiers. 
Meantime the reserve and the Piedmontese arrived. The 
Chersonese became crowded. The soldiers considered that these 
reenforcements enabled them to do anything. Why was nothing 
done? The expedition to Kertch was resolved upon, and sailed. 
But before it had reached the offing of that town a dispatch from 
Paris induced Canrobert to recall it. Raglan of course gave in at 
once.  Brown and Lyons, the commanders of the British land and 
sea forces on this expedition, besought their French colleagues to 
attack the place in disobedience to the order; in vain—the 
expedition had to sail back, and it is even stated that Canrobert 
had in his hurry misread the order, which was merely conditional. 
Now the exasperation of the troops was no longer to be mastered. 
Even the English spoke in unmistakable terms; the French were in 
a state bordering on mutiny. Accordingly there was nothing left 
for Canrobert but to resign the command of an army over which 
he had lost all control and influence. The only possible successor 
was Pélissier. The soldiers were sick of these young generals, 
advanced to the highest honors in the quick hotbed of Bonapar-
tism. They had all the while been clamoring for a leader of long 
standing of the old African school—a man who had held a 
responsible command in the Algerian wars, and held it with credit. 
Pélissier was almost the only man of the sort at the command of 
the Emperor; he had been sent there with the evident intention of 
being, sooner or later, made the successor of Canrobert. Whatever 
else his qualifications might be, he had the confidence of the 
troops, and that is a great deal. 
But he takes his command under difficult circumstances. He 
must act, and speedily too, before the men lose the freshness of 
the enthusiasm which the certainty of immediate action must have 
inspired them with. The assault being impossible, nothing remains 
but to take the field, and that can be done only by turning the 
Russian position in the manner we have previously described.3 
Indeed, we find our views on this subject confirmed by a British 
officer in the London Morning  Herald,  who says that it is the 
general opinion among competent men that there is no other way 
to take the field with success. 
a See this volume, pp. 201-07.— Ed. 

=====第247页=====
The New French Commander 217 
There is however one very serious difficulty in carrying out this 
plan. The French with all their army have no more means of 
transport than will supply 30,000 men for a very short distance 
from the coast. As to the English, their means of transport would 
be exhausted if they had to supply one single division no further 
off than Chorgun on the Chernaya. How then is the field to be 
taken, in case of success the north side of Sevastopol invested, the 
enemy pursued to Bakshiserai and a junction effected with Omer 
Pasha? Of course the Russians will take very good care to leave 
nothing but ruins behind them, and a supply of carts, horses or 
camels can only be obtained after the Allies have completely 
routed their enemy. We shall see how Pélissier will extricate 
himself from this difficulty. 
Written about May 24, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4414, June 12, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1049, June 15, 1855 as a 
leading article 

=====第248页=====
218 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
PROLOGUE AT LORD PALMERSTON'S.—COURSE 
OF THE LATEST EVENTS IN THE CRIMEA 165 
London, May 24. No sooner had Disraeli's motion 166 presented 
the prospect of a regular battle between the Ins and Outs* in the 
House of Commons than Palmerston sounded the alarm and, a 
few hours before the commencement of the sitting, he asked his 
ministerial retinue along with Peelites, Manchester School and 
so-called Independents to come to his official residence in 
Downing Street.*3 Two hundred and three M.P.s turned up, 
including Mr. Layard who felt incapable of resisting the ministerial 
siren-call. Palmerston played the diplomat, the penitent, the 
apologist, the appeaser, the wheedler. Smilingly he bore with the 
censorious rebukes of Messrs Bright, Lowe and Layard. He left it 
to Lord Robert Grosvenor and Sir James Graham to mediate with 
the "agitated". From the moment he saw the malcontents 
clustering about him in his official residence, mingling with his 
faithful followers, he knew he had them in his pocket. They were 
disgruntled but anxious for reconciliation. Thus the result of the 
sitting in the Commons was anticipated; nothing more remained 
but the parliamentary performance of the comedy before the 
public. The crisis was over. We shall be sending a brief account of 
this comedy as soon as the final act has been played out. 
The types of illness peculiar to the spring and summer season in 
the Crimea have been reactivated by the return of warm, humid 
weather. Cholera and ague have again made their appearance in 
Marx uses the English words "Ins" and "Outs" (the reference is to the 
supporters and opponents of the government).— Ed. 
10 Downing Street is the official residence of the British Prime Minister. These 
details are contained in "The Ministry and Its Supporters" published in The Times, 
No. 22063, May 25,  \855.~Ed . 

=====第249页=====
Prologue at Lord Palmerston's 219 
the allied camp, not as yet in particularly virulent form but 
sufficiently so to provide a warning for the future. Also in 
evidence is the miasma given off by the mass of putrefying animal 
matter that is buried only a few inches below ground throughout 
the entire extent of the Chersonese. The morale of the besieging 
army is also in a very unsatisfactory state. After they had undergone 
the hardships and dangers of an unparalleled Winter campaign, the 
soldiers had been kept in something like order and good spirits by 
the return of Spring and by ever-repeated promises of a speedy 
and glorious termination of the siege. But day after day passed 
away without making any progress, while the Russians actually 
advanced out of their lines and constructed redoubts on the 
disputed ground between the two parties. The Zouaves became 
unruly and were consequently led to the slaughter on Mount 
Sapun on February 23. A little more bustling—it can hardly be 
called activity—was then shown on the part of the allied 
commanders; but there was evidently no distinct aim, and no 
definite plan was followed up consistently. 
Again, the spirit of mutiny among the French was kept down by 
the continued sallies of the Russians which kept them occupied 
and by the opening of the second bombardment which was this 
time definitely to end in the grand spectacle of the assault. A 
deplorable fiasco ensued. Then came engineering operations, slow, 
difficult and barren of those results which keep up the spirits of 
soldiers. Soon they got tired again of nightly trench-fighting, 
where hundreds fell to no visible purpose. Again the assault was 
demanded, and again Canrobert was compelled to make promises 
which he knew he could not fulfil. Then Pélissier saved him from 
a renewal of disorderly scenes by the night attack of the 1st of 
May; it is stated that Pélissier executed it in spite of a 
counter-order from Canrobert arriving the moment the troops 
were put in motion. The success of this affair is said to have 
revived the courage of the soldiers. Meantime the Piedmontese 
reserve arrived; the Chersonese became crowded. The soldiers con­
sidered that these reinforcements enabled them to go into action 
immediately. Something had to be done. The expedition to Kerch 
was resolved upon, and sailed. But before it had reached the offing 
of that town a dispatch from Paris induced Canrobert to recall it. 
Raglan of course gave in at once. Brown, and Lyons, the 
commanders of the British land and sea forces on this expedition, 
besought their French colleagues to attack the place in spite of the 
countermand; in vain — the expedition had to sail back. Now the 
exasperation of the troops was no longer to be mastered. Even the 

=====第250页=====
220 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
English spoke in unmistakable terms; the French were in a state 
bordering on mutiny. Accordingly there was nothing left for 
Canrobert but to resign the command of an army over which he 
had lost all control and influence. 
Pélissier was the only possible successor, since the soldiers, long 
sick of generals who had shot up in the forcing-house of 
Bonapartism, had been repeatedly calling for a leader of the old African 
school. Pélissier enjoys the confidence of the soldiers but he is 
taking command under difficult circumstances. He must act, and 
act quickly. Since an assault is impossible, there is no other choice 
than to move into the field against the Russians, not, however, in 
the manner we have previously described when the entire army 
would have to march along one single road that had, moreover, 
been heavily barricaded by the Russians, but by distributing the 
army over the numerous small upland paths and tracks mostly 
used only by shepherds and their flocks, which would make 
it possible to outflank the Russian position. One difficulty arises 
here.  The French have only sufficient means of transport to supply 
about 30,000 men for a very short distance from the coast. 
The means of transport of the English would be exhausted if they 
had to convey a single division no further than Chorgun on the 
Chernaya. Given this lack of transport it is difficult to see how then 
is the field to be taken, in case of success the north side of Sevasto­
pol invested, the enemy pursued to Bakshiserai and a junction 
effected with Omer Pasha? Especially since the Russians in accor­
dance with their custom will take good care to leave nothing but 
ruins behind them, so that a supply of carts, horses, camels, etc., 
can only be obtained after the Allies have completely routed their 
enemy. We shall see how Pélissier will extricate himself from this 
difficulty. 
We have previously drawn attention to a number of peculiar 
circumstances connected with Pelissier's appointment.3  However 
there is a further aspect to be considered here. When the war 
began, that Bonapartist general par  excellence,  S[ain]t-Arnaud, was 
entrusted with the supreme command. He did his emperor the 
service of promptly dying. Not one of the Bonapartists of the first 
rank was appointed in his place, neither Magnan, nor Castellane, 
nor Roguet, nor Baraguay d'Hilliers. Recourse was had to 
Canrobert, a man tarred neither so heavily nor so long with the 
Bonapartist brush, but having greater African experience. Now, 
with another change of command, the Bonapartists du lendemain b 
See this volume, pp. 212-13.— Ed. 
Of tomorrow.— Ed. 

=====第251页=====
Prologue at Lord Palmerston's 221 
have been passed over in the same way as those de la veille, 3 and 
the post awarded to a simple African general of no pronounced 
political complexion, but with many years of service and a name in 
the army. Must not this descending line inevitably lead to 
Changarnier, Lamoricière or Cavaignac, i.e. away from Bonapar-
tism? 
"Unfitness for peace no less than for war—such is our 
situation!" observed a day or two ago a French statesman for whom 
everything is at stake with the imperial régime. Every action of the 
restored empire, right up to the appointment of  Pelissier,  proves that 
he was right. 
Written on May 24, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 243, May 29, 1855 Published in English for the first 
Marked with the sign x 
The English version was published in 
the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4414, 
June 12, 1855 and reprinted in the 
New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1049, 
June 15, 1855 as a leading article 
a Of the day before.— Ed. 

=====第252页=====
222 
Karl Marx 
PARLIAMENTARY REFORM.—THE BREAK-OFF 
AND CONTINUATION OF THE VIENNA CONFERENCE. 
—THE SO-CALLED WAR OF ANNIHILATION 
London, May 26. Further details have become known regarding 
the Comité du Salut Ministériel 3 called by Lord Palmerston the day 
before yesterday before the opening of the House of Commons, 
characteristic of the parliamentary mechanism and the position of 
the various factions which have provided the Ministry with a 
majority of 100 votes. Right at the outset Palmerston threatened 
resignation if Disraeli's motion 167 were carried. He threatened the 
prospect of a Tory Ministry}1 The so-called radical parliamen­
tarians, poor fellows,0 have enjoyed the privilege of having this 
great and ultimate threat suspended over them since 1830, 
whenever they break out in mutiny. It never fails to recall them to 
a sense of discipline. And why? Because they fear the mass 
movement that is inevitable under a Tory Ministry. How literally 
correct this view is may be gathered from the confession of a 
radical who is himself a minister at the moment, if only Minister 
responsible for the Crown Forests, Sir William Molesworth. This 
job is well suited for a man who has all along possessed the talent 
of not being able to see the wood for the trees. M.P. for South-
wark, a part of London, he received an invitation from his con­
stituents to attend a public meeting for Southwark held last Wed­
nesday.0 (N.B. At this meeting, as at the majority of those hitherto 
held in the provinces, a resolution was passed that administrative 
Committee of Ministerial Safety. (See this volume, p. 218).— Ed. 
In his speech in the House of Commons on May 25, 1855, a report on which 
was published in The Times, No. 22064, May 26, 1855.—Ed. 
Marx uses the English words "poor fellows".— Ed. 
d May 23, 1855.—Ed. 

=====第253页=====
Parliamentary Reform 223 
reform without prior parliamentary reform is sham and humbug.3 
Molesworth did not appear but sent a letter and in this letter the 
radical and Cabinet minister declared: "If Mr. Disraeli's motion is 
carried the need for administrative reform will become more 
evident." Which "evidently" means: If the Tories take over the 
government the reform movement will become serious. The threat 
of resignation, though, was not the biggest gun that Palmerston 
fired off. He alluded to the dissolution of Parliament and to the fate 
of the many unfortunates who scarcely three years ago had bought 
their way into the "honourable House" at tremendous sacrifice. 
This argument was irresistible. It was no longer just a question of 
his resignation. It was a question of their resignation. 
Although Palmerston thus secured a majority of 100 votes 
against Disraeli's motion, by threatening some with his resignation, 
and others with their ejection from the House of Commons, 
presenting some with the prospect of peace and others with the 
prospect of war—the newly founded coalition immediately col­
lapsed again, this happening during the public performance of the 
agreed farce. The statements which the ministers were induced to 
make during the debate neutralised the statements they had made 
en petit comité^ The mortar which loosely held together the 
reluctant groupings crumbled away, not in a hurricane but in the 
parliamentary wind. For in yesterday's sitting Roebuck put a 
question to the Prime Minister about the rumoured re-opening of 
the Vienna Conferences. He demanded to know whether the 
British ambassador in Vienna c was instructed to take part in these 
conferences. Ever since the return of Russell, that hapless 
diplomat, from Vienna, Palmerston, as is common knowledge, had 
rejected all debates on war or diplomacy on the pretext of not 
jeopardising the "admittedly interrupted but by no means 
concluded Vienna Conferences". Milner Gibson had withdrawn or 
postponed his motion168 last Mondayd because according to a 
statement by the noble Lord "the conferences were still pending". 
On that occasion Palmerston had expressly emphasised that the 
British government was leaving it to Austria, "our ally within 
certain limits", to devise new starting-points for peace negotia­
tions.  The continued existence of the Vienna Conference was, he 
said, beyond all doubt. Though Russell had left Vienna, West­
morland was continuing to reside in Vienna, where, moreover, 
a Marx uses the English words "sham" and "humbug".— Ed. 
In a small circle.— Ed. 
( J. F. Westmorland.— Ed. 
d May 21, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第254页=====
224 Karl Marx 
the plenipotentiaries of all the great powers were engaged in 
consultations; in other words, all the elements of a permanent 
conference were present.3 
Since Monday, the day Palnrerston favoured Parliament with 
these revelations, a major change had occurred in the situation. 
Disraeli's motion and a day spent debating itb separated the 
Palmerston of Monday from the Palmerston of Friday, and 
Disraeli had motivated his motion with the misgiving that the 
government might "drift into a shameful peace" during the 
recess, just as it had "drifted" into a shameful war under 
Aberdeen's auspices. Thus the outcome of the vote hung on 
Palmerston's answer to Roebuck's question. This time he could not 
call up the ghost of the Vienna Conference and inform the House 
that in Vienna they were deciding, while in the Halls of St. 
Stephen's0 they were debating: that here they were proposing but 
there they were disposing. This was all the more impossible as 
only the previous evening Russell had disowned Austria and the 
peace projects and the Vienna Conference. Accordingly he replied 
to Roebuck: the Vienna Conference had not been resumed, and 
the British envoy had no permission to attend a new conference 
without special instructions from Downing Street. Then Milner 
Gibson got up in a state of moral indignation. A few days ago, he 
said, the noble Lord had declared that the Conference was merely 
suspended, and that Westmorland possessed absolute authority to 
negotiate at it. Had he been deprived of this authority, if so, 
when?—Authority! replied Palmerston, his authority is as com­
plete as ever, but he has not the power to use it. To possess 
authority and to be permitted to use it are two different things. 
This answer to Roebuck's question broke the ties between the 
Ministry and the peace-at-any-price party augmented by the 
Peelites. But this was neither the only nor the most important 
"misunderstanding". The day before yesterday Russell was 
stretched on the rack by Disraeli and tortured and pricked with 
red-hot pins for hours. With one hand Disraeli displayed the 
rhetorical lionskin in which the Whig Aztec likes to parade; with 
the other, the diminutive gutta-percha manikin hiding beneath the 
Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on May 21, 1855. The Times, 
No. 22060, May 22, 1855.— Ed. 
May 24, 1855. Below Marx quotes a passage from Disraeli's speech and 
mentions the speeches of Gladstone and Russell at that sitting. The Times, 
No. 22063, May 25, 1855.— Ed. 
The House of Commons met in St. Stephen's Chapel, Westminster Palace, since 
1547.—  Ed. 

=====第255页=====
Parliamentary Reform 225 
skin. Although Russell  is armed against harsh words  by his  long 
parliamentary experience  and  adventures like  the  invulnerable 
Siegfried against wounds,  he was  unable  to remain composed  in 
the face  of this ruthless, naked exposure  of his  true  self. He 
pulled faces while Disraeli spoke.  He twisted  and  turned  in his  seat 
uneasily  and  incessantly while Gladstone followed with  his sermon. 
When Gladstone made  a rhetorical pause Russell  got up and was 
only reminded  by the  laughter  of the  House that  his turn  had not 
yet come.  At last Gladstone fell silent  for  good.  At last Russell 
could unburden  his  oppressed heart.  He now  told  the  House 
everything that  he had  wisely concealed from Prince Gorchakov 
and Herr  von  Titov. Russia, whose "honour  and  dignity"  he 
supported  at the  Vienna Conference,  now  seemed  to him to be a 
power unscrupulously striving  for mastery  of the  world, making 
treaties  as pretexts  for  wars  of conquest, making wars  so as to 
spread poison with treaties.  Not  only England  but all  Europe 
seemed  to him to be  threatened, nothing short  of a war of 
annihilation would  do. He  alluded  to Poland  too. In  short,  the 
Vienna diplomat  was  suddenly transformed into  a "street  de­
magogue"  (one of his  favourite expressions).  In a  cunningly 
calculating  way  Disraeli  had  launched  him  into this odic style. 
But immediately after  the division  Sir James Graham,  the  Peelite, 
rose to speak.3  Was he to  believe  his ears? Russell  had  declared  a 
"new  war" on  Russia,  a crusade,  a war to the  death,  a war of the 
nationalities.  The  matter  was too  serious  for the  debate  to be 
concluded  now. The  House  was  even more  in the  dark about  the 
intentions  of the  ministers than before. Russell thought that after 
the vote  he could cast  off the  lionskin  in his  usual  way. He 
therefore  did not  beat about  the  bush. Graham  had  "misunder­
stood"  him. He  only sought "security  for Turkey". There  you are! 
cried Disraeli,  you who  have acquitted  the  Ministry  of the  charge 
of "ambiguous language"  by rejecting  my  motion,  you now  hear 
how honest  he is!  This Russell retracts after  the vote  the whole  of 
the speech that  he made before  the vote!  I congratulate  you on 
your voting! 
The House could  not  resist this demonstratio  ad oculos b; the 
debate  was  adjourned until after  the  Whitsun recess;  the  victory 
won by the  Ministry  had  been lost again  in a  moment.  The 
comedy  was  only supposed  to consist  of two  acts,  and to end  with 
the division.  Now it has had an  epilogue added  to it  that threatens 
Graham's speech  in the  House  of Commons  on May 25,  1855.—  Ed. 
Visual  proof.— Ed. 

=====第256页=====
226 Karl Marx 
to be more serious than the grand historical drama. In the 
meanwhile the parliamentary recess will enable us to analyse the 
first two acts more closely. It remains unprecedented in the annals 
of Parliament that the debate should only start in earnest after the 
vote.  Hitherto, parliamentary battles have usually ended with the 
vote just as romantic novels end with the wedding. 
Written on May 26, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 245, May 30, 1855 Published in English for the first 
Marked with the sign X 

=====第257页=====
227 
Karl Marx 
DISRAELI'S MOTION 
London, May 28. The Commons were offered a "rich menu", as 
the elegant Gladstone put it, in the choice between Disraeli's 
motion and Baring's amendment to Disraeli's motion, between Sir 
William Heathcote's sub-amendment to Baring's amendment and 
Mr. Lowe's counter-sub-amendment against Disraeli, Baring and 
Sir William Heathcote. 3 Disraeli's motion contains a censure of the 
ministers and an address on the war to the Crown, the former 
definite and the latter flexible, both connected by a link accessible to 
the parliamentary thought process. The feeble form in which the 
war address was wrapped was soon explained. Disraeli had to 
apprehend mutiny in his own camp. One Tory, the Marquis of 
Granby, spoke against it, another, Lord Stanley, spoke for it, but 
both in a spirit of peace. Baring's amendment was a ministerial 
one. It suppresses the vote of censure against the Cabinet, and 
adopts the bellicose part of the motion with Disraeli's own 
terminology, only prefacing it with the words that the House "has 
seen with regret that the Conferences of Vienna have not led to a 
termination of hostilities". He is blowing hot and cold in the same 
breath. The "regret" for the peace lobby, the "continuation of the 
war" for the war lobby, no definite obligation on the part of the 
Cabinet to either lobby—a shell-trapb for votes, black and white, a 
part for the flute and a part for the trumpet. Heathcote's 
sub-amendment rounds off Baring's two-tongued amendment in a 
thoroughly idyllic turn of phrase by adding the words: "that the 
Disraeli's motion and the amendments to it, and his speech in the House of 
Commons on May 24, 1855, were reported in The Times, No. 22063, May 25, 1855; 
the amendments and the speech by Lowe in the Commons on May 25, 1855 were 
published in The Times, No. 22064, May 26, 1855.—Ed. 
Marx uses the English expression.— Ed. 

=====第258页=====
228 Karl Marx 
House is still cherishing the hope" ("cherishing" a is a thoroughly 
cosy expression) "that the communications in progress may arrive 
at a successful issue". Lowe's amendment, on the other hand, 
declares the peace negotiations closed with the rejection of the 
Third Point by Russia and thus motivates the war address to the 
Crown. It can be seen that the eclectic amendment of the Ministry 
has both sides, which it sought to hush up and neutralise, 
independently and peacefully confronting each other. Continua­
tion of the Vienna Conferences! cries Heathcote. No Vienna 
Conference! retorts Lowe. Vienna Conference and warfare! 
whispers Baring. We shall hear the themes of this terzetto 
performed in a week's time, and for the moment return to the 
debate on Disraeli's motion, on whose first nightb only three 
principal political personages appeared, Disraeli, Gladstone and 
Russell, the first pungent and drastic, the second smooth and 
casuistic, the third banal and blustering. 
We do not agree with the objection that in his personal attack 
on Russell, Disraeli lost sight of the "actual issue". The secrets of 
the Anglo-Russian war are not to be found on the battlefield but 
in Downing Street.0 Russell, Foreign Secretary at the time of the 
Petersburg Cabinet's secret communications, Russell, envoy ex­
traordinary at the time of the last Vienna Conference, Russell, at 
the same time Leader3 of the House of Commons; he is Downing 
Street personified, he is its secret revealed. Not because he is the 
soul of the Ministry but because he is its mouth-piece. 
Towards the end of 1854, relates Disraeli, Russell gave a blast 
on the trumpet of war, and among loud cheers3 told a full House: 
"England could not lay down arms until material guarantees are obtained, which, 
reducing Russia's power to proportions innocuous for Europe, will afford perfect 
security for the future." 
This man was a member of a Cabinet that approved the Vienna 
Protocol of December 5, 1853, in which the English and French 
plenipotentiaries stipulated that the war should not lead to a 
reduction or alteration of the "material conditions" of the Russian 
Empire.170 Clarendon, questioned by Lyndhurst about this pro­
tocol, declared on behalf of the Ministry: 
"It might be the will of Austria and of Prussia, but it was not the will of 
England and France that a reduction of Russian power in Europe should be brought 
about." 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b May 24,  1855.—  Ed. 
The Prime Minister's official residence.— Ed. 

=====第259页=====
Disraeli's Motion 229 
To the House Russell denounced the conduct of Emperor 
Nicholas as "false and fraudulent". In July 1854 he flippantly 
announced the invasion of the Crimea, declaring that the 
destruction of Sevastopol was a matter of European necessity. He 
finally brought about the fall of Aberdeen for, in his opinion, 
conducting the war too feebly. So much for the lionskin, now for 
the lion. Russell was Foreign Secretary for two or three months in 
1853,  at the time when England received the "secret and confidential 
correspondence' from Petersburg in which Nicholas openly de­
manded the partition of Turkey, to be attained chiefly through his 
pretended protection of the Christian subjects of Turkey, a 
protection which, as Nesselrode admits in his last despatch, has 
never existed. What did Russell do? He addressed a despatch to 
the British ambassador in Petersburg, 3 which literally says: 
"The more the Turkish Government adopts the rules of impartial law and equal 
administration, the less will the Emperor of Russia find it necessary to apply that 
exceptional 'protection' which he has found so burdensome and inconvenient, though, 
no doubt, prescribed by duty and sanctified by treaty." 
Thus Russell concedes the point at issue from the start. He not 
only declares the protection legal but obligatory. He traces it back 
to the Treaty of Kainardji.171 And what does the "Fourth Point" 
of the Vienna Conferenceb  state? That "the erroneous interpreta­
tion of the Treaty of Kuchuk-Kainardji was the principal cause 
of the present war". If we see Russell at the outbreak of war as 
the advocate of Russian rights—now renounced even by Nessel­
rode —at the end of the first stage of the war, at the Vienna 
Conference, we observe him as the champion of Russia's honour. 
As soon as the real business, the discussion of the Third Point, 172 
began on March 26, the Russian-eater Russell rose and solemnly 
declared: 
"In the eyes of England and of her allies, the best and only admissible conditions 
of peace would be those which, being the most in harmony with the honour and 
dignity of Russia, should at the same time be sufficient for the security of Europe, 
etc." 
On April 17 the Russian envoys therefore refused to take the 
initiative in making proposals for the Third Point, being convinced 
after Russell's statement that the conditions offered by the allied 
envoys would be conceived more in the Russian spirit than any 
that Russia herself could devise. But was the limitation of Russian 
naval forces "most in harmony with Russia's honour"? In his latest 
G. H. Seymour.— Ed. 
In this paragraph the Neue Oder-Zeitung has "Vienna Congress" instead of 
"Vienna Conference".— Ed. 

=====第260页=====
230 Karl Marx 
circular Nesselrode therefore adhered firmly to Russell's conces­
sions of March 26. He quotes Russell. He asks him whether the 
proposals of April 19 are "the best and only admissible ones". 
Russell appears as the patron of Russia on the threshold of war. 
He appears as her patron at the end of the first stage of the war, 
at the green table in Count Buol's palace. 
Thus far Disraeli against Russell. He then traced both the 
disasters at the front and the discord in the country itself back to 
the contradictory actions of the Ministry, which is working for war in 
the Crimea and peace in Vienna, combining warlike diplomacy 
with diplomatic warfare. 
Disraeli exclaimed: 
"I deny that all you have to do to make war is to levy taxes and to fit out 
expeditions. [...] You must keep up the spirit of the people. You cannot do this 
if you are perpetually impressing on the country that peace is impending and [...] 
that the point of difference between ourselves and our opponents is, [...] after all, [...] 
comparatively speaking, of a very petty character. Men will endure great sacrifices if 
they think they are encountering an enemy of colossal power [...]. A nation will not 
count the sacrifices which it makes if it supposes that it is engaged in a struggle for its 
fame, its existence, and its power; but when you come to a doubled and tripled income 
tax, when you come to draw men away from their homes for military service, when 
you darken the hearts3 of England with ensanguined calamities—when you do all 
this, men must not be told that this is merely a question of whether [...] Russia shall 
have four frigates or eight in the Black Sea.... If you would carry on war, it is necessary 
not merely to keep up the spirit of the nation, but also to keep up the spirit of foreign 
Powers; but you may rest assured that so long as you appeal to a foreign Power as a 
mediator that foreign Power will never be your ally.... Lord Palmerston told us that he 
was not going to make an ignominious peace [...]. The noble lord is witness for 
himself,  but who will be witness for the noble lord?... 
"...You cannot, however, extricate yourselves from these difficulties by 
conferences at Vienna. You will only increase your difficulties and augment your 
dangers if you trust to diplomacy. Your position is one that is entirely deceptive; 
and you never can carry on war with success unless [...] you are supported by an 
enthusiastic people, and unless [...] you can count upon allies [...] who know that 
you are determined to support them. 
"...I want this House by its decision tonight to put an end to that vicious 
double system by which we have so long carried on [...] war and diplomacy. I want it 
to say openly and in distinct language that the time for negotiations has passed. No 
man, I think, will be inclined to deny that proposition who has read Nesselrode's 
circular." 
Written on May 28, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 247, May 31, 1855 
Marked with the sign x 
In Disraeli's speech: "hearths".— Ed. Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第261页=====
281 
Karl Marx 
FROM PARLIAMENT 
London, May 29. Gladstones kind of eloquence has never been 
given more complete and exhaustive expression than in his 
"speech" 3 on Thursday evening.0 Polished blandness, empty 
profundity, unction not without poisonous ingredients, the velvet 
paw not without the claws, scholastic distinctions both grandiose 
and petty, quaestiones and quaestiuniculae,c the entire arsenal of 
probabilism m with its casuistic scruples and unscrupulous reserva­
tions,  its unhesitating motives and motivated hesitation, its humble 
pretensions of superiority, virtuous intrigue, intricate simplicity, 
Byzantium and Liverpool. Gladstone's speech revolved not so 
much around the question of war or peace between England and 
Russia as the examination of why Gladstone, who until a short 
while ago had been a member of a Ministry engaged in war, had 
now become the Gladstone of the peace-at-any-price party. He 
analysed, he scrutinised the limits of his own conscience in all 
directions with all manner of subtleties, and with characteristic 
modesty demanded that the British Empire move within the limits 
of the Gladstonian conscience. His speech thus had a diplomatic-
cum-psychological colouring which may have brought conscience 
into diplomacy, but even more definitely brought diplomacy into 
conscience. 
The war against Russia was originally a just one, but we have 
now reached the point where its continuation would be sinful. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
The speeches of Gladstone and Russell in the debate on Disraeli's motion 
in the House of Commons on May 24, 1855 were published in The Times, No. 22063, 
May 25, 1855.— Ed. 
Minor questions.— Ed. 

=====第262页=====
232 Karl Marx 
Since the start of the Eastern troubles we have gradually raised 
our demands. We have followed an ascending line with our 
conditions, while Russia has been moving down from the heights 
of her intransigence. At first Russia claimed not only a spiritual, 
but also a temporal protection over the Greek Christians of 
Turkey. She was unwilling to give up any of the old treaties, and 
would agree to evacuate the Danubian provinces only under 
certain conditions. She refused to attend any congress of the 
powers at Vienna, and summoned the Turkish ambassador to 
St. Petersburg or to the Russian headquarters. That was Russia's 
language up to February 2, 1854. What a distance between the 
demands of the Western powers at that time, and the Four 
Points174! And as late as August 26, 1854, Russia declared that she 
would never accept the Four Points except after a long, desperate 
and calamitous struggle. Again, what a distance between Russia's 
language in August 1854 and her language of December 1854, 
when she promised to accept the Four Points "unreservedly"! 
These Four Points are the nodal point to which our demands can 
rise, and Russia's concessions descend. Whatever lies beyond the 
Four Points lies outside the pale of Christian morality. Well! 
Russia has accepted the 1st point; she has accepted the 2nd point, 
and has not rejected the 4th point, for it has not been discussed. 
That only leaves the 3rd point, i.e. only a quarter, and not even 
the whole of the 3rd point but only a half of it, thus a difference 
of only one-eighth. For the 3rd point consists of two parts: No. 1, 
the guarantee of Turkish territory; No. 2, the reduction of 
Russian power in the Black Sea. Russia has stated that she is more 
or less willing to accept No. 1. So that only leaves the second half 
of the 3rd point. And even here Russia has not said that she 
objects to the limitation of her superiority at sea; she has merely 
declared her opposition to our methods of carrying it out. The 
Western powers have suggested one method, while Russia suggests 
not merely one but two alternative methods, thus here again she is 
ahead of the Western powers. As regards the method proposed by 
the Western powers, it is an affront to the honour of the Russian 
Empire. But one must not affront the honour of an empire 
without reducing its power. On the other hand, one must not 
reduce its power because one is thereby affronting its honour. 
These are different views on "method", a difference of one-eighth 
of a point, and as it is a matter of "method" it can be regarded as 
1/32 of a point—and for that another half a million men is to be 
sacrificed? On the contrary, it must be stated that we have attained 
the aims of the war. Should we therefore continue it for pure 

=====第263页=====
From Parliament 233 
prestige, for military glory? Our soldiers have covered themselves 
with glory. If England has nevertheless fallen into discredit on the 
Continent, 
"For God's sake," cried the honourable gentleman, "don't let us seek to avenge 
that discredit—don't let us wipe it out by human blood, but rather by sending 
abroad more correci information". 
And, indeed, why not "correct" the foreign newspapers? 
Further successes on the part of the allied forces—where do they 
lead to? They force Russia to resist more stubbornly. Allied 
defeats? They make the Londoners and Parisians excited and 
force them to make bolder attacks. What is the result of waging 
war for war's sake? Originally Prussia, Austria, France and 
England were united in their demands on Russia. Prussia has 
already withdrawn. If we go on, Austria, too, will withdraw. 
England would be isolated except for France. 
If England continues the war for reasons shared by no other 
power but France, "the moral authority of its position is greatly 
weakened and undermined". But on the other hand a peace with 
Russia, if it forfeits the prestige that is of this world, will strengthen 
its "moral authority", which neither moth nor rust doth corrupt.'1 
Moreover, what do the people want who do not accept Russia's 
method of carrying out the second half of the 3rd point? Do they 
intend to dismember the Russian Empire? Impossible without 
provoking a "war of the nationalities". Will Austria, can France 
support a war of the nationalities? If England undertakes a "war 
of nationalities" it must undertake it alone, i.e. "it will not 
undertake it at all". So nothing is possible except to demand 
nothing that Russia has not already conceded. 
That was Gladstone's speech in spirit, if not in letter. Russia has 
changed her language: proof that she has backed down in 
substance. For the honourable Puseyite 175 the language is the only 
issue. He too has changed his language. He is now uttering 
jeremiads over the war; he is overwhelmed by the suffering of all 
mankind. He uttered apologias when he inveighed against the 
Committee of Inquiry and found it quite in order to abandon an 
English army to all the sufferings of death from starvation and the 
plague. Of course! Then the army was being sacrificed for peace. 
The sin begins when it is sacrificed for war. He is, however, 
fortunate in demonstrating that the British government was never 
in earnest in the war against Russia, fortunate in demonstrating 
that neither the present British government nor the present 
a Matthew 6:20.— Ed. 

=====第264页=====
234 Karl Marx 
French government would be able or willing to wage serious war 
on Russia, fortunate in demonstrating that the pretexts for the war 
are not worth a single bullet. But he forgets that these "pretexts" 
belong to him and his former colleagues, the "war" itself however 
was forced on them by the British people. The leadership of the 
war was for them simply a pretext for paralysing it and 
maintaining their positions. And from the history and metamor­
phoses of the false pretexts under which they waged war he 
successfully concludes that they could make peace under equally 
false pretexts. He finds himself at variance with his old colleagues 
only on one point. He is Out, they are In.a A false pretext good 
enough for the ex-minister is not a false pretext good enough for 
the minister, although what's sauce for the goose is sauce for the 
gander. 
Gladstone's terrible confusion of ideas gave Russell the long-
awaited signal. He got up and painted Russia black where 
Gladstone had painted her white. But Gladstone was "Out" and 
Russell was "In". After blustering forth all the familiar, and 
despite their triviality, true platitudes about Russia's plans for 
world conquest, he came to the point, to Russell's point. Never, he 
declared, had such a great national issue been so totally degraded 
as this had been by Disraeli. True enough: can one degrade a 
national issue, indeed a matter of world history, further than by 
identifying it with little5  Johnny, with Johnny Russell? But it was in 
fact not Disraeli's fault that Europe versus Russia at the beginning 
and end of this first stage of the war appeared as Russell versus 
Nesselrode. The little man performed some odd contortions when 
he came to the Four Points. On the one hand, he had to show that 
his peace terms were related to the Russian horrors he had just 
exposed. On the other hand, he had to show that true to his 
voluntary, unprovoked promise to Titov and Gorchakov, he had 
proposed terms "which harmonised best with the honour of Russia". 
Hence he proved, on the one hand, that Russia exists only nominally 
as a naval power, and so can well afford a limitation of this merely 
imaginary power. On the other hand, he proved that the navy, 
scuttled by Russia  herself,  is a terrible thing for Turkey and hence 
for European equilibrium, i.e. "the second half of the 3rd point" 
formed one great whole. Many a man is caught by his opponent 
between the two horns of a dilemma. Russell impaled himself on 
Marx uses the English words "Out" and "In" (the reference is to the 
opposition and the government).— Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第265页=====
From Parliament 235 
both horns. He gave new samples of his diplomatic talent. Nothing 
could be expected of Austria's active alliance because a battle lost 
would bring the Russians to Vienna. This is the way he encourages 
an ally. 
"We say," he continued, "that Russia intends to get possession of Constan­
tinople, and to rule there, as Turkey is obviously in a state of  decay;  and I do not doubt 
that Russia harbours the same opinion of the intentions of England and France in the 
case of the break-up of that country." 
All that was lacking was for him to add: "She is wrong, 
however. Not England and France, but England alone must take 
possession of Constantinople." In this way the great diplomat 
encouraged Austria to take sides; thus he betrayed to Turkey the 
"obvious" opinion of her saviours and supporters. He has, 
however, improved as a parliamentary tactician on one count. In 
July 1854, when he was bragging about the seizure of the Crimea, 
he let himself be so startled by Disraeli that he ate his heroic 
words before the House divided. This time he postponed this 
process of self-consumption—the retraction of his proclaimed 
world struggle against Russia—until after the vote had been taken. 
A great improvement! 
His speech also contained two historical illustrations, his 
extremely comical account of the negotiations with Emperor 
Nicholas over the Treaty of Kainardji,176 and a sketch of German 
conditions. Both deserve a mention in extract. As the reader will 
remember, Russell had conceded Russia's protection at the outset, 
based on the Treaty of Kainardji. The British ambassador in 
Petersburg, Sir Hamilton Seymour, turned out to be more 
awkward and more sceptical. He made inquiries of the Russian 
government, the story of which Russell is naive enough to recount 
as follows: 
"Sir Hamilton Seymour asked the late Emperor of Russia to have the goodness 
to point out the part of the Treaty [...] upon which the right he claimed was founded. 
His Imperial Majesty said [...] 'I would not point out to you the particular article in the 
treaty on which my claim " (to protection) "is based. You may go to Count Nesselrode 
and he will show you the article.' Hamilton Seymour did go to Count Nesselrode [...]. 
Count Nesselrode replied he was not very conversant with the articles of the treaty and 
told Hamilton to go to Baron Brunnow or refer his government to him and the Baron 
would tell him what part of the treaty it is which gives the Emperor the right he 
claims.' I believe Baron Brunnow never attempted to point out any such article in the 
treaty." 
About Germany the noble Lord related: 
"In Germany she [Russia] is connected with many of the smaller Princes by 
marriage. Many of the Princes of Germany, I am sorry to say, live in great fear of 

=====第266页=====
236 Karl Marx 
what they think the revolutionary disposition of their subjects, and rely on their 
armed forces for protection. But what are those armed forces? The officers of 
those forces are seduced and corrupted by the Russian Court. That Court 
distributes rewards, orders and distinctions among them, and in some cases Russia 
regularly supplies them with money to pay their debts so that Germany which 
ought to be in a state of independence — Germany which should stand forward for 
the protection of Europe against Russian domination—has for years been 
corrupted, and has been undermined in its vital strength and independence, by 
Russian arts and Russian means." 
And in order to precede Germany like a column of fire and 
rouse it to the "categorical imperative",177 duty, Russell declared 
himself at the Vienna Conference the champion of the "honour and 
dignity of Russia" and let Germany hear the proud language of the 
free and independent Englishman. 
Written on May 29, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 249, June 1, 1855 
Marked with the sign x Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第267页=====
237 
Karl Marx 
A CRITIQUE 
OF PALMERSTON'S LATEST SPEECH 
London, June 1. If Gladstone deceives by his air of profundity, 
Palmerston deceives by his air of superficiality. He knows how to 
conceal his real intention with true artistry beneath loosely 
connected phrases meant for effect and commonplace concessions 
to the opinion of the day. His Cabinet speech has now lain before 
the public for a week.3 The daily and weekly press has ventilated, 
scrutinised and criticised it. His enemies say that after keeping to 
the language of old Aberdeen for many months he has now found 
it appropriate to speak the language of old Palmerston again 
for an evening. They say: the noble lord is witness for  himself,  but 
who will be witness for the noble lordb? They regard his speech as 
a clever feat since he manages to avoid giving any definite account 
of his policies, and adopts such an elastic, airy form that it is 
impossible to pin him down anywhere. His friends, on the other 
hand, do not hesitate to hail the wind he expended on his 
rhetorical organ-playing as the music  itself.  From the beginning he 
correctly grasped the situation in which he had to present himself 
to the House and to the country. Who confronts me? 
"...There are those who think, on the one hand, that we have not been 
sufficiently vigorous in the prosecution of the war while there are those who wish, 
on the other hand, to drive the country to a peace upon ignominious terms; on 
the one hand, there are those who reproach us for having opened negotiations 
with Austria that are pointless and only paralyse the war, but, on the other, those 
A report on Palmerston's, Disraeli's, and Layard's speeches in the House of 
Commons on May 25, 1855 was published in The Times, No. 22064, May 26, 
1855.—  Ed. 
A quotation from Disraeli's speech in the House of Commons on May 24, 
1855 (see this volume, p. 230).— Ed. 

=====第268页=====
238 Karl Marx 
who think that we have not gone far enough in these negotiations and have 
wrecked them by making extravagant demands." 
Thus he took up the stance of a man of the true centre. He 
repulsed the attacks of the war men by referring them to the 
peace men and the attacks of the peace men by referring them 
back to the war men. The about-turn against the committed peace 
men then gave him the opportunity to indulge in well-calculated 
outbursts of patriotic fervour, loud protestation of energy and all 
the brave words which he has so often used to bamboozle the 
ninnies. He flattered national pride by listing the great resources 
that England has at its disposal—his sole reply to the accusation 
that he is incapable of handling large resources. 
"The noble lord," said Disraeli, "reminds me[...]of that parvenu who used to 
recommend himself to his mistress's good graces by enumerating his possessions. 'I 
have a house in the country, a house in town, a gallery of pictures, a fine cellar of 
wines.'" 
Thus England has a Baltic fleet and a fleet in the Black Sea, and 
an annual national income of £80 million, etc. However, among all 
the rhetorical trivialities in which Palmerston's speech petered out, 
he succeeded in throwing in one definite statement, to which he can 
return later at a suitable opportunity and which he can proclaim 
as the principle of his policy, sanctioned by the House. No English 
newspaper has emphasised it, but the art of Palmerstonian oratory 
has always consisted of concealing its own point and sweeping it 
away from the memory of his listeners in the smooth, shallow flow 
of his phraseology. But as it is not simply a question of momentary 
success for Palmerston, as it is for Russell, because he plans ahead, 
he does not merely content himself with the oratorical expedients 
of the moment but carefully lays the foundation for his 
subsequent operations. The statement mentioned above says 
literally: 
"We are engaged in a great operation in the Black Sea. We trust and hope that 
we shall be successful in that operation. We think success in that operation will lead 
to the obtaining those conditions which [...] we have thought, in the present state of 
the conflict, Britain, France and Austria have a right to demand." 
In other words, however protracted the operations in the Black 
Sea may be, the diplomatic basis of the war remains the same. 
However great the military success may be, final success is 
determined in adyance, and limited to what are called the Four 
Points.178 And Palmerston makes this declaration when only a few 
hours earlier Layard had stripped the Four Points of their 
Russophile mask. But Palmerston diverted attention from Layard's 

=====第269页=====
A Critique of Palmerston's Latest Speech 239 
criticism, he avoided dealing with the real question, the value of 
the ostensible aims and objectives of the war, by defending the 
second half of the 3rd point3 against Gladstone and advancing this 
half of the point as the entire thing. 
Palmerston's speech was interrupted by an incident that is 
worthy of mention. An English bigot by the name of Lord Robert 
Grosvenor preached a penitential sermon at him because he had 
discussed military successes and the chances of war without taking 
into account the grace and favour of the Almighty, without even 
"mentioning the name of God". So he called down divine 
judgment on his nation. Palmerston immediately did penance, 
beating his breast and proving that if necessary he, too, can preach 
and roll his eyes just as well as Lord Robert Grosvenor. But the 
parliamentary episode received a popular sequel. The citizens of 
Marylebone (a part of London) had called a large meeting in the 
School Room, Cowper Street, to protest against the "Bill for the 
Suppression of Trade on Sundays". As their constituents were 
involved here, Lord Ebrington and Lord Robert Grosvenor 
appeared to defend the Bill, which they themselves had tabled in 
Parliament. Instead of relying on the protection and grace of God, 
however, they had taken pains to place a dozen paid clappers and 
trouble-makers at various spots in the meeting. The secret was 
soon discovered, and the hired agents of bigotry were immediately 
seized by the good citizens and thrown out into the street. 
Incapable of facing the hissing, booing and whistling that now 
broke out, the "noble lords" resumed their seats in a state of 
embarrassment. As soon as they left the meeting, an "unpaid" 
mob followed their carriage with unmistakable manifestations of 
sinful scorn and hardness of heart. 
Written on June 1, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 253, June 4, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 
a See this volume, pp.  232-33.—  Ed. 

=====第270页=====
240 
Karl Marx 
THE ASSOCIATION FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM. 
[—PEOPLE'S CHARTER] 179 
London, June 5. The Association for Administrative Reform 180 
has gained a victory in Bath. Its candidate, Mr. Tite, has been 
elected a Member of Parliament by a large majority against the 
Tory candidate.3 This victory, gained on the territory of its 
"legal" country, is being celebrated as a great event by today's 
Liberal papers. Bulletins about the pollb are being published with 
no less ostentation than those about the bloodless successes on the 
Sea of Azov. Bath and Kerch! is the motto of the day. But the 
press — pro-reform and anti-reform, Ministerial, Opposition, Tory, 
Whig and Radical papers alike—says nothing about the defeats 
and disappointments which the Association for Administrative 
Reform has suffered in the last few days in London, Birmingham 
and Worcester. To be sure, this time the battle was not fought on 
the well defined territory of a privileged electoral body. Nor were 
its results such as to draw cries of triumph from the opponents of 
the Citv reformers. 
The first truly public meeting (i.e., one without admission tickets) 
which the Reform Association held in London took place in 
Marylebone last Wednesday.0 One of the Chartistsd countered the 
resolutions of the City reformers by moving the amendment 
"that the money aristocracy represented by the City men is as bad as the landed 
aristocracy; that, under the pretext of reform, it merely wants to climb, on the 
shoulders of the people, into Downing Street, and there to share offices, salaries 
a Q. C. Whateley.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
May 30, 1855. A report on the meeting was published in The People's Paper, 
No. 161, June 2, 1855.—Ed. 
M'Dickey.— Ed. 

=====第271页=====
The Association for Administrative Reform 241 
and ranks with the oligarchs; that the Charter with its five points is the only 
programme of the people's movement". 
The chairman of the meeting,3 one of the City illuminati, voiced 
a number of misgivings, first, whether he should put the 
amendment to the vote at all, then, whether he should first take a 
vote on the resolution or on the amendment, and lastly, how he 
should take the vote. The audience, being tired of his indecision, 
tactical considerations and troublesome manoeuvres, declared him 
incapable of presiding further, called on Ernest Jones to replace 
him in the chair, and voted by a vast majority against the 
resolution and for the amendment. In Birmingham, the City 
Association called a public meeting in the Town Hall with the 
Mayor in the chair.b The resolution proposed by the Association 
was countered by an amendment similar to that moved in London. 
The Mayor, however, flatly refused to put the amendment to the 
vote unless the word "Charter" was replaced by a less objection­
able one. If not, he would withdraw from the chair, he said. The 
word "Charter" was therefore replaced by "universal suffrage and 
voting by ballot". Thus edited, the amendment was passed by a 
majority of 10 votes. In  Worcester,  where the City reformers held a 
public meeting, the victory of the Chartists and the defeat of the 
Administrative Reformers were even more complete. There the 
Charter was proclaimed without more ado.c 
The extremely embarrassing success of these large meetings in 
London, Birmingham and Worcester decided the Administrative 
Reformers to circulate in all the bigger and more populous towns 
petitions to be signed by people holding similar views, rather than 
to make public appeals to the vox populi. The City notables' 
manifold links with businessmen in the United Kingdom, and the 
influence these gentlemen exert upon their clerks, warehousemen d 
and "minor" commercial friends will no doubt enable them to fill 
the petitions with names very quietly, behind the back of the 
public, and then to send them to the "Honourable House" with 
the label, Voice of the People of England. But they are mistaken if 
they think they can intimidate the Government with signatures 
collected by cadging, intrigue and stealth. The Government 
observed with ironical self-satisfaction that the Administrative 
H. Farrer.— Ed. 
The meeting was held on May 21, 1855. A report on it was published in The 
People's Paper, No. 160, May 26, 1855.—Ed. 
c The meeting was held at the end of May. A report on it appeared in The 
People's Paper, No. 161, June 2, 1855.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第272页=====
242 Karl Marx 
Reformers were hissed out of the theatrum mundi. Its organs are 
silent for the time being, partly because they would otherwise have 
to register the successes of Chartism, and partly because the ruling 
class is already toying with the idea of putting itself at the head of 
the Administrative Reformers should the people's movement 
become importunate. They keep a "misunderstanding" in reserve 
should this danger set in: a misunderstanding allowing them 
sometime in the future to regard the Administrative Reformers as 
the spokesmen of the masses. Such misunderstandings are an 
essential element of England's "historical" development, and no 
one is more familiar with handling them than the free-thinking 
Whigs. 
The Charter is a very laconic document; besides the demand for 
universal suffrage, it contains only the following five points, which 
are all prerequisites for exercising it: 1) vote by ballot; 2) no 
property qualifications for Members of Parliament; 3) payment of 
Members of Parliament; 4) annual Parliaments; 5) equal electoral 
districts. After the experiments which undermined universal 
suffrage in France in 1848,181 the continentals are prone to 
underrate the importance and meaning of the English Charter. 
They overlook the fact that two-thirds of the population of France 
are peasants and over one-third townspeople, whereas in England 
more than two-thirds live in towns and less than one-third in the 
countryside. Hence the results of universal suffrage in England 
must likewise be in inverse proportion to the results in France, just 
as town and country are in the two states. This explains the 
diametrically opposite character which the demand for universal 
suffrage has assumed in France and England. In France the 
political ideologists put forward this demand, which every 
"educated" person could support to a greater or lesser extent, 
depending on his convictions. In England it is a distinguishing 
feature roughly separating the aristocracy and bourgeoisie on the 
one hand, and the people, on the other. There it is regarded as a 
political question and here, as a social one. In England agitation 
for universal suffrage had gone through a period of historical 
development before it became the slogan of the masses. In France, 
it was first introduced and then started on its historical path. In 
France it was the practice of universal suffrage that failed, whereas 
in England it was its ideology. In the early decades of this century, 
universal suffrage as propounded by Sir Francis Burdett, Major 
Cartwright and Cobbett was still a very vague and idealistic 
concept, so that it could become the pious wish of all sections of 
the population that did not belong directly to the ruling classes. 

=====第273页=====
The Association for Administrative Reform 243 
For the bourgeoisie, it was in fact simply an eccentric, generalised 
expression of what it had attained through the parliamentary 
reform of 1831. In England the demand for universal suffrage 
did not assume its concrete, specific character even after 1838. 
Proof:  Hume and O'Connell were among those who signed the 
Charter. The last illusions disappeared in 1842. At that time 
Lovett made a last but futile attempt to formulate universal 
suffrage as a common demand of what are known as Radicals and 
the masses of the people.182 Since that day there has no longer 
been any doubt about the meaning of universal suffrage. Nor 
about its name. It is the Charter of the people and implies the 
assumption of political power as a means of satisfying their social 
needs.  Universal suffrage, which was regarded as the motto of 
universal brotherhood in the France of 1848, has become a battle 
cry iri England. There universal suffrage was the direct content of 
the revolution; here, revolution is the direct content of universal 
suffrage. An examination of the history of universal suffrage in 
England will show that it casts off its idealistic features at the same 
rate as modern society with its immense contradictions develops in 
this country, contradictions that are produced by industrial 
progress. 
Alongside the official and semi-official parties, as well as 
alongside the Chartists, there is another clique of "wise men" 
emerging in England, who are discontented with the Government 
and the ruling classes as much as with the Chartists. What do the 
Chartists want? they exclaim. They want to increase and extend 
the omnipotence of Parliament by elevating it to democratic power. 
They are not breaking up parliamentarism but are raising it to a 
higher power. The right thing to do is to break up the 
representative system! A wise man from the East, David Urquhart, 
heads that clique. He wants to revert to England's Common Law. 
He wants to squeeze Statute Law3 back into its bounds. He wants 
to localise rather than centralise. He wants to unearth "the true 
old legal sources of Anglo-Saxon times" from the rubbish. Then 
they will gush forth of themselves and will water and fertilise the 
surrounding country. But David is at least consistent. He also 
wants to reduce modern division of labour and concentration of 
capital to the old Anglo-Saxon level or, preferably, to that of the 
Orient. A Highlander by birth, an adoptive Circassian and a Turk 
by free choice, he is able to condemn civilisation with all its evils, 
a Marx uses the English terms "Common Law" and "Statute Law" and explains 
their meaning in German in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第274页=====
244 Karl Marx 
and even to evaluate it from time to time. But he is not trite like 
the men with lofty ideas who separate the modern political forms 
from modern society, and who prattle about local autonomy 
combined with concentration of capital, and about the uniqueness 
of the individual combined with the anti-individualising division of 
labour. David is a prophet who looks backwards, and is in an 
old-fashioned way enraptured by old England. He must therefore 
consider it quite all right that new England passes him by and 
leaves him behind, however urgent and persuasive he may be 
exclaiming: "David Urquhart is the only man who can save you!" 
As he did only a few days ago, at a meeting in Stafford. 
Written on June 5, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 261, June 8, 1855 
Marked with the sign x Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第275页=====
245 
Karl Marx 
PARLIAMENTARY 
London, June 6. Palmerston has again given proof of his old 
mastery at handling diplomacy by means of Parliament and 
Parliament by means of diplomacy. The policy of the ministry was 
to be discussed on the basis of the amendments of Baring, 
Heathcote and Lowe. a The amendments were all based on the 
Vienna Conference.183 During Whitsun week Palmerston conjured 
away the Vienna Conference, by referring in his dealings with 
Austria to the past parliamentary debate; and in his dealings with 
the newly re-opened Parliamentb he conjured away the debate, by 
referring to the past Conference, which, allegedly, now existed 
only as a myth. With the Vienna Conference are thrown 
overboard the amendments which presuppose it; with the amend­
ments, the discussion of the ministry's policy ceases, and with this 
discussion, disappears the need for the ministry to make any 
statement about the tendency, aim and object of the "new" war. We 
are assured by David Urquhart, alias David Bey, that this aim is 
nothing less than to acquaint the allied troops with the summer 
diseases of the Crimea, now that they have sampled the winter 
diseases of the Crimea. And though Urquhart does not know 
everything, he knows his Palmerston. But he is mistaken about the 
power that secret design has over public history. Thus Palmerston 
informs the reassembled Parliament that there is no longer any 
subject for debate, and that the House could now do nothing 
better than send a war address to the Crown, i.e. give the ministry 
a Amendments to Disraeli's motion of May 24, 1855 (see this volume, 
pp. 227-28).— Ed. 
Parliament re-opened on June 4, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第276页=====
246 Karl Marx 
a vote of confidence. For the time being he is thwarted by the 
stubbornness of the parliamentarians, who have prepared long 
speeches on the amendments and are resolved to dispose of their 
goods. By the mere act of disbanding the Conference he has 
broken the point off these speeches and the horror vacui, boredom, 
will drive Parliament into accepting his address. To save itself 
from the speeches it will seize on the address. 
With the change in the situation, Lowe's amendment has 
changed its meaning. Originally it meant the break-up of the 
Vienna Conference. Now it means sanctioning the Vienna 
Conference and ministerial diplomacy, insofar as it raises Russell's 
formula for the reduction of Russian maritime power in the 
Euxinus3 to the ultimate aim, to the real object of the war. It is a 
stumbling block for the peace party insofar as it demands too much, 
for the war party insofar as it demands too little, and a stumbling 
block for the ministry insofar as it demands any object, that is any 
admitted object, for the war. Hence the phenomenon of pro-peace 
men and Tories being for the continuation of the debate on Lowe's 
amendment and the ministry against it; hence Palmerston's attempt 
to jettison it. The attempt failed. He therefore adjourned the debate 
until Thursday evening. A day's respite gained. In the meantime the 
final protocol of the Vienna Conference is printed. It is presented to 
the House. A new and secondary question is raised, and with his 
"dissolving views" b Palmerston can hope to remove the real issue 
from the focus of the debate. 
The two-day parliamentary discussionc  was as boring, tedious 
and confused as can only be expected of speeches whose point has 
been broken off in advance. It offered, however, a characteristic 
spectacle: whereas before the vote on Disraeli's motion the peace 
men flirted with the ministry, they now flirted with the Opposi­
tion, by which we mean the professional Opposition. Further, it 
revealed the entente cordiale between the Peelites and the Manches­
ter School. 184 The Peelites obviously flatter themselves that they 
will rule England after the war, at the head of the industrial 
bourgeoisie. Thus, after their long wanderings, the Peelites would 
at last have a real party behind them, and the industrialists at last 
have found professional statesmen. If the peace men have thus 
won Gladstone, Graham and Co., they have lost the "radical" Sir 
William Molesworth, a friend of more than twenty years' standing. 
Ancient Greek name for the Black Sea.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English expression.— Ed. 
An account of the debate in the House of Commons on June 4 and 5 was 
published in 77»« Times, Nos. 22072 and 22073, June 5 and 6, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第277页=====
Parliamentary 247 
Molesworth must have read in Hobbes, whom he published,185 
that "intelligence comes through the ears". He therefore appealed 
not to the intelligence but to the ears. He did what Hamlet forbids 
the actors to do.a He out-tyrannised the tyrant and was more Rus­
sell than Russell  himself.  He had also read in his Hobbes that all 
men are equal, because each can take the life of the other. As he is 
now concerned with prolonging his ministerial life he spoke in the 
spirit of the men who can take it from him. It was indeed a 
curious thing to see this adding-machine indulging in dithyrambs. 
Not even Babbage in his "Philosophy of Machines"0  would have 
imagined it. Milner Gibson, the baronet from the Manchester area, 
was monotonous, soporific, desiccated and desiccating. He has 
obviously learnt from the nearby metropolis of British industry 
how to deliver as much as possible while keeping production costs 
as low as possible. He is a man whose whole appearance proclaims 
that he is bored. Why should he seek to amuse his fellow-men? Do 
as you would be done by! Moreover, he clearly counts spirit, wit 
and life among the faux frais de production, 0 and it is the first law of 
the economic school to which he belongs to avoid "false costs". 
Bulwer hovered between the heroic mood of his "king-maker" and 
the contemplative one of his "Eugene Aram". d In the former he 
threw down the gauntlet to Russia, in the latter he wove a myrtle 
wreath around Metternich's brow. 
Milner Gibson, Molesworth and Bulwer were the  coryphaei  of the 
first evening, Cobden, Graham and Russell of the second. Cobden's 
speech alone deserves an analysis which space and time do not 
permit at present. Let us only remark that he claims Bonaparte 
was prepared to accept the last Austrian proposals. The late Sir 
Robert Peel's dirty boy, who has recently taken to "sentiments",6 
"broken hearts" and "love of truth", gave a self-apology on behalf 
of his neighbour, namely Sir James Graham. He had forbidden 
Napier to act in the Baltic Sea until the time of year when any 
action is ruinous for the British Navy. He had forbidden Dundas 
to shell Odessa. He had thus neutralised the British Navy both in 
The reference is to Hamlet's warning against overacting (Shakespeare, Hamlet, 
Act III, Scene  2).—  Ed. 
Ch. Babbage, On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures.—Ed. 
False costs of production.— Ed. 
"King-maker" was the nickname of Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick, described 
in Bulwer-Lytton's novel The Last of  the Barons, the action of which takes place during 
the Wars of the Roses; Eugene Aram is the title character of another of Lytton's 
novels.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English words "dirty boy" and "sentiments".— Ed. 

=====第278页=====
248 Karl Marx 
the Baltic and in the Black Sea. He justifies himself with the size 
of the fleets which he had equipped. The mere existence of these 
fleets was proof of British power. Their action was therefore 
superfluous. A few days ago Napier addressed a laconic letter to a 
friend of Urquhart, which Urquhart read out at the Stafford 
meeting. This letter says literally: 
"Sir! I hold Sir James Graham capable of any base act. Charles Napier." 
Russell has finally excelled  himself.  At the beginning of his 
speech he declared that the big question confronting the House 
was the following: 
"If you are determined to have peace, upon what conditions can you obtain it? 
If you mean to carry on the war, for what objects is that war to be carried on?" 
As to the first question, his answer could be found in the 
Vienna protocols. As to the second, the object of the war, his 
answer had to be a very general one, in other words, no answer at 
all. If one were to accept the phrase "security for Turkey" as an 
answer, he would not mind. One interpretation of this "security" 
was given in the Vienna Note; another in the Four Points*86; 
finding a third was not Russell's business but the war's. It was 
Napoleon's principle that war must cover its own costs; it is 
Russell's principle that war must find its own object. 
Written on June 6, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 263, June 9, 1855 
Marked with the sign x Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第279页=====
249 
Frederick Engels 
FROM THE CRIMEA 1 
The arrival of the Asia's mail at a late hour on Thursday night 
enabled us yesterday to publish the dispatch of Gen. Pélissier 
concerning the fight which took place before Sevastopol on the 
night of May 22, as well as an authentic account of the allied 
advance upon Chorgun, which was accomplished on the 25th of 
that month. Some 25,000 men under Canrobert crossed the 
Chernaya and occupied the line of that streamlet, expelling the 
Russian outposts from their positions on the hights immediately 
overhanging the right bank. The Russians fell back as a matter of 
course, this not being their proper field of battle, in order to 
concentrate all their forces on the strong line between Inkermann 
and the range of cliffs to the east of that place. By this advance 
the Allies have nearly doubled the extent of ground occupied by 
them—giving them room of which their increased forces stood 
greatly in need—and managed an opening into the valley of 
Baidar which may prove very useful. The first step toward a 
resumption of field operations has been accomplished with 
success, and should be followed by actions of greater importance. 
As for the affair of May 22, the scene of the struggle was 
between the Quarantine Bay and the Central Bastion—No. 5 of 
the Russians. It was a very hard-contested and sanguinary conflict. 
The Russians, as we now learn from Pelissier's report, have 
occupied all the ground from the head of the Quarantine Bay to 
the Cemetery, and thence to the Central Bastion by detached 
works and rifle trenches, though the official British Admiralty 
plan of the siege-works shows that there are trench-works all over 
this important ground. But the truth now appears to be that as 
soon as the Flagstaff and Central Bastions were seriously menaced 

=====第280页=====
250 Frederick Engels 
and the outworks protecting them taken by the French, this piece 
of ground was turned by the Russians into one vast works. In a 
couple of nights long lines of connecting breastworks were thrown 
up inclosing the whole ground, and thus forming a large place 
d'armes or protected space where troops could safely be concen­
trated in order to act upon the flanks of any French attack, or 
even to attempt strong sorties on the flanks of the advanced 
French works. Pélissier knew by experience the rapidity with 
which the Russians proceed in structures of the sort, and the 
tenacity with which they defend their works when once completed. 
He fell upon them at once. On the night of May 22 an attack in 
two columns was made. The left column established itself in the 
Russian trenches at the head of Quarantine Bay, and effected a 
lodgment; the right column also got possession of the advanced 
trenches, but being unable to work under the heavy fire of the 
enemy, had to withdraw at daybreak. On the following night the 
attempt was renewed with stronger columns and with complete 
success. The entire work was carried and turned against the 
Russians by transplanting the gabions from one side of the trench 
to the opposite one. In this action the French appear to have 
fought with the greatest gallantry—with some sort of revival of 
that old furia francese which made them so celebrated in former 
times,  although it must be confessed that the statements of Gen. 
Pélissier as to the odds they had to contend against have some 
little show of brag about them. 
With regard to the third bombardment of the city, which our 
Halifax dispatch reported as having commenced on the 6th, 
followed by the storm and capture of the Mamelon and White 
Tower 3 on the 7th, the Asia's mail furnishes no new information, 
and enables us to add nothing to our remarks of Wednesday last. 
We learn however that 25,000 men had been transported to the 
Chersonese from Omer Pasha's army at Eupatoria, with a view 
evidently to operations in the field, since if another bombardment 
and an assault were contemplated, these Turks had better have 
been left in their former quarters. But it also appears that the 
allied army was very insufficiently furnished with means of 
transport and supplies for a campaign in the interior; and the 
probability is that while waiting for them to be provided, Pélissier 
has occupied the troops with this active renewal of the siege 
operations, not with the intention of really undertaking to storm 
the place at present, but to keep up the morale of the men. 
The Selenghinsk and Volhynsk redoubts.— Ed. 

=====第281页=====
From the Crimea 251 
From the conduct of Pélissier since taking the command, it 
seems certain that he is determined to be guided by his own 
judgment only and to take no notice of whatever plans and 
projects the imagination of Louis Bonaparte may be inclined to 
hatch. Plan-making for Crimean campaigns seems now to be a 
fashionable occupation at Paris; even old Marshal Vaillant has sent 
one or two; but Pélissier at once telegraphed that if Vaillant 
thought his plans so good he had better come to the Crimea to 
carry them out  himself.  How this energetic but obstinate and 
brutal Commander will go on we shall see very shortly; at all 
events, if it be true, as we see it intimated, that he has ventured to 
forward "orders" to the British, Turkish and Sardinian Chiefs of 
the Staff without even taking the trouble to inform the respective 
Commanders of their contents, he will very soon get up a pretty 
squabble in the allied camp, where hitherto no single General, 
but the Council of War, composed of all the Commanders, has 
been considered supreme. Imagine old Field Marshal Lord 
Raglan under the command of a single French Lieutenant-
General! 
Meantime the Russians are not idle. The "expectant" position 
into which Austria has relapsed and the arrival of reserves and 
new levies from the interior have enabled Russia to send fresh 
troops to the Crimea. The 3d, 4th, 5th and 6th Infantry Corps are 
there already, beside several Cavalry Divisions. Now the 2d 
Infantry Corps, which was said to be in the Crimea six weeks ago, 
has actually left Volhynia for the seat of war, followed by the 7th 
Light Cavalry Division, attached to the Grenadier Corps. This is a 
pretty sure sign that the infantry and artillery of the Grenadier 
Corps are next on the list to march to the Crimea; and indeed 
they are already moving to Volhynia and Podolia to take the place 
of the 2d Corps. This latter body, commanded by Gen. Paniutin, 
who in Hungary3 commanded the Russian Division attached to 
Haynau's army, will bring to the Crimea 49 battalions of Infantry, 
beside Artillery and Light Cavalry—in all, about 50,000 or 60,000 
men—for there can be no doubt that these corps, which have not 
yet been engaged, have been raised to the full war-complement. 
The troops of the 2d Corps will successively arrive on the seat of 
war from June 15 to July 15, at a time when decisive operations 
will very likely be taking place, and thus they may take a very 
important part in the coming Crimean campaign. 
The month of June must bring some decision into this Crimean 
a In 1849.—-Erf. 

=====第282页=====
252 Frederick Engels 
warfare. Before June, or at the outside July, has elapsed, either 
the Russian field-army will have had to leave the Crimea, or the 
Allies will have to prepare for their own retreat. 
Written about June 8, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4424, June 23, 1855; re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1052, June 26, 1855 and the 
New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 720, June 
30, 1855 as a leading article 

=====第283页=====
253 
Frederick Engels 
A CRITIQUE OF THE EVENTS IN THE CRIMEA 1 
London, June 8. The arrival of three French reserve divisions in 
addition to the two Sardinian divisions makes it impossible for the 
allies to remain spellbound within the narrow confines of the 
Heracleatic Chersonese. So, on May 25, shortly after General Pélis-
sier assumed command, they sent 20,000-25,000 men to the 
Chernaya, occupied the line of this river and expelled the Russian 
outposts from their positions on the heights overhanging the river's 
right bank. It will be remembered that more than a month ago we 
pointed out a that this, the Russians' advanced line of defence, was 
not their true battlefield and that consequently, instead of holding 
their ground and accepting battle along this line, they would 
probably give it up at the first serious assault so as to concentrate all 
their forces on the strong line between Inkerman and the range of 
hills to the east of that place. This has now happened. By this 
advance the allies have nearly doubled the extent of the area 
occupied by them, and opened a gateway to the fertile valley of 
Baidar, which may become very useful in the future. Up to now, 
however, the advantage gained has not been swiftly and vigorously 
followed up. The first movement was immediately followed again by 
stagnation. Lack of transport facilities may have made this inevitable. 
Disunity between the allied commanders is cited as one cause. The 
shelling of Sevastopol, resumed on June 6, shelling No. 3, arouses 
the suspicion that it may be intended to return after an interlude to 
the old routine. The shelling may, however, be combined with 
operations in the field. At any rate, one necessary measure (cf. No. 
241 of the  N.O-Z.) b has at last been taken—the transportation of 
See this volume, pp. 184-85.— Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 212.— Ed. 

=====第284页=====
254 Frederick Engels 
some 20,000 Turks under the personal command of Omer Pasha 
from Eupatoria to Chersonese. The allied army has thus increased to 
a full 200,000 men. With a fighting force of this size active operations 
can certainly be begun as soon as the organisation of supplies and 
transport facilities permits the army to take the field. But here there 
seem to be great difficulties to be overcome. 
The second affair to be mentioned in the story of the main 
army is the battle between the Quarantine Harbour and the 
Central Bastion (No. 5 of the Russians). It was stubborn and 
bloody. As we can now see from General Pélissier's report, the 
Russians held all the ground from the head of the Quarantine 
Harbour to the churchyard, and from there to the Central Bastion 
by means of detached earthworks and trenches, although even the 
official British Admiralty map of the siege-works indulges in the 
fantasy of placing French fortifications over the whole of this 
important area. As soon as the Flagstaff and Central bastions were 
seriously threatened, and the outer works protecting them were 
taken by the French, the Russians turned this extensive stretch 
into one great fortification. In a few nights long lines were 
connected with one another, ramparts thrown up intended to 
enclose the whole area and form a spacious place d'armes, i.e. a 
fortified place where the troops could be gathered in safety in 
order to act against the flanks of any French attack or to 
undertake strong assaults on the flanks of the advanced French 
fortifications. To deprive the Russians of the time to carry out 
their plan, Pélissier decided to fall on them immediately, while 
their earthworks were still incomplete. On the evening of May 22 
an attack was made in two columns. The left column established 
itself in the Russian trenches at the head of the Quarantine 
Harbour and managed to dig itself in; the right column also 
captured the advance trenches but was forced to retire again at 
daybreak by the heavy fire of the enemy. On the following 
evening the attempt was renewed with stronger columns and 
complete success. The entire fortification was captured and turned 
against the Russians by removing the gabions from one side of the 
trench to the opposite side. In this action the French seem to have 
fought again with the famous furia francese, although it has 
to be admitted that the manner in which Pélissier describes 
the difficulties to be overcome is not free from a tinge of 
boasting. 
It is generally known that the expedition to the Sea of Azov was 
rewarded with total success. A flotilla consisting chiefly of the light 
warships of the two fleets, manned by 15,000 British, French and 

=====第285页=====
A Critique of the Events in the Crimea 255 
Turks,  seized Kerch, Yenikale and the straits leading to the Sea of 
Azov without encountering resistance. Advancing into this lake, the 
ships appeared off Berdyansk, Genichesk and Arabat, destroying 
or compelling the Russians to destroy large supplies of corn and 
munitions, a number of steamships and nearly 200 transport 
boats.  At Kerch they succeeded in capturing Gorchakov's letters 
to the commander of the place. The Russian commander-in-
chief complains about the lack of provisions in Sevastopol and 
urges the rapid despatch of fresh supplies. Now it turns out that 
throughout the campaign the Sea of Azov was the main channel 
along which the Russians in the Crimea had been receiving their 
supplies and that 500 sailing-boats had been used to transport 
them. As the allies have up to now only found and destroyed 200 
such boats, the remaining 300 must be further up near Taganrog 
or Azov. A squadron of steamships has therefore been sent out in 
search of them. The success of the allies is all the more important 
as it forces the Russians to send all supplies along a slow and less 
safe land-route via Perekop or via the interior of the Sivash Seaa 
and to set up their main depots at Kherson or Berislav on the 
Dnieper, in positions far more exposed than those at the head of 
the Sea of Azov. The almost uncontested success of this expedition 
is the greatest reproach to the allies' conduct of the war. If such 
results can now be achieved in four days, why was the expedition 
not sent out in September or October last year, at a time when 
similar breaches in the Russians' line of communication might have 
entailed the retreat of their army and the surrender of Sevastopol? 
The land forces accompanying this expedition are intended to 
protect the steamers if necessary, to supply the captured places 
with garrisons and to go into action against the Russian 
communications. Their main corps seems intended to act in the 
field as a simple flying corps, making sorties whenever there is a 
chance of dealing a swift blow, retiring behind its fortifications under 
cover of the ships' guns, and, if the worst comes to the worst, 
embarking again when threatened by a greatly superior enemy 
force. If this is its purpose it can perform important duties, and 
15,000 are not too many for this. If on the other hand it is 
intended to act as an independent corps with its own base of 
operations, undertaking a serious flanking movement against the 
Russians and attempting to pose a serious threat to the interior of 
the Crimea, then 15,000 men, weakened by detachments, are far 
too few for such an operation and run a considerable risk of being 
Most western part of the Sea of Azov.— Ed. 

=====第286页=====
256 Frederick Engels 
cut off, surrounded by superior forces and annihilated. At present 
we only know that they have landed at Kerch and are engaged in 
preparing it for defence against the interior. The Russians having 
voluntarily evacuated Sudjouk Kale, Anapa remains the only 
fortress in their hands on the Circassian coast. It is a natural 
stronghold that is now moreover well fortified. We doubt that the 
allies will attack it at the moment. Should they do so they will be 
making a big mistake, if not positive of rapid success. They would 
be dispersing troops that need the utmost concentration and 
wasting their energies by attacking new targets before the old ones 
are secured. 
Written about June 8, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 265, June 11, 1855 Published in English for the first 
Marked with the sign x 

=====第287页=====
257 
Karl Marx 
THE GREAT PARLIAMENTARY DEBATE 
London, June 9. The great parliamentary debate has ended, or 
rather perished because of hypersalivation. Baring's motion a was 
carried without opposition "amidst the general laughter of the H mise" . 
The motion, insipid as it is, concludes with a war address to the 
Crown. Did the House declare the war "une guerre pour rire"'? 
Or did it declare itself "une parlement pour rire"'? At any rate, 
the real conclusion of the two-week debate did not lie in the 
acceptance of Baring's motion — a mere formality—but in the 
general laughter, the spontaneous muscular spasm contravening 
the regulations, the indiscreet cry of nature beneath which the 
"honourable House" buried motions and counter-motions, amend­
ments and sub-amendments, ministry and opposition, speeches, 
counter-speeches, sermons, deductions, shrill sarcasm and pathetic 
entreaty, prayers for peace and war-cries, tactics and tactlessness, 
itself and its vote. The House saved itself from the laughable 
situation by laughing at  itself.  Thus it confessed that world-
historical seriousness in this parliamentary medium first becomes 
contorted into conventional seriousness, and this contrived serious­
ness then turns into natural jesting. 
Every attempt to get Palmerston to formulate ministerial policy, 
to make any statement about the object, tendency or purpose of 
the war failed completely. He flatly declared that 
"it was impossible to question a minister, or indeed any friend, about the object of 
the war."*1 
Baring's amendment to Disraeli's motion of May 24, 1855 (see this volume, 
pp. 227-28). The amendment was passed by the House of Commons on June 8, 
1855.—  Ed. 
A war for laughter.— Ed. 
A parliament for laughter.— Ed. 
d Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on June 8, 1855, published in 
The Times, No. 22076, June 9, 1855.—Ed. 
10—3754 

=====第288页=====
258 Karl Marx 
It was the  peace  men  that helped  him  most  of all. Do you  wish 
to know  why we are  waging war? There  is Richard Cobden  who 
wants peace  at any  price.  Do you not  prefer  war  without  any  price 
to peace  at any  price?  Aim  your blows  at Richard Cobden!  In this 
way he  continually thrust Cobden  or Bright  or Graham  or 
Gladstone between himself  and his  antagonists. 
The cotton heroes  did not  merely serve  him as  padding  to line 
his battle-dress with. More than that.  He  manufactured gunpow­
der out of  their cotton.  It also appeared during  the  debate that  in 
Russell, just  as formerly  in Aberdeen, Palmerston possesses  a 
lightning-conductor  for his  sacrosanct person,  a lightning-conductor 
belonging  to the  Cabinet  itself. It was for  this purpose that  he sent 
Russell  to Vienna,  for the  purpose  of turning  him  into  his 
lightning-conductor.  And  Roebuck  is now  declaring Russell 
responsible  for the  "shortcomings"a of the heroic Palmerston just  as 
Layard  and Co.  formerly  did with Aberdeen.  The  "wingbeats"  of his 
"free soul"  b are now  impeded  by the  Russellites just  as they used  to 
be by the  Peelites.  He has  these weights hanging from  him not in 
order  to work, like Black Forest clocks,  but so as to  strike  the hour 
wrongly. 
All the  cliques  of the  House  of Commons have emerged  the 
worse  for  wear from  the  conventional mock battle.  The  Peelites 
have  at last admitted that they have hitherto been officers without 
armies. They have given  up the  pretension  of forming  a grouping 
of their  own and  have openly joined  the  Manchester School.  As 
they were entrusted with  the  leadership  of the  army  and  navy 
during  the  first year  of the war  they have,  by professing their 
belief  in eternal peace, foolishly denounced themselves  as the 
traitors within  the  coalition,  to the  happy surprise  of Palmerston-
Russell. They have made themselves impossible. 
The Manchester School actually want peace  in order  to wage 
industrial  war at  home  and  abroad. They want  to establish  the 
mastery  of the  English bourgeoisie  on the  world market, where 
fighting  is only  to be  permitted with their weapons—cotton-
bales—and  in England  itself,  where  the  aristocrat  is to be  pushed 
aside  as superfluous  in modern production,  and the  proletarian,  as 
the mere instrument  of this production,  is to be  subjugated, while 
they themselves,  as the  leaders  of production,  are to  head  the  state 
and take over  the  offices  of government.  And now  Cobden 
denounces  a clergyman,  Dr.  Griffiths,  for  declaring  at a  public 
Marx uses  the  English word.—  Ed. 
From Georg Herwegh's poem  "Aus den Bergen" (Gedichte eines Lebendigen).— 
Ed. 

=====第289页=====
The Great Parliamentary Debate 259 
meeting that the House of Lords is superfluous. And Bright weeps 
over the fate of the royal children, who will be obliged by the ruin 
consequent on the war to wash their own shirts. Both denounce 
popular agitation.3 Are these the heroes of the Anti-Corn Law 
League,189  who, carried to the top on the waves of popular 
agitation, used to denounce the "barbaric splendour of the 
Crown", Lords, landed aristocracy, etc., as "false production 
costs"? Their whole point consisted of the struggle against the 
aristocracy, not excepting the peace homily. And now they are 
denouncing the masses to the aristocracy! Et propter vitam vivendi 
perdere causas! 3 In this debate the Manchester School have 
renounced their raison d'être. 
As for the Tories, they have discovered a peace party in their 
own bosom and proved that they have preserved their tradition as 
the representatives of English nationalism as little as their hatred 
for the "Bonapartes". 
Finally, the ministerial side? Nothing characterises them better 
than their frantic efforts to cling to a motion which Palmerston 
himself had to turn down only a week before, which the proposer 
wished to drop, but which was accepted by Walpole in the name of 
the Tories, by Gladstone in the name of the peace men, and by 
the House in the name of "general merriment". 
The Morning Herald has received the following communication 
from the Gulf of Finland: 
"16 miles off Cronstadt, May 28. The Orion has been in to reconnoiter, and 
reports that the Russian fleet in Cronstadt consists of six line-of-battle ships, ready 
for sea; six nearly dismantled ones, thirteen apparently fitted as floating-batteries, and 
eight steamers of a large size, besides gun-boats, which could not be counted." 
"Visited Bomarsund [...] found things exactly the same as they were left, the 
Russians had done nothing to repair the fortifications, we saw neither man, 
woman, or child ... the inhabitants fight rather shy of us, in consequence of the 
Russians having punished a number of them for having traded with the allied 
squadrons last year...". 
Written on June 9, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 267, June 12, 1855 Published in English for the first 
Marked with the sign X 
a The reference is to the speeches delivered in the House of Commons by 
Cobden on June 5, 1855, and by Bright on June 7, 1855. The Times, Nos. 22073 
and 22075, June 6 and 8.— Ed. 
And for the sake of life to sacrifice life's only end (Juvenalis, Satirae, VIII, 
85).—  Ed. 
c Quoted from two reports published in The Morning  Herald,  No. 22450, 
June 6, 1855 — "Gulf of Finland, 16 Miles off Cronstadt" and "Visit to Bomar­
sund".— Ed. 
10* 

=====第290页=====
260 
Frederick Engels 
SEVASTOPOL 190 
The mails of the Baltic have put us in possession of the official 
documents in regard to the late events at Sevastopol. The 
dispatches of Gen. Pélissier and Lord Raglan we published 
yesterday; and we now proceed to set forth the facts as they are 
established by this and other testimony: 
On the 6th of June, the allied batteries on the right attack again 
opened their fire upon the town. This time, however, it was no 
general bombardment; it was a cannonade concentrated upon 
certain points with a view to reduce them at once.3  The outworks 
constructed by the Russians on the 23d February and 12th March 
on this front of defense, the Selenghinsk, Volhynsk and 
Kamtschatka redoubts, had hitherto kept the besiegers and their 
batteries at a distance. On the Western front, the allied left attack, 
there were no such outworks, and the French being by this time 
established almost on the brink of the ditch or of the covered way 
(if there is one) of the defenses, the progress made on that side 
had by far left behind the slower advance of the right attack. As in 
the siege-plan of the Allies the two great divisions of the 
lines—the town west of the inner harbor b and the suburb of 
Karabelnaya, on its eastern side—are considered as two separate 
Instead of the preceding text the Neue Oder-Zeitung version begins: "The 
telegraphic dispatch announcing that the bombardment of Sevastopol had been 
resumed on June 6 was inaccurate. There was only a cannonade concentrated upon 
certain points which were to be captured at once." — Ed. 
The southern harbour.— Ed. 

=====第291页=====
Sevastopol 261 
fortresses which must be attacked at the same time, the right 
attack had to be pushed with greater energy and the outworks to 
be forced so as to bring the Allies on this side up into line with 
their advanced parallels on the left attack. In order to accomplish 
this, the above redoubts and some minor intrenchments in a 
quarry flanking the Mamelon (Kamtchatka 3) on its right, had to 
be taken. Accordingly, after 36 hours' cannonading, on the 
evening of the 7th of June the French advanced upon the two 
redoubts Selenghinsk and Volhynsk over the Careening Bay and 
upon the Mamelon, while the British assaulted the quarry. After 
an hour's sharp struggle the Allies were in possession of the 
works. A number of guns were taken as well as 400 prisoners, 
among them 13 officers. The loss on both sides was very 
heavy. 1' 
Thus affairs on that side are nearly in the same state now as 
they were before the 22d February. Of the redoubts carried by the 
Allies, that of the Mamelon (called by the Russians the 
Kamtschatka redoubt) was the most important. It was constructed 
on the 12th of March and the following days. At that time we at 
once pointed out the great importance of this work and the 
considerable part it would play in the struggle/ The event has 
fully justified our views. This hastily constructed fieldwork has 
arrested the progress of the besiegers on one-half of the whole 
line of attack for eighty-eight days, or for a period which in 
ordinary sieges is considered more than sufficient to take a 
good-sized fortress twice over. We will now explain this asto­
nishing phenomenon, which has but two parallels in the 
history of sieges: one in the defense of Colberg, 1807, by the 
Prussians; the other in the defense of Dantzic by the French in 
1813-14. 191 
With the increase of armies in the field, the old and generally 
small fortifications of the time of Vauban lost their significance. 
They were safely passed by the hosts of the victor and scarcely 
observed by his flying corps, until the reserves of his army came 
up and found time to take them. But wrhen these considerable 
armies on their march fell in with large fortresses they were 
The Kamchatka demi-lune.— Ed. 
The end of this paragraph beginning with the words "After an hour's sharp 
struggle" does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 151-55. This and the following sentence do not occur in the 
Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第292页=====
262 Frederick Engels 
invariably arrested. This was the case with Napoleon at Mantua in 
1797,  and at Dantzic in 1807.192 The reason is evident.3 When an 
army of 150,000 men advanced into a hostile country the small fry 
of fortresses offered no danger in the rear: all their garrisons put 
together were not strong enough to meet the reenforcements and 
reserves which were dispatched from the depots to keep up the 
active army to its full strength. Such small garrisons, besides, could 
not detach any strong bodies of troops to scour the field and to 
interrupt the communications of the hostile army. But when a 
fortress of considerable extent was met with, garrisoned by 15,000 
to 25,000 men, the case was different. Such a fortress was the 
nucleus of defense for a whole province; it could detach in any 
direction, and to a considerable distance, a strong body of troops 
capable of acting in the field and always sure, in case of superior 
attack, of a safe retreat to the stronghold. To observe such a 
fortress was nearly as troublesome as to take it; therefore, it had to 
be taken at once. 
Now the old fortresses of the Vauban and Cormontaigne sort 
concentrated all their means of defense around the main rampart 
and in the main ditch. All their tenailles, demi-lunes, counter-
guards, tower-reduits were accumulated so as to form with all but 
one line of defense, which, when once broken into, was pierced 
altogether in a few days; and a breach once made through these 
defenses, the place was taken. It is evident that such a system was 
totally unadapted to the large fortresses which alone could check 
the advance of large invading armies; it would have amounted to 
sacrificing the garrison; the breach once effected the fort became 
defenseless. 1* Another system had to be resorted to—that of 
advanced works. The French General Montalembert, the teacher 
of Carnot, was the first who boldly stood up, in spite of the 
prejudices of his profession, for detached forts; but the method of 
constructing large fortresses with detached forts so as to form a 
complete system of defense was elaborated to its present perfec­
tion in Germany, particularly by the Prussian General Aster. The 
splendid defenses of Cologne, Coblentz, Posen, Königsberg, and 
partly of Mayence are his work, and they mark a new era in the 
history of fortifications. The French at last acknowledged the 
necessity of coming round to this system and constructed the 
The following two sentences do not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 
The end of this sentence beginning with the words "it would have amounted 
to" does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第293页=====
Sevastopol 263 
defenses of Paris with detached works planned and executed in 
first-rate style.3 
The system of detached forts at once necessitated a new mode 
of defense. The garrisons of large fortresses had to be increased 
to such numbers that there was no necessity of keeping up a 
merely passive defense, until the enemy, advancing to the glacis, 
came within reach of sallies. A garrison of 20,000 or 25,000 men 
was strong enough to attack the enemy on his own ground. The 
fortress and the space around it, so far as it was protected by the 
detached forts, took the nature of an intrenched camp, or of a 
base for the field operations of the garrison, which itself was 
converted into a small army. The hitherto passive defense became 
active; it took on an offensive character. So necessary was this 
that when the French in 1807 besieged Dantzic, the Prussian 
garrison, which numbered about 20,000, constructed those 
very detached forts which were not in existence, but which 
were immediately found to be required in order to apply the 
resources of this large garrison to a proper defense of the 
place. When the French defended Dantzic in 1813-14 against 
the Allies they carried out the same principle with still greater 
success.b 
A siege, which since Vauban had ever been an operation of 
short duration, and the end of which could almost with certainty 
be attained in a given number of days, unless the proceedings 
were interrupted from without—a siege now becomes an opera­
tion subject to as many chances as a war in the open field. The 
artillery on the ramparts at once became of secondary importance; 
field artillery almost took precedence over it even in the defense 
of a place. The skill of the engineer was no longer applied merely 
to the repairs of the damage done during the siege; it had, as in 
the field, to choose and to fortify positions situated in advance of 
the forts themselves; to meet trench by trench; to take in flank the 
enemy's works by counter-works; to change suddenly the front of 
defense, and thus to force the enemy to change his front of attack. 
The end of this paragraph beginning with the words "The splendid defenses 
of Cologne" does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung gives this paragraph in abridged form: "The system of 
detached forts changed the mode of defence of fortresses. The garrisons of big 
fortresses swelled to the size of small armies; the fortress and the space around it, 
so far as it was controlled by the detached forts, assumed the nature of an entrenched 
camp or of a base for the field operations of the garrison; the hitherto passive 
defense became active and took on an offensive character." — Ed. 

=====第294页=====
264 Frederick Engels 
Infantry became the main stay in the war of sieges as in the field, 
and cavalry was made a very necessary ingredient of almost every 
garrison. There was no longer any means to fix the probable 
duration of a siege, and the rules of Vauban for the attack of a 
place, retaining most of their correctness as far as the details of 
the artillery attack were concerned, became utterly inapplicable to 
the ensemble of a siege. 
The Russians at Sevastopol had no time3  to construct detached 
works. They were compelled to act upon the old method of 
fortifying a place. They erected a main rampart as a first defense; 
it was indeed the thing most required for the moment. Behind this 
they made a second and a third line of defense, and all the while 
went on strengthening the first. Then gradually feeling their 
superiority, even at a certain distance from the main wall, they 
advanced, constructed the Selenghinsk and Volhynsk redoubts, 
and finally the work on the Mamelon, and a long line of rifle pits, 
while on the western front, where the main body of the French 
was placed, they could merely construct a few lunettes close to the 
main ditch, and a series of rifle trenches not much further in 
advance. Thus from the moment the Mamelon was fortified by the 
Russians, the eastern front was comparatively safe; while on the 
western front, where such protecting outworks did not exist, the 
besiegers gradually advanced to the very brink of the main ditch. b 
To approach on the right attack the commanding and decisive 
position of Malakoff bastion the besiegers had therefore first to 
take the Mamelon; but the Mamelon while it defended the 
Malakoff was again defended by all the works in its own rear; and 
how they defended it, was shown in the second bombardment, 
when Canrobert dared not seriously assault it. Even now there can 
be no doubt that the loss of the French in carrying this work must 
have been very great. b 
The reopening of the fire by the Allies and the energy with 
which General Pélissier, heedless of the lives of his soldiers, follows 
up every favorable chance to gain on the defense, are accom­
panied by a complete stagnation of operations on the Chernaya. 
This mode of proceeding at once gives us an insight into the 
character of Pélissier confirmatory of his former reputation for 
tenacity, obstinacy and recklessness. There were two ways open to 
him; to take the field, inclose Sevastopol on the north side also, 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung has here: "after the notorious flanking march".— Ed. 
This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第295页=====
Sevastopol 265 
and then take up the siege again with redoubled energy and 
a quadrupled chance of a speedy success,3 or else to go on 
in the faulty way of the last eight months; to cling doggedly to 
the south side, destroy every stone of it and drive the Russians 
out of a place which after all, if reduced, could not be occupied 
by his own troops on account of the batteries on the north 
side. 
There is not a military man of sense in either hemisphere who, 
on the news of Pélissier's nomination to the command, and of the 
great reenforcements received by the Allies, did not expect that he 
would at once take the first course. Most particularly when Omer 
Pasha with 25,000 Turks came round to Balaklava, there was no 
doubt that the Allies were strong enough to carry on the siege, to 
send 15,000 men to Kertch and still to advance into the field with 
more men than the Russians could spare to oppose them. Why 
have they not done so? Are they still in want of means of 
transport? Have they no confidence in their ability to carry on a 
campaign in the Crimea? We do not know. But this is certain: 
unless Pélissier has very cogent reasons to abstain from taking the 
field, he is pursuing, out of sheer obstinacy and self-will, an 
extremely faulty course; for with a loss equal to that he is now 
continually subjecting his army to, in assaults, he might obtain 
results in the field of far greater magnitude, and of a far more 
decisive effect. To take the south side without having even 
invested the north side, which completely commands it, is to 
proceed in utter defiance of all rules of warfare, and if Pélissier 
is bent upon that, he may yet ruin the great army he com­
mands. 
We will, however, give the new commander the benefit of every 
doubtful circumstance. It may be that the struggles on the left 
attack were inevitable and provoked by the counter-approaches of 
the Russians. It may be that it was necessary to confine the 
Russians to the limits of their original lines—to convince them, by 
a few hard, irresistible blows, of the superiority of the besiegers — 
before a separation of the army into a siege-corps and a 
field-corps could be ventured on. But allowing even this, we now 
must say that the utmost limit has been reached, and that any 
further serious attempt upon the body of the place will be a 
downright blunder, unless the strength of the Russian army in the 
a The following text is added here in the Neue Oder-Zeitung: "This was all the 
more to be expected after not only the reinforcements but also Omer Pasha had 
arrived in Balaklava with 25,000 Turks." — Ed. 

=====第296页=====
266 Frederick Engels 
field has been first tried with all the forces that can be made 
available for the purpose.3 
Written about June 12, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4429, June 29, 1855; re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1054, July 3, 1855 and the 
New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 721, July 7, 
1855;  as a leading article; the German 
version was first published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, No. 273, June 15, 1855, 
marked with the sign x 
a Instead of the last two paragraphs the Neue Oder-Zeitung has the following 
concluding passage: "With the same losses, to which Pélissier now continuously 
exposes his army with his assaults, he could obtain results of far greater magnitude, 
and of a far more decisive nature in the field. To try to take the south side 
without having even invested the north side which commands it, is an 
incomprehensible procedure. Pélissier may still be lacking means of transport for 
field operations. Or the counter-approaches of the Russians may have made it 
necessary to push them back to their original lines and show them the superiority 
of the besiegers before proceeding to field operations. However that may be, with 
the seizure of Malakhov no excuses are left. Should Pélissier be stubborn enough to 
persist in serious attempts upon the main body of the enemy instead of trying to break 
the strength of the Russians in the field with all the forces that can be made available, 
the destruction of  the army he commands is not at all  improbable,  especially since the area in 
which such vast numbers of people are confined is one big graveyard whose deadly 
miasmas will be let loose by the first heat of the summer." — Ed. 

=====第297页=====
267 
Frederick Engels 
NAPOLEON'S WAR PLANS 1 
The French Government has thought proper again to give to 
the world through the columns of the Paris Constitutionnel another 
intimation respecting the manner in which the war is to be carried 
on for the next couple of months. 3 These exposés are now 
becoming not only fashionable but periodical, and although they 
are apt to be inconsistent with each other, they afford for the time 
a pretty good idea of what favorable chances are open to the 
French Government. Take them all in all, they form a collec­
tion of all Louis Bonaparte's possible plans of campaign against 
Russia. As such they deserve some attention, for they involve 
the destiny of the second Empire and the possibility of French 
national resurrection. 
It seems then that there is to be no "grande guerre" with 500,000 
Austrians and 100,000 French on the Vistula and Dnieper. Nor is 
there to be a general rising of those "oppressed nationalities" 
which are constantly looking toward the West. No Hungarian, 
Italian, Polish armies are to appear at the magic call of the man 
who put down the Roman Republic. 194 All that belongs to the past. 
Austria has done her duty to the West. So has Prussia. So has all 
the world. Everybody is satisfied with everybody. This war is no 
grand war at all. It is not destined to renew the glory of the old 
struggles of the French with the Russians, though Pélissier 
accidentally says as much in one of his dispatches. The French 
troops are not sent to the Crimea to reap a harvest of glory; they 
are simply there to do police duty. The question pending is a 
a This refers to A. de Cesena's article on the aims and prospects of the Crimean 
war published in the semi-official Constitutionnel, No. 169, June 18, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第298页=====
268 Frederick Engels 
mere local one: the supremacy of the Black Sea—and it will be 
settled on the very locality concerned. To give the war any larger 
dimensions would be folly. "Respectfully but firmly" will the Allies 
knock down every attempt at resistance by the Russians in the 
Black Sea and on its coasts; and when they have done that—why 
then of course they or Russia, or both of them will make peace. 
Thus another of the Bonapartist self-delusions has been put 
aside. The dreams of the Rhine as the boundary of France, of the 
acquisition of Belgium and Savoy, have vanished, and a sober 
modesty of no common degree has taken their place. We are not 
fighting to restore France to the position which is due to her in 
Europe. Far from it. Not even are we fighting for civilization, as 
we used to say a short time ago. We are too modest to pretend to 
anything of such magnitude. What we are fighting for is—why, 
nothing more than the interpretation of the Third Point191 of the 
Vienna protocol! Such is the language now held by his Imperial 
Majesty Napoleon III, by the grace of the army and the toleration 
of Europe, Emperor of the French. 
And what does this all amount to? We are told the war is being 
carried on for a purely local object, and can be brought to a 
successful termination by purely local means. Take the actual 
supremacy of the Black Sea out of the hands of Russia, and the 
end will be accomplished. Once masters of the Black Sea and its 
shores, hold what you have got, and Russia will very soon give in. 
Such is the most recent of all the many plans of campaign issued 
from headquarters at Paris. We proceed to look at it a little more 
closely. 
We will take matters as they stand at present. From Constan­
tinople to the Danube on the one side, and round by the 
Circassian coast, Anapa, Kertch, Balaklava, to Eupatoria, the whole 
coast is taken out of the hands of the Russians. Kaffa and 
Sevastopol are the only points that hold out, the one hard pressed, 
the other so situated that it must be abandoned as soon as it is 
seriously menaced. More than that, the allied fleets sweep the 
inland sea of  Azoff;  their light vessels have been up as far as 
Taganrog, and every place of importance has been assailed by 
them. No portion of the coast can be said to remain in the hands 
of the Russians, except the tract from Perekop to the Danube, or 
about one-fifteenth part of their possessions on that coast. Now we 
will even suppose that Kaffa and Sevastopol have fallen, and that 
the Crimea is in the hands of the Allies. What then? That Russia 
will not make peace in that situation, she has already loudly 
proclaimed. She would be mad if she did. It would be giving up 

=====第299页=====
Napoleon's War Plans 269 
the battle after your advanced guard has been thrown back, at the 
very moment your main body is coming up. What then can the 
Allies do, after having secured these advantages at an immense 
cost? 
They can, we are told, destroy Odessa, Cherson, Nikolaieff; they 
can even land a strong army at Odessa, fortify themselves there so 
as to hold out against any number of Russians, and then act 
according to circumstances. They can, besides, detach troops to 
the Caucasus and all but destroy the Russian army which, under 
General  Muravieff,  now holds Georgia and the other trans-
Caucasian countries. But suppose all these things to be accom­
plished: and again we ask, what then, if Russia, as she certainly 
will do, refuse to make peace under these circumstances? Let it 
not be forgotten that Russia is not placed in the same position as 
France or England. England can afford to conclude a shabby 
peace. In fact, as soon as John Bull has had enough of excitement 
and war-taxes, he will be but too eager to creep out of the mess 
and leave his dear allies to shift for themselves. England's real 
power and source of strength do not exactly lie in that direction. 
Louis Bonaparte may, too, find himself placed in a position where 
an unseemly peace will be preferable, for him, to a war to the 
knife; for it must not be forgotten that with such an adventurer, 
in a desperate case, the chance of prolonging his dominion for 
another six months outweighs every other consideration. Turkey 
and Sardinia are sure to be left to their own puny resources in the 
decisive moment. So much, at least, is certain. But Russia cannot 
make peace, any more than ancient Rome could, while the enemy 
is on her territory. Russia, for a hundred and fifty years past, has 
never made a peace by which she lost ground. Even Tilsit196 gave 
her an increase of territory, and Tilsit was concluded before a 
single Frenchman had put his foot on Russian soil. To make peace 
while a large and advancing army is on Russian soil, a peace 
involving a sacrifice of territory, or at least a restriction of the 
Czar's sovereignty in his own dominions, would be to break at 
once with the traditions of a century and a  half.  Such a step could 
not be thought of by a Czar new to the throne,3 new to the people, 
and anxiously watched by a powerful national party. Such a peace 
could not be concluded until all the resources offensive and (above 
all) defensive of Russia had been brought into play and found 
wanting. That day will doubtless come, and the necessity of 
minding her own business will be imposed upon Russia, but by 
Alexander II.— Ed. 

=====第300页=====
270 Frederick Engels 
other enemies than Louis Bonaparte and Palmerston, and after 
struggles far more decisive than the "local" execution put in force 
on her Black Sea dominions. But let us suppose the Crimea 
conquered and garrisoned by 50,000 Allies—the Caucasus and 
everything to the South of it cleared of Russian troops, and an 
allied army checking the Russians on the Kuban and Terek— 
Odessa taken, and converted into an intrenched camp, holding say 
100,000 Anglo-French troops; Nikolaieff, Cherson, Ismail, de­
stroyed or occupied by the Allies. We will even suppose that beside 
these "local" exploits, something of some importance may have 
been accomplished in the Baltic, although with the information at 
our command it is hard to say what that may be. What then? 
Will the Allies confine themselves to holding their positions and 
tiring out the Russians? Their men in the Crimea and the 
Caucasus will vanish faster under the effects of disease than they 
can be replaced. Their main army, say at Odessa, will have to be 
fed by the fleets, for the country for hundreds of miles around 
Odessa produces nothing. The Russian army, surrounded by 
Cossack scouts—nowhere more useful than in these steppes—will 
harass them whenever they show themselves out of their 
intrenchments, if it cannot take up a permanent position 
somewhere in the neighborhood of the town. It is impossible 
under such circumstances to force the Russians to give battle; their 
great advantage will always be to draw the Allies into the interior 
of the country. To every advance of the Allies, they will respond 
by a slow retreat. Yet a large army cannot be confined for any 
length of time in an intrenched camp without giving it something 
to do. The gradual progress of disorder and demoralization would 
force the Allies to some decided movement. Sickness, too, would 
make the place too hot for them. In a word, to occupy the 
principal points on the coast and there to await the moment when 
Russia finds it necessary to give in is a game that will never do at 
all. There are three chances to one that the Allies would be tired 
of it first, and that the graves of their soldiers on the shores of the 
Black Sea would soon be counted by hundreds of thousands. 
It would be a military blunder, too. To command a coast, it is 
not sufficient to possess its principal points. It is the possession of 
the inner country which alone gives the possession of the coast. As 
we have seen, the very circumstances arising from an establish­
ment on the coast of South Russia would all but force the Allies to 
march into the interior. And here it is that the difficulties begin. 
Up to the frontiers of the Governments of Podolia,  Kieff,  Poltava, 
Charkoff,  the country is an almost uncultivated plain, very scantily 

=====第301页=====
Napoleon's War Plans 271 
watered, furnishing nothing but grass, and not even that after the 
heats of Summer. Supposing Odessa, Nikolaieff, Cherson to be 
taken for a base of operations, where would be the object against 
which the Allies could direct their efforts? The towns are few and 
far between, and there are none of sufficient importance to give, 
if occupied, a decisive character to the operation. There is no 
decisive point nearer than Moscow, and that is 700 miles off! Five 
hundred thousand men would be required for a march on 
Moscow, and where are they to come from? Surely, the case is 
such that in this way the "local" war can never lead to any decisive 
result; and we defy Louis Bonaparte with all his exuberance of 
strategic imagination to find another. 
All this, however, presupposes not only the strict neutrality but 
even the moral support of Austria. And where is that power at the 
present moment? Austria and Prussia have declared they would 
consider an advance of the Russian army towards the Balkan, in 
1854,  as a casus belli against Russia.197 Where is the guarantee that 
in 1856 they will not consider a French advance on Moscow or 
even Charkoff as a cause of war against the Western Powers? We 
need not forget that every army advancing from the Black Sea 
toward the interior of Russia as much offers its flank to Austria as 
a Russian army advancing into Turkey from the Danube; and at a 
given distance, therefore, its communication with its base of 
operations, that is to say its very existence, is at the mercy of 
Austria. To keep Austria quiet, even for a time, she will have to be 
bought off by the surrender of Bessarabia to her troops. Once on 
the Dniester, her army commands Odessa as completely as if that 
town were garrisoned by Austrians. And under such circumstances 
could an allied army venture on a wild-goose chase after the 
Russians into the interior of the country? Nonsense! But this 
nonsense, let us remember, is the logical consequence of Louis 
Bonaparte's latest plan of "local warfare." 
The first plan for the campaign was the "grande guerre," by 
means of the Austrian alliance. It would have placed the French 
army in the same numerical inferiority and virtual dependence 
with respect to the Austrian army as the English army is now with 
regard to the French. It would have given the revolutionary 
initiative to Russia. Louis Bonaparte could do neither. Austria 
refused to act; the subject dropped. The second was the "war of 
nationalities." This would have roused a storm between the 
Germans, Italians, Hungarians on one hand, and the Slavonian 
insurrection on the other, which must have reacted upon France 
at once and overturned Louis Bonaparte's Lower Empire 198 in less 

=====第302页=====
272 Frederick Engels 
time than it took to set it up. The counterfeit "iron man," passing 
himself off as a Napoleon, shrunk back. The third and most 
modest of all is the "local war for local objects." It reduces itself at 
once to an absurdity. We are again obliged to ask: What next? 
After all, it is far easier to be made Emperor of the French, with 
every circumstance to favor the design, than to act as such, even 
when long study before the looking-glass has made his Majesty 
perfectly familiar with all the theatrical portion of the business. 
Written about June 15, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4431, July 2, 1855; re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1054, July 3, 1855; an 
abridged and altered German version was 
first published as part of Marx's report 
in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, Nos. 279 and 
287, June 19 and 23, 1855, marked with 
the sign x 

=====第303页=====
273 
Karl Marx 
NAPIER'S LETTERS.—ROEBUCK'S COMMITTEE 
London, June 15. Sir Charles Napier has published a series of 
letters about the Baltic Fleet,3 the following being No. 1: 
"People ask why our squadron in the Baltic, which did nothing to signify last year, 
is likely to do nothing this? The question is easily answered, viz., because Sir James 
Graham did not attend to the plans I sent him last June, and which he pretended to 
know nothing about; and because the Admiralty did not attend to the plans I sent 
them last September. Had Admiral Dundas been furnished with the appliances Ï 
pointed out, Sweaborg might have been bombarded, and probably destroyed. Instead 
of doing that, they spent about [...] a million of money in building iron floating 
batteries, which will hardly swim, and if sent to the Baltic will probably never return; 
and this, after it was proved, at Portsmouth, that 68-pounders would destrov them at 
400 yards; and at 800 yards evervbody knows they could do no harm to granite walls. 
Had the same money been spent in mortar vessels, something might have been 
expected, or had half the money been laid out in putting Lord Dundonald's plans 
(which he communicated to me) in execution, I have no doubt they would have been 
successfully employed, both in the Baltic and Black Sea. My time will come, and before 
long, when I shall be able to expose all Sir James Graham's conduct to me. He has been 
shown to have opened private letters" (in the Bandiera affair ) "by Mr. Duncombe. 
He endeavoured to throw the blame of poor Captain Christie's death on Mr. Layard, 
and I have accused him of perverting my letters, which I am prevented from proving, 
by the pretence that the publication would afford information to the enemy. That 
pretence will soon cease, and the country shall know what means the Right Hon. 
Baronet used to induce Admiral Berkeley and Admiral Richards to sign instructions, 
which, if carried out, would have lost the Queen's fleet. The country shall know 
whether the First Lord of the Admiralty has the power to turn an officer's private 
letters into public ones, and prevent him doing the same with the First Lord's. 
Sir Charles Napier."h 
Published in The Morning Advertiser.—Ed. 
b The Morning Advertiser, No. 19964, June 15, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第304页=====
274 Karl Marx 
Roebuck's Committee met again yesterday, for the 49th time, to 
reach a decision about the report to be submitted to the House of 
Commons. After a four hours' debate its members were just as 
incapable of reconciling their views as in earlier sessions. They 
adjourned again until Monday in the "hope" that they will finally 
be able to announce the conclusion of their proceedings. 
The "Administrative Reform Association"200  held a large 
meeting yesterday in the Drury Lane Theatre; not, be it noted, a 
public meeting but a ticket-meeting,* a meeting to which only those 
favoured with tickets were admitted. The gentlemen were thus 
completely at their ease, au sein de leur famille* They were 
avowedly meeting to give "public opinion" an airing. But to shield 
public opinion from draughts from outside half a company of 
constables were posted at the doors of the Drury Lane. What a 
fragile public opinion that only dares to be made public with the 
protection of constables and tickets of admission! The meeting 
was, above all, a demonstration in support of Layard, who is at last 
due to present his reform bill to the House tonight. 
At a public meeting held in Newcastle-upon-Tyne the day 
before yesterday David Urquhart denounced "the treacherous 
Ministry and the feeble-minded Parliament". 
About the meetings now being prepared by the Chartists in the 
provinces, another time.201 
While thus the status quo is coming in for criticism from various 
quarters and different points of view, Prince Albert, at a dinner in 
Trinity House," has seized the opportunity of stating the position of 
the Court with regard to the general ferment. He too has a 
panacea for the crisis. It is: "patriotic, [...] self-denying confidence in 
the Cabinet! " According to Prince Albert only the despotism of the 
Cabinet can enable constitutional England to stand up to Russia 
and wage war against the despotism of the North. The comparison 
he made between England and Russia was neither striking nor 
felicitous. For example: The Queene had no power to levy troops 
nor had she any troops at her command but such as offered their 
Marx uses the English expression. The meeting was held on June 13, 
1855.—  Ed. 
In the bosom of the family.— Ed. 
The headquarters of the British mariners' corporation, which received its first 
charter from Henry VIII in 1514. Trinity House is at Tower Hill.— Ed. 
Prince Albert's address at Trinity House on June 9, 1855, and Palmerston's 
reply were reported in The Times, No. 22080, June 14, 1855 ("Prince Albert on 
Public Affairs").— Ed. 
Victoria.— Ed. 

=====第305页=====
Napier's Letters 275 
services voluntarily! Prince Albert forgets that the Queen has 
approximately £30 million at her disposal to buy troops with. Since 
when has forced labour been more productive than wage-labour? 
What would be said of a Manchester manufacturer who deplored 
the competition of the Muscovite manufacturers on the grounds 
that he only had at his disposal workers "offering their services 
voluntarily"? Instead of emphasising that the Emperor of Russia3 
has had the purpose of his "holy" war clearly and firmly 
proclaimed to his people from the pulpit, whereas for two years 
England has been waging a war of which the Prime Minister0 has 
said in Parliament that "nobody can state its object'', Prince Albert 
deplores the fact that 
"Her Majesty's Government can take no measure for the prosecution of the war 
which it has not beforehand to explain in Parliament"! 
As though Roebuck's committee had not been set up only after 
two-thirds of the British army had been sacrificed! As though the 
debate on the Vienna Conferences had not been held after they 
were over! In actual fact there was not a single explanation of any 
war measure in Parliament apart from Russell's blustering, 
unprovoked announcement of the Sevastopol expedition, whose 
only aim evidently was to give the Petersburg Cabinet timely 
warning! And if the blockade was debated it was not because the 
Ministry took this step but because it proclaimed it without taking 
it. Instead of deploring that in a war against Russia the Crown was 
compelled by parliamentary intrigues to submit to the dictatorship 
of an avowedly Russophile and notoriously peaceful Cabinet, 
Prince Albert complains, on the contrary, that an unfavourable 
vote in Parliament "forced the Queen to dismiss her confidential 
servants". Instead of rightly complaining that blunders, foibles 
and acts of villainy which, in Russia, would render generals, 
ministers and diplomats liable for Siberia, in England are followed 
at most by a little half-hearted gossip in the press and in 
Parliament, Prince Albert complains, on the contrary, that 
"no mistake, however trifling, can occur, no want or weakness exist, which is 
not at once denounced, and even sometimes exaggerated, with morbid satisfac­
tion". 
Prince Albert inserted these morbidly irritated expectorations in 
a toast to his long-standing enemy Lord Palmerston. But 
Palmerston is not given to magnanimity. He at once used the false 
a Nicholas I.— Ed. 
Palmerston.— Ed. 

=====第306页=====
276 Karl Marx 
position taken by the Prince in order to beat his own breast in 
front of him, protesting loudly: 
"I am bound to say that the English people have given us the most generous 
support." 
He went further. He declared outright that he possessed "the 
confidence" of the English people. He spurned the Prince's 
obtrusive exhortations to the people. He paid court to the people 
after the Prince had paid court to him. He did not even think it 
worth the trouble to reply with a compliment to the Crown. Prince 
Albert had sought to set himself up as the protector of the 
Ministry, hence proclaiming the Cabinet's "independence" of 
Parliament and the people; Palmerston replied by pointing out the 
Crown's "dependence" on the Cabinet. 
Written on June 14 and 15, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 277, June 18, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign x 

=====第307页=====
277 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
THE DEBATE ON LAYARD'S MOTION.— 
THE WAR IN THE CRIMEA202 
London, June 16. The debate on Layard's motion203 was not 
concluded yesterday but adjourned until Monday evening. So 
we shall also adjourn our account of it for the time being. 
One incident in the Commons sitting deserves mention.3  During 
the talks about the Vienna Conference Palmerston had intimated 
that the Peelites had made the stipulation of certain peace terms a 
condition for their entry into his Cabinet. Russell defended these 
same terms in Vienna. Yesterday Otway called on Palmerston to 
state whether he was adhering to peace terms that had originated 
from the Peelites, in other words from a party confessedly acting 
in the interests of Russia. Gladstone rose and demanded that the 
speaker accusing him and his friends of  treason  should be called to 
order. The call to order was made. Otway, however, repeated his 
description of the Peelites and his question to Palmerston. As is his 
custom, Palmerston refused to reply. The peace terms were 
naturally dependent on the events of the war. As regards the 
Peelites, they had in particular stipulated that a "certain" 
condition, which he could not name, would not be made a conditio 
sine qua non of peace. In his reply to Palmerston, Gladstone for his 
part denied ever having had talks with Palmerston about the peace 
terms.  It might be otherwise with his friend Graham. Moreover, 
he protested against Palmerston's system of affected official 
reserve on the one side, and the concealed hint, ambiguous 
The debate in the House of Commons on June 15, 1855 was reported in The 
Times, No. 22082, June 16, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第308页=====
278 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
allusion and quasi-statement on the other. Let the ministry speak 
out frankly or be silent. Gladstone administered this lesson to 
Palmerston with sanctimonious bitterness. 
The French government has issued in the Constitutionnel a new 
exposé of the conduct of the war in the coming months. 3 These 
exposés have now become not only fashionable but also regular. 
Although in profound contradiction with themselves, they are 
valuable as revelations of "various" plans of campaign devised 
against Russia by Louis Bonaparte. They are valuable insofar as 
they document the disappearance of one Bonapartist illusion after 
the other. The first plan was that of "grand war" by means of the 
Austrian alliance, with 500,000 Austrians and 100,000 Frenchmen 
on the Vistula and the Dnieper. The plan would have assigned to 
the French Army the same numerically subordinate relationship to 
the Austrians as the English have to the French in the Crimea. It 
would have conceded the revolutionary initiative to Russia. Austria 
refused to act. The plan was dropped. The second plan was the 
"war of nationalities", a general rising of the "oppressed, who 
are constantly looking to the West". It would have provoked a 
storm between the Germans, Italians and Hungarians on the one 
side,  and the Slav insurrection on the other. Recoiling on France, 
it would have threatened the "second" Empire with its end. The 
imitation "man of iron" shrank back from it. The plan was 
dropped. All this is now over and done with. Austria has done its 
duty, Prussia has done its duty, the whole world has done its duty, 
and Bonaparte has come to the third and most modest plan. 
"Local war for local aims." The French troops in the Crimea are 
not fighting for glory, they are merely there on police duty. The 
question to be settled is a purely local one: predominance in the 
Black Sea, and it must be cleared up there, on the spot. It would 
be foolishness to give the war wider dimensions. "Respectfully but 
firmly" the allies will crush any Russian attempt to resist them in 
the Black Sea, and then they or the Russians or both will make 
peace. Nothing is left of the high-sounding phrases, not even the 
phrase about civilisation, nothing but the fight for the 3rd point 204 
of the Vienna Protocol. War with a purely local aim, remarks the 
imperial oracle, can only be waged with local means. Deprive the 
Russians simply of their predominance in the Black Sea! In our 
next letter we shall showb that Bonaparte has descended from 
A. de Cesena's article on the aims and prospects of the Crimean war 
published in the semi-official Constitutionnel, No. 169, June 18, 1855.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 287-89.— Ed. 

=====第309页=====
The Debate on Layard's Motion 279 
"grand war" to the "war of the nationalities", and from the "war 
of nationalities" to "local war serving local purposes and waged 
with local means", and this final war becomes "preposterous". 
Written on June 16, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 279, June 19, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 

=====第310页=====
280 
Karl Marx 
PRINCE ALBERT'S TOAST.— 
THE STAMP DUTY ON NEWSPAPERS 
London, June 18. There were several curious circumstances 
connected with the publication of Prince Albert's speech and 
Palmerston's reply. The speeches were made at Trinity House3 on 
Saturday, June 9. The following Monday the daily newspapers 
only mentioned the annual dinner of the Trinity Brotherhood in 
passing, without dwelling on Prince Albert's toast. Not until 
Wednesday, June 13, did The Daily News print the toast and the 
speech of thanks, followed by The Times on Thursday, June 14. It 
has turned out that their publication was a trick of Lord 
Palmerston's to restore his own popularity at the expense of his 
royal wellwisher. Prince Albert has now discovered at his own 
expense where "self-sacrificing confidence" in the noble viscount 
leads,  the sort of confidence that he recommended so eagerly to 
the country. The following extract from Reynolds' Weekly will show 
how Prince Albert's toast was received bv the majority of the 
weekly press. Reynolds' Weekly,b it should be noted, has a circulation 
of 2,496,256 copies. After detailed criticism it goes on to say: 
"The royal censor maintains that no want or weakness exist, which is not at once 
denounced, and even sometimes exaggerated with a kind of morbid satisfaction. The 
patience of the English people is proverbial; [...] like Issachar, they may be compared 
to an ass crouched down between two burdens—usury and land monopoly; but this 
taunt of the Prince-Consort is the most insolent and deadly insult with which even 
Englishmen have borne. "Morbid satisfaction!" That is, the English people have a 
d The headquarters of the British mariners' corporation in London (for the 
speeches of Prince Albert and Palmerston see this volume, pp. 273-76).— Ed. 
Reynolds' Weekly Newspaper.—Ed. 

=====第311页=====
Prince Albert's Toast 281 
'morbid satisfaction' in contemplating the horrible sufferings to which [...] treason and 
aristocratic imbecility have exposed our heroic soldiers—morbid satisfaction at having 
been made the dupes of Austria—morbid satisfaction at having squandered 
40,000,000/. of treasure and lost 40,000 of the bravest human lives—morbid 
satisfaction at having excited the distrust of the ally whom we profess to help, and the 
contempt of the foe whom we wish to chastise. But the charge is not only insolent and 
insulting, it is also false and calumnious in the highest degree. Whatever may be the 
faults of the English people—and heaven knows they are many—they have no 
satisfaction in the miseries and disasters of their soldiers and sailors, nor in the 
disgrace that have been entailed on the national character [...] with the exception of 
royal Germans, aristocratic traitors and their abominable and disgusting parasites.... 
At the same time, we are prepared to admit that it is very difficult for an obese and 
lazy Sybarite and feather-bed soldier to conceive of the sufferings and trials of real 
soldiers and sailors.... There is one thing in which we agree with the royal warrior. 
Constitutionalism is an enormous sham  — a most clumsy, bungling, incongruous, and 
mischievous form of government. But the Prince is silly in supposing that there is no 
other alternative than despotism. We beg to remind him that there is such a thing as 
republicanism — an alternative to which it is possible for this nation to have recourse, 
and in the direction of which, we think, the current of public opinion is tending, 
rather than to the unlimited despotism which the martial Prince covets." 
Thus writes Reynolds' [Weekly  Newspaper]. 11 
The new Act for the abolition of stamp duty on  newspapers  received 
the royal assent last Sunday and will come into force on June 30. 
Thereafter, stamp duty is only required on copies to be sent free 
by post. Of the London dailies, The Morning Herald is the only one 
to announce that it will reduce its price from 5d. to 4d. A large 
number of weeklies, on the other hand, such as Lloyd's,h Reynolds', 
The People's Paper, etc., have already announced a reduction from 
3d. to 2d. A new London daily, the Courier and Telegraph, in the 
same format as The Times, is announced, price 2d. As for new 
weekly papers at 2d., the following have appeared in London to 
date:  The Pilot (Catholic magazine); the Illustrated Times and Mr. 
Charles Knight's Town and Country Paper. Finally Messrs. Willet 
and Ledger have given notice of a new weekly London penny 
paper.0 What is more significant, though, is the revolution in the 
provincial press caused by the abolition of stamp duty. In Glasgow 
alone four new daily penny papers are to appear. In Liverpool 
and Manchester the papers that have hitherto only appeared 
weekly or twice weekly are to turn into dailies at 3d., 2d., and Id. 
The emancipation from London of the provincial press, the 
a Reynolds' Newspaper, No. 253, June 17, 1815.— £<i. 
b Lloyd's Weekly Newspaper.—Ed. 
c The Penny Times. Marx uses the English expression "penny paper" here and 
below.— Ed. 

=====第312页=====
282 Karl Marx 
decentralisation of journalism 
Manchester School in their fiei 
stamp duty. 
Written on June 18, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeiti 
No. 283, June 21, 1855 
Marked with the sign x was, in fact, the main aim of the 
:e and protracted campaign against 
Printed according to the news­
paper 
»ft 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第313页=====
283 
Karl Marx 
ECCENTRICITIES OF POLITICS 
In his book on the Congrès de Vienne the Abbé de Pradt justly 
accuses that dancing Congress, as it was called by the Prince de 
Ligne, of having laid the foundation of Russian supremacy in 
Europe and given its sanction thereto. 205 
"Thus,"  he exclaims, "it happens that the European war of independence 
against France terminates with the subjection of Europe to Russia. It was not worth 
while to fatigue oneself so much for such a result." 
The war against France being at the same time a war against the 
Revolution, an Anti-Jacobin war, naturally led to a transfer of 
influence from the West to the East, from France to Russia. The 
Vienna Congress was the natural offspring of the Anti-Jacobin 
War, the Treaty of Vienna the legitimate product of the Vienna 
Congress, and Russian supremacy the natural child of the Treaty 
of Vienna. The crowd of English, French and German writers 
cannot therefore be allowed to throw all the blame upon Prussia, 
because Frederick William III, by his blind devotion to the 
Emperor Alexander and the categorical orders he gave his 
Embassadors to side with Russia in all important questions, 
thwarted that infamous triumvirate, Castlereagh, Metternich and 
Talleyrand, in their deep-laid schemes to erect safe territorial 
barriers against Russian encroachments206 and thus ward off the 
unpleasant but inevitable consequences of the system they had so 
zealously imposed upon the Continent. Even to such an un­
scrupulous conclave it was not given to falsify the logic of events. 
Dominique Dufour de Pradt, Du Congrès de Vienne, t. I, p. 262.— Ed. 

=====第314页=====
284 Karl Marx 
Russia's preponderance in Europe being inseparable from the 
Treaty of Vienna, any war against that power not proclaiming at 
the outset the abolition of the Treaty, cannot but prove a mere 
tissue of shams, delusions and collusions. Now, the present war is 
undertaken with a view not to supersede but rather to consolidate 
the Treaty of Vienna by the introduction, in a supplementary way, 
of Turkey into the protocols of 1815. Then it is expected the 
conservative millennium will dawn and the aggregate force of the 
Governments be allowed to direct itself exclusively to the 
"tranquilization" of the European mind. From the following 
remarkable passages translated from the Prussian Marshal 
Knesebeck's pamphlet "relating to the equilibrium of Europe, 
composed at the meeting of the Vienna Congress,"11 it will be seen 
that even at the epoch of that Congress, the principal actors were 
fully aware of the maintenance of Turkey being as much 
interwoven with "the system" as the partition of Poland.20' 
"The Turks in Europe! What harm have the Turks done to you? They are a 
powerful and honest people; quiet for centuries among themselves, if you leave 
them undisturbed, confidence may be placed in them. Have they ever deceived 
you? Are they not sincere and frank in their policy? Brave and warlike indeed; but 
this is wholesome and good for more reasons than one. They are the best bulwark 
against the encroachment of the Asiatic surplus population, and just because they 
have a footing in Europe they ward off every encroachment. If they were driven 
away, thev themselves would encroach. Just imagine them away. What would 
happen? Either Russia or Austria would get possession of those entire countries, or 
a separate Greek State would be founded there. Do you wish to make Russia still 
more powerful? to draw down on this side also the colossus on your own heads? 
Are you not yet content that it has advanced its stride from the Volga to the 
Niémen, from the Niémen to the Vistula, and will now probably extend it as far as 
the Wartha? And if this be not the case, do you wish to turn the power of Austria 
in the direction of Asia, and to make it by that means weak or indifferent to the 
maintenance of its central position to the encroachments from the West? Recall to 
yourselves the position of the past times of John Sobieski, of Eugène of Savoy, and 
of Montecucculi. In what way did France at first gain dominion in Germany, but 
because the power of Austria was of necessity constantly engaged in opposing the 
encroachments of Asia? Do you wish to restore this state of things, and to increase 
it still more bv bringing it nearer Asia? 
"A separate Grecian" or Byzantine "State is, therefore, to be founded! Would 
this ameliorate the condition of Europe? In the state of torpidity into which that 
people" (the Greeks) "have sunk, would not Europe, on the contrary, be obliged to be 
continually under arms to protect itself against the returning Turks? Would not 
Greece become merely a Russian colony, in consequence of the influence which 
Russia would possess over this State through religion, commerce and interest? 
Rather let the Turks alone where they are, and do not arouse the restless power 
a K. F. Knesebeck, Denkschrift, betreffend die Gleichgewichts-Lage Europa's, beim 
Zusammentritte des Wiener Congresses verfasst. The excerpts quoted below (with 
omissions and explanatory addenda) are from pp. 11-14.— Ed. 

=====第315页=====
Eccentricities of Politics 285 
while it reposes. 'But,' exclaims a well-meaning philanthropist, 'men are maltreated 
there. The most beautiful part of the world, including the ancient Athens and 
Sparta, is inhabited by barbarians!' 
"It may be all true, my friend: men there are at present, or until lately were, 
strangled; but they are bastinadoed, beaten, scourged, and sold in other parts. 
Before you change anything, think whether you could also better at the same 
moment; whether the bastinado and the rod, with Greek perfidy, would be easier 
to bear than the silk cord and a firman" with the Turks. "Do away first with 
those things, and with the slave trade in Europe, and console yourself about 
the uncivilization of the Turk; his uncivilization has power, his faith gives courage, 
and we require strength and courage to be able to watch tranquilly the Muscovite 
pushing himself on as far as the Wartha. 
"The Turks are then to be maintained, but the Poles as a nation are to sink! 
Yes, it cannot be otherwise. 
"Whatever has strength to stand, endures; where all is rotten, it must perish. 
And so it is. Let any one ask himself what would be the result if the Polish nation 
were maintained independent in its natural character. Drunkenness, gluttony, 
servility, contempt for all that is better and for every other people, contemptuous 
derision of all order and custom, extravagance, dissoluteness, venality, cunning, 
treachery, immorality from the palace to the cottage; that is the element in which 
the Pole exists. For this he sings his songs, plays on his fiddle and guitar, kisses his 
mistress and drinks out of her shoe, draws his sword, strokes his moustaches, 
mounts his horse, marches to battle with Dumouriez and Bonaparte or anybody 
else on earth, delights in excessive brandy and punch, fights with friend and foe, 
ill-treats his wife and his  serf,  sells his property, goes abroad, disturbs half the 
world, and swears by Kosciuszko and Poniatowski Poland shall not die as sure as he 
is a Pole. 
"Here you behold what you would support when you say Poland shall be 
restored. 
"Is such a nation worthy to exist? Is such a people fit for a Constitution? A 
Constitution presupposes an idea of order, [...] for it does nothing but regulate, 
and points out to each member of the community the place to which he belongs, 
for which reason it determines the ranks of which the State is to be composed, and 
to each rank its place, condition, order, rights and duties, as well as the course of 
the State machine and the principal traits of its government. What! Rule a people 
when no one will have order? A Polish King (Stefan Batory) once exclaimed: 
'Poles  — not order—you know none; not government—you respect none; to a 
mere chance you owe your continued existence!' 
"And thus it is still. Disorder, immorality, is the Poles' element. No; let this 
people undergo the bastinado. Providence wills it. Heaven knows what is profitable 
for mankind. 
"For the present, therefore, no more Poles!" 
Old Marshal Knesebeck's views are then to be realized by the 
present war—a war undertaken for the extension and consolida­
tion of the Vienna Treaty of 1815. During the whole period of the 
Restoration and the Monarchy of July there was the delusion 
afloat in France that Napoleonism meant the abolition of the 
Treaty of Vienna, which had placed Europe under the official 
tutelage of Russia, and France under the "surveillance publique" of 
Europe. Now the present imitator of his uncle, haunted by the 

=====第316页=====
286 Karl Marx 
inexorable irony of his fatal position, is proving to the world that 
Napoleonism means war, not to emancipate France from, but to 
subject Turkey to, the Treaty of Vienna. War in the interest of the 
Treaty of Vienna and under the pretext of checking the power of 
Russia! 
This is the true "Idée Napoléonienne," 3 as interpreted by the 
resurrection-man at Paris. The English being the proud allies of 
the second Napoleon, feel themselves, of course, authorized to 
deal with the sayings of the old Napoleon as his nephew does with 
his ideas. We are then not to be astonished at reading in a recent 
English author (Dunlop) b that Napoleon foretold that the next 
struggle with Russia would involve the great question of whether 
Europe should be "Constitutional or Cossack." Before the days of 
the Lower Empire208 Napoleon was supposed to have said 
"Republican or Cossack."0 However, the world lives and learns. 
—And it is for failing to appreciate the glories of the Treaty of 
Vienna and of the European "system" based upon it, that the 
Tribune is charged with infidelity to the cause of human rights 
and of Freedom! 209 
Written on June 19, 1855 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4437, July 10, 1855 as a 
leading article 
An allusion to Louis Bonaparte's book Des idées napoléoniennes, published in 
Paris in 1839.— Ed. 
This presumably refers to A. G. Dunlop's book Cossack Rule, and Russian 
Influence in Europe, and over Germany.—Ed. 
A reference to Napoleon's statement on St. Helena that Europe was bound to 
become "Republican or Cossack" (quoted by E. Las Cases in his Mémorial de 
Sainte-Hélène..., t. 3, p. 111).— Ed. 

=====第317页=====
287 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
THE LOCAL WAR. — 
DEBATE ON ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM. — 
REPORT OF THE ROEBUCK COMMITTEE, ETC. 210 
London, June 20. The local war proclaimed by Bonaparte in the 
Constitutionnel 3 is a war in the Black Sea, and its purpose is the 
destruction of the alleged Russian supremacy in the Black Sea—a 
supremacy, moreover, that has never stood the test at sea, not 
even against the Turks. What is the state of affairs at the moment? 
The whole coast, from Constantinople to the Danube on one side 
and right round the Circassian shores to Balaklava and Eupatoria, 
has been snatched out of the hands of the Russians. Only Kaffa 
and Sevastopol are still holding out, with the former hard-pressed 
and the latter so situated that it will have to surrender as soon as it 
is seriously threatened. And more. The fleets are carrying out 
mopping-up operations in the inland sea of Azov, their light 
ships penetrate as far as Taganrog and every important place 
is bombarded by them. No part of the coast remains in Russian 
hands except the stretch from Perekop to the Danube, approxi­
mately Vis of their possessions on this coast. Supposing Kaffa 
and Sevastopol also fall, and the Crimea is under the control of 
the allies, then what? Russia will not conclude peace, as it has 
already proclaimed. It would be madness. It would be tantamount 
to giving up a battle after the vanguard has been repulsed, at the 
very moment that the main force is entering the battlefield. What 
remains for the allies to do? We are told they can destroy Odessa, 
Kherson, Nikolayev. They can go ahead and land a strong army at 
Odessa, fortifying it against any number of Russians and then 
a A reference to A. de Cesena's article on the aims and prospects of the 
Crimean war published in the semi-official Constitutionnel, No. 169, June 18, 
1855.—  Ed. 

=====第318页=====
288 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
acting according to circumstances. In addition, they can send a 
detachment of troops to the Caucasus, wiping out the Russian 
army in Georgia and the other trans-Caucasian possessions (under 
General Muraviev) and cutting off the Russian Empire from its 
south Asian possessions. And if Russia still refuses to make peace? 
Russia cannot make peace as long as the enemy remains on its soil. 
It has not lost through any peace it has concluded in the last 150 
years.  Even at Tilsit211 it acquired additional territory, and that 
peace was made before a single Frenchman had set foot on 
Russian soil. Having only recently succeeded to the throne, 
Alexander II dare not even attempt something that would have 
been perilous even for Nicholas. He cannot suddenly break with 
the imperial tradition. Supposing the Crimea has been captured 
and garrisoned with 50,000 allied troops; that the Caucasus and all 
the possessions in the south have been cleared of Russians; that an 
allied army is holding the Russians in check at the Kuban and the 
Terek; that Odessa has been taken and turned into a fortified 
camp with an army of 100,000 men; that Nikolayev, Kherson and 
Ismail have been destroyed or occupied by the allies—will the 
allies then limit themselves to maintaining their positions and 
count on wearing out the Russians? Their troops in the Crimea 
and the Caucasus will dwindle from disease faster than they can be 
replaced. Their main army at Odessa would have to be supplied 
by the fleets, as the land produces nothing for hundreds of miles 
around Odessa. Wherever they dared emerge from the camp they 
would be exposed to the harassment of the Russians, particularly 
the Cossacks. To force the latter to stand and fight would be 
impossible. It would always be to their advantage to entice the 
allies into the interior of the country. They would respond to all 
allied advances with a slow retreat. Moreover, large armies cannot 
be kept idle in a fortified camp for long. Disease and the gradual 
breakdown of discipline and morale would compel the allies to 
take a decisive step. It is therefore not feasible to occupy the main 
points of the coast and wait until the Russians find themselves 
constrained to give in. It would also be a military blunder. To 
control a coast it is not sufficient to hold the main points. Only 
possession of the country's interior guarantees possession of the 
coast. With the allied forces established on the south coast of 
Russia, conditions would arise which would compel them to 
advance into the interior. But this is where the difficulties begin. 
All the way to the borders of the gubernias of Podolia, Kiev, 
Poltava and Kharkov the terrain is mostly uncultivated steppe, 
very poorly watered and yielding nothing but grass, and not even 

=====第319页=====
The Local War 289 
that when the heat of the sun has dried it out. Taking Odessa, 
Nikolayev and Kherson as their base of operations, where is the 
object at which the allies are supposed to direct their efforts? 
There appears to be none except Moscow, 700 miles away and 
requiring 500,000 men to march on it. But all this presupposes 
not merely the strict neutrality of Austria but even her moral 
support. And where is it? In 1854 Prussia and Austria declared 
the advance of the Russians across the Balkans to be a casus belli. 
Why not, then, a French advance on Moscow or even Kharkov in 
1856? One must never for a moment forget that any army 
marching from the Black Sea towards the interior of Russia 
exposes its flank to Austria just as much as a Russian army 
advancing from the Danube into Turkey, and therefore, at a given 
distance, renders its lines of communication and its base of 
operations, i.e. its very existence, dependent on Austria. Should 
the allied armies pursue the Russians on a wild goose chase into 
the interior under these circumstances? It is nonsense, sheer 
nonsense, but it is the inevitable consequence of Bonaparte's latest 
plan of "local warfare". On all counts an inexorable dialectic 
drives the "local war" beyond the appointed local boundaries, 
turning it into a "grand" war, but without the prerequisites, 
conditions and resources of a grand war. Nevertheless, 
Bonaparte's latest "plan" remains important. It constitutes an 
admission that other powers must step on to the stage to continue 
the war against Russia, and that the restored Empire finds itself 
condemned to the impotence of waging war on Russia on a local 
scale when it can only be done on a European scale. All the 
grotesque metamorphoses undergone by the "idées napoléonien-
nes"' d under the restored Empire have been surpassed by the 
transformation of the Napoleonic war against Russia into a "local 
war". 
In the debate on administrative reform, to be resumed this evening, 
the amendment moved by Bulwer on behalf of the Tories gave the 
government the opportunity of defeating the "administratives" by 
a majority of 7 to l. 212 What characterised the whole debate was its 
junior civil-servant nature, which it failed to transcend for a 
moment. Details of favouritism and nepotism, investigations as to 
the "best type of examination", resentment at merit neglected  — 
everything was petty and pusillanimous. One seemed to be 
listening to a written complaint from an assistant gamekeeper to a 
An allusion to Louis Bonaparte's book Des idées napoléoniennes, which was 
published in Paris in 1839.— Ed. 
11—3754 

=====第320页=====
290 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
government board. Aberdeen, too, had a reform of the bureaucra­
cy in petto,3 Gladstone asserted. Derby too, asserted Disraeli. Not 
less my Ministry, asserted Palmerston. So the city gentlemen need 
not swing into action to reform, inform and re-organise our 
Departments. Too kind! 
In their earlier agitation the English bourgeoisie took the ruling 
caste by surprise and drew the masses behind them as a chorus, by 
vastly overstating their real purpose in their programme. This 
time the programme does not even venture to rise to the height of 
the real purpose. One after the other you assure us that you do 
not seek the fall of the aristocracy but simply want to patch up the 
government machine in friendship with us! Very well!c Friendship 
for friendship! We are willing to reform the administration for 
you—within its traditional limits, of course. "Administrative 
reform" is not a matter of conflict between the classes as you 
assert. It is simply a question of the "issue", of "well-intentioned" 
reforms. As initial evidence of your good intentions we ask you to 
leave the details to us, and it is only a matter of details. We 
ourselves must know best how far we can go without jeopardising 
our class, without administrative reform inadvertently becoming a 
matter of conflict between the classes and forfeiting its philan­
thropic character. The reforming bourgeoisie are obliged to 
acquiesce in this ironic language of aristocratic bonhomie because 
they themselves speak a fraudulent language to the masses. The 
aristocracy, ministry and opposition, Whigs and Tories were never 
mistaken about the relationship of the Administrative Reformers 
to the masses. They knew that the agitation had failed before it 
had even had a chance to be produced in Parliament. And how 
could they have been mistaken? Although the Reform Association 
admitted selected guests only to its Drury Lane meeting, although 
its audience was sifted twice and thrice, their fear of a popular 
motion, or even simply an unorthodox speech, was so excessive 
that the chairmand declared at the opening of the meeting that the 
audience was only there to "listen to the addresses of the speakers 
announced in the programme", no "resolutions" would be put to 
the vote, therefore "no amendments could be moved", and "no 
addition could be made to the list of set speakers". Agitation 
Up his sleeve.— Ed. 
Gladstone's speech was made on June 15, 1855 and the speeches by Disraeli 
and Palmerston on June 18. The Times, Nos. 22082 and 22084, June 16 and 19, 
1855.—  Ed. 
Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 
S. Morley. For a description of the meeting see this volume, p. 274.— Ed. 

=====第321页=====
The Local War 291 
like this is definitely not suitable to impress the tough English 
oligarchy and wring concessions from it. 
The report of the Roebuck committee which was read out in the 
Commons the day before yesterday envelops its points in a broad, 
feeble gush of words.3 It contains timidly formulated criticism of 
the various departments, such as Ordnance, the Commissariat, the 
Medical Department, etc. It condemns Palmerston for his manage­
ment of the militia, and the entire coalition ministry for the 
heedless frivolity with which it undertook the Sevastopol expedi­
tion. As during the examination of witnesses the committee 
scrupulously avoided inquiring into the fundamental reasons for 
the stupendous calamities, it is only natural that in the report, too, 
it is obliged to keep the balance between quite general criticism of 
the political heads and petty, detailed faulting of the administra­
tive machinery. On the whole the committee has fulfilled its 
purpose of acting as a safety-valve for the pressure of public 
passions. 
The daily papers have let out a cry of indignation at the 
"dastardly murders" by the Russians at Hangö. 213 The fact that 
ships sailing under flags of truce have been misused by the British 
for taking soundings with a plummet and spying out Russian 
positions, e.g. at Sevastopol and Odessa, is, however, admitted by 
The Morning Chronicled 
Written on June 20, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 287, June 23, 1855 Published in English for the first 
iiii • time 
Marked with the sign X 
a "State of the Army before Sebastopol", The Times, No. 22084, June 19, 
1855.—  Ed. 
This refers to a Letter to the Editor signed R.G.A. published in The Morning 
Chronicle, No. 27607, June 20, 1855.—Ed. 

=====第322页=====
292 
Karl Marx 
ANNOUNCEMENT CONCERNING THE TAKING 
OF SEVASTOPOL.—FROM THE PARIS BOURSE.— 
ON THE MASSACRE AT HANGÖ IN THE HOUSE 
OF LORDS214 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 289, June 25, 1855] 
London, June 22. The second act of La Sonnambula* had just 
finished, and the curtain of the Drury Lane Theatre was coming 
down when suddenly a mighty drum-roll summoned the audience 
back into the auditorium just as they were thronging out for 
refreshments. The curtain went up again, the manager stepped 
forward and, with great melodramatic effect, made the following 
announcement: 
"Ladies and gentlemen! I am very happy to be able to announce a great event 
to you. The allies have taken Sevastopol." 
There were enthusiastic shouts of triumph, people cheered and 
applauded, bouquets were flying everywhere. The orchestra 
played and the audience sang "God save the Queen", "Rule 
Britannia" and "Partant pour la Syrie". b A voice from the upper 
regions shouted "La Marseillaise!", but it died away without an 
echo.  The manager's improvised speech was based on a tele­
graphic message which did not, however, report the taking of 
Sevastopol, but on the contrary that the French in their storming 
of the Malakhov, and the English in their storming of the Redan, 
on June 18, had been repulsed, suffering considerable losses}15 That 
play actor yesterday evening on the stage at Drury Lane copied 
another manager who almost a year ago, in the middle of a 
military spectacular,216 improvised the following unexpected and 
unforgettable words: "Messieurs, Sevastopol est pris!"c 
Opera by the Italian composer Vincenzo Bellini.— Ed. 
"Leaving for Syria", a song frequently performed at official festivities during 
the Second Empire in France. The titles of the English songs are given in English 
in the original.— Ed. 
"Gentlemen, Sevastopol has been taken!" — Ed. 

=====第323页=====
Announcement Concerning the Taking of Sevastopol 293 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 290, June 26, 1855] 
The reason for the incomprehensible obduracy with which 
Pélissier continues to exhaust the forces of the allied army in 
one-sided assaults on the southern flank is said to be not military 
but financial. It is well known that Bonaparte has already drawn 
bills of exchange for thousands of millions on the prospect of 
taking Sevastopol and had them discounted by the French nation. 
He is on the point of drawing bills for another 800 millions or 
thereabouts. 217 It therefore seemed essential to make an advance 
payment on the bills already circulating, and if crossing the 
Chernaya brings real results an assault on the southern flank of 
Sevastopol promises to produce a dazzling illusion of  success.  "The 
fall of Sevastopol" would look well in the prospectus for the new 
loan, and if a loan can be made for the war, why not a war for the 
loan? Confronted with that point of view, all the criticism based on 
military science will have to be silent. There is anyway quite a 
mysterious link between the war in the Crimea and the Bourse at 
Paris.  It is well known that, just as all roads lead to Rome, so all 
electric wires converge in the Tuileries, where they end in a "secret 
closet". It has been noticed that the most important telegrams are 
published in Paris hours later than in London. During those hours a 
certain Corsican by the name of Orsi is said to be extremely busy at 
the Paris Bourse. It is generally known in London that this fellow 
Orsi was previously the "providential" agent on the London Stock 
Exchange 3 of the man in exile at the time.b 
If the dispatches from Admiral Dundas, which have been 
published by the English Cabinet, did not already prove that there 
was no abuse of a flag of truce on the part of the officers and 
crew of the boat dispatched by the  Cossack,  which could serve as a 
pretext for the Russian massacre at Hangö? 1& then the story told by 
the Invalide Russe would dispel any doubt on this point. c Evidently 
the Russians did not suspect that a sailor, John Brown, had 
escaped with his life and would testify against them. The Invalide 
therefore considered it superfluous to accuse the English boat of 
espionage, or of taking soundings, etc., and concocted its tale on 
the spur of the moment, following Abbé Sieyès in the conviction 
that "dead men tell no tales". d The matter was raised in the 
Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
Louis Bonaparte.— Ed. 
c Marx refers to the reports on the Hangö events published in Russky  Invalid, 
No. 118, June 1, 1855, and The Times, No. 22086, June 21, 1855.— Ed. 
"La mort sans phrase" — words allegedly uttered by Sieyès when voting 
in the French Convention on January 17, 1793 for Louis XVI's execution.— Ed. 

=====第324页=====
294 Karl Marx 
House of Lords yesterday. We cannot, however, agree with The 
Times that this assembly, otherwise "cold and unimpassioned by 
habit and by policy',' was on this occasion trembling with the 
unadulterated expression of true passion. 3 We find affected 
indignation in the choice of phrase, but in fact affectionate 
concern for "Russian honour" and an anxious warding off of 
national revenge. The Tories' spokesman for Foreign Affairs, the 
Earl of Malmesbury, rose yesterday, set forth the facts briefly and 
then exclaimed: 
"I have ransacked English history, and I cannot find an instance of a similar 
atrocious act [...]. What course does the Government mean to take under the 
circumstances? [...] It is a matter of the greatest importance to every officer 
and every army in Europe that the matter should be noticed and that con­
dign punishment should be meted out to the perpetrators [...]•" 
Clarendon, the Whigs' Foreign Secretary, declared that he shared 
the "indignation" of his colleague. It is an outrage so horrible and 
unparalleled, so utterly at variance with the usages and the 
customs of civilised nations, that we are compelled to believe that 
the perpetrators of it cannot have acted upon the instructions or 
with the permission of their superiors. It was possible that the 
person in command of the 500 Russians had not been a 
commissioned officer0 (every English officer down to the rank of 
lieutenant has a commission, not sergeants and other non­
commissioned officers, however). It is therefore quite plausible 
that the Russian Government disapproved of this act. He had 
therefore instructed the English Envoy at Copenhagen0 to request 
the Danish Envoy at St. Petersburg0 to state to the Russian 
Government that the British Cabinet waited with extreme anxiety 
to learn what steps the Russian Government had taken or 
intended to take to establish their attitude to an act which might 
possibly have happened in some one of the savage islands of the 
South Sea without exciting any degree of surprise, but which was 
not to be expected in civilised Europe, and which, if not severely 
and appropriately punished by the Russian Government, would 
deserve the severest of reprisals. Clarendon closed by saying that 
the British Government was awaiting the Russian statement before 
determining what course to adopt. 
a The Times, No. 22087, June 22, 1855. The debate in the House of Lords on 
June 21, 1855, was reported in the same issue of The Times.—Ed. 
Marx uses the English words "commissioned officer" and, below, "commis­
sion".— Ed. 
A. Buchanan.— Ed. 
O. Plessen.— Ed. 

=====第325页=====
Announcement Concerning the Taking of Sevastopol 295 
Lord Colchester believes that 
"in any such case as this it was the duty of the officer commanding [...] immediately 
to communicate by a flag of truce with the highest Russian authority he could find, 
mentioning the circumstances, and demanding that the atrocity should be dis­
claimed". 
The Earl of Malmesbury rises again and declares that on the 
whole he has no fault to find with the course taken by the 
Government, but shudders to have heard Clarendon use the word 
"reprisal". England must not sink to the level of the Russians in 
this matter. She must take moral revenge on the Tsar,a have every 
Court in Europe protest at the St. Petersburg court and thus 
pronounce an international judgment on Russia. Anything like 
"revenge" would only serve to increase public "disgust". The 
nominal president of the English Cabinet,15 Earl Granville, avidly 
seizes upon the Tory's words and recites like a good Christian: 
"No retaliation!" 
Now, what does this outburst of passion in the Lords, as The 
Times calls it, show us? Full of moral indignation the Tory asks a 
question. The Whig outdoes him in indignation, but himself 
surreptitiously provides the Russian Government with an excuse 
and shows them the way to get out of the situation, by repudiating 
and sacrificing a subaltern. He covers his retreat by muttering 
something about reprisals "as a possibility". Lord Colchester seeks 
to chastise the Russians for having murderously attacked inter­
mediaries bearing a flag of truce by sending another intermediary 
under a flag of truce. The Tory rises again and invokes a moral 
solution rather than reprisals. The Whig, glad to be rid of 
reprisals, even only as a possibility, joins in the call for "No 
retaliation!"0  Pure farce. The House of Lords places itself between 
the passions of the people and Russia in order to protect Russia. 
The only peer who did not act the part was Brougham. "If ever the 
land called for blood," he said, "it is now." As far as English 
sensitivity to "reprisals" and "jus talionis" 0 is concerned, the Earl 
of Malmesbury has ransacked English history without finding an 
Irisjh page, or an Indian or North American. When was the 
English oligarchy ever squeamish except in the case of Russia! 
In the report of the Roebuck committee, which was read to the 
House, oddly enough the final paragraph has been suppressed, a 
Alexander II.— Ed. 
Marx refers here to the Lord President of the Council.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 
Right of retaliation.— Ed. 

=====第326页=====
296 Karl Marx 
paragraph which Roebuck proposed and which was accepted by 
the committee after a vote. It runs as follows: 
"What was planned and undertaken without sufficient information, was 
conducted without sufficient care or forethought. This conduct on the part of 
the Administration was the first and chief cause of the calamities which befell our 
army in the Crimea."3 
Written on June 22, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
Nos.  289 and 290, June 25 and 26, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time. 
Marked with the sign X 
The report, headlined "State of the Army before Sebastopol", was pub­
lished in The Times, No. 22084, June 19, 1855; the omitted paragraph is 
quoted here from the article "The Sebastopol Committee", The Times, No. 22087, 
June 22, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第327页=====
297 
Karl Marx 
THE MISHAP OF JUNE 18.—REINFORCEMENTS 
London, June 23. June 18, the anniversary of the battle of 
Waterloo,219 was of course not celebrated in London this year. It 
was to be celebrated in the Crimea with a victory, not over the 
French but alongside the French. The event seemed all the more 
piquant since Raglan, Wellington's famulus, was carrying out his 
command more or less under the orders of a General of Napoleon 
III.a The inscription was ready, only the event that it was to 
immortalise failed to happen. It will not escape people's notice that 
in the history of the restored Empire there is a fatalistic 
predilection for resurrecting its great dates, affirming successes 
and disavowing misfortunes, in a second and improved edition. 
This glorious resurrection of Napoleonic dates, successful so far 
with respect to blows against the Republic, is failing with respect to 
blows against the enemy abroad. And the Empire without the 
victories of the Empire reminds one of the adaptation of 
Shakespeare's Hamlet which not only lacks the melancholy of the 
Prince of Denmark but also the Prince  himself.b  Paris had 
arranged for a great feat of arms in the Crimea on December 2, 
1854. c It came to grief thanks to a surplus of rain and a shortage 
of ammunition. On June 18, 1855 an improved version of the 
battle, with a different result, was to be performed at Sevastopol. 
Instead, the Franco-English army suffered its first serious defeat. 
London is in sombre mood; the stocks have fallen, and in one 
day Palmerston has forfeited what it took him months of the most 
Pélissier. — Ed. 
An allusion to the English saying: "It's Hamlet without the Prince." — Ed. 
The third anniversary of the Bonapartist coup in France.— Ed. 

=====第328页=====
298 Karl Marx 
subtle tactical manoeuvrings to secure. The defeats occurred on 
June 18; the telegraphed dispatch was not published until June 
22. Last Thursday the official  Globe*  announced on Palmerston's 
behest that "nothing serious had happened". In the Commons' 
night sitting of the same date Palmerston solemnly repeated the 
same statement.15 And now it has been established that he received 
the telegram as early as 4 p.m. on Wednesday, June 20. The 
Leader asserts that this happened at the urgent request of Paris, 
where the misfortune in the field had been turned into good 
fortune at the stock exchange.0 However that may be, the 
cockneysd are seriously annoyed with Palmerston. Being beaten is 
bad enough. But to let oneself be carried away at Drury Lane and 
Covent Garden by the Ministers' tricks into ludicrous ovations at 
the capture of Sevastopol—this is too bad, Sire! 
We prepared our readers sufficiently for the fact that Pélissier's 
stubborn persistence in attacking the southern flank heralded 
disaster for the allied armies. Immediately he assumed command 
we drew attention to the mitigating circumstance that lack of 
transport would place great obstacles in his way when it came to 
operations in the open field/ Both points have now been 
confirmed by the English press. For instance, today's Morning 
Herald says: 
"The army cannot take the field—as, according to all rules of strategy, it ought 
to do, beat the relieving army at Simpheropol [...]• That it cannot do because the 
'Government grave-diggers', Neglect and Delay, have been at their murderous 
work again, and of 20,000 baggage cattle, which we ought to have, we have not 
above 4,000 or 5,000; and this while disease is once more becoming rampant in a 
camp which contains every possible incitement to fever, cholera, and plague. This 
incapacity of moving them, the same as it was at Varna and in the Valley of Death, 
is the cause why, day after day, our generals are compelled to waste the lives of our 
soldiers in desperate attacks upon almost impregnable earthworks, while the noble 
army that should take the field is lying on the Chernaya, without cavalry or means 
of transport." g 
The ingenious negligence with which, from the outset of the 
war, the Cabinet administered the resources at its disposal has 
The Globe and Traveller. Marx refers to the issue of June 21,  1855.—  Ed. 
Palmerston made that statement on Friday, June 22. The Times, No. 22088, 
June 23, 1855.—Ed. 
c The Leader, No. 274, June 23, 1855.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English words "this is too bad, Sir!" — Ed. 
This refers to the German version of the article "Sevastopol" (see this volume, 
pp. 260-66) and to other articles in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 
g The Morning  Herald,  No. 22465, June 23,  1855.—  Ed. 

=====第329页=====
The Mishap of June 18 299 
been shown anew by financial reports which have just been 
published. According to this official report the balance in hand on 
January 1, 1854 of the money allocated for the army was 
£1,835,882 and the amount expended on the army on April 1, 
1854 was only £2,270,000, so that less than three-quarters of the 
money voted by Parliament for raising troops was used. And what 
was it that, according to the report of the Roebuck Committee,3 
ruined the army? Overwork. And what is the reason of this 
overwork? Lack of numbers. But this lack of numbers, as the 
financial report shows, was the result of a Cabinet intrigue. And 
Prince Albert complains that the Queenb has no troops at her 
disposal! And that the Cabinet's hands are tied! The Layard 
debate revealed that the self-same Cabinet, whilst complaining 
about lack of transport, sent troopships to Portsmouth via 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne to collect coal, or from the Clyde to 
Liverpool and from Deptford to Woolwich to be inspected by the 
Surveyor.c 
The misfortunes of June 18 have made immediate reinforcements 
necessary. Accordingly orders were issued yesterday for immediate 
embarkation: the 15th Infantry Regiment, which has recently 
returned from Ceylon; the King's 51st Light Infantry Regiment, 
the 80th and 94th Infantry Regiments, all the India detachments 
from the various depot companies, and 1,200 men of the cavalry 
are to leave immediately for the theatre of war. Orders have been 
telegraphed to Marseilles for special steamships to be sent from 
there to the Governors of Malta and Gibraltar and to the Lord 
High Commissioner0 of the Ionian Islands with the task of 
transporting all the men who are fit for service not only from the 
garrisons but also from the reserve of the Household Brigade and 
all the reserve battalions that can be spared before the arrival of 
the relieving regiments and militia. Sailing at once are: the 13th 
Light Infantry Regiment of Gibraltar, the 31st Infantry Regiment 
from the Ionian Islands, the 48th from Corfu, the 54th from 
Gibraltar, the 66th from Gibraltar, and the 92 nd Scottish 
Highland Regiment from Gibraltar. British forces in the Crimea 
will thus be increased by more than 13,000 men. To this must be 
added four field batteries, a troop of mounted artillery and 
reinforcements for the siege train, all of which are ready and are 
a "State of the Army before Sebastopol", The Times, No. 22084, June 19, 
1855.—  Ed. 
Victoria. For an account of Prince Albert's speech see this volume, 
pp. 273-76.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 

=====第330页=====
300 Karl Marx 
only waiting for ships. Incidentally, England is in the same 
position as in 1854. No reserve army. And even worse. In 1854, as 
the Roebuck report admits, Palmerston prevented and delayed 
the formation of the militia; but in 1855 he succeeded in 
practically dissolving the militia which was already formed. As one 
can see from the above list, the reinforcements absorb not only the 
bulk of the army, but they also swallow up the depot battalions 
and break up the cadres. Thus England resembles Montesquieu's 
savage who fells the tree in order to get hold of the fruit.3 The 
economical country par excellence is spending its military capital 
instead of the interest. This is the result of the manoeuvrings of 
the Cabinet in which Prince Albert demands that one have implicit 
confidence! Nothing could be less accurate than the view held on 
the Continent that England has too small a population to be able 
to raise armies. In 1815, after 22 years of war, England had more 
than 350,000 men mobilised! But the Cabinet purposely ignores 
both remedies: raising the bounty for the standing army, and 
balloting for the militia. What else can one expect from the Prime 
Minister, whose debts Princess Lieven paid in 1827, and whom she 
appointed Foreign Secretary in 1830, a man who procured for 
Russia eight years of dictatorship over Turkey by means of the 
Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi, and eight days before the treaty 
expired, renewed it in the Dardanelles treaty220? 
Yesterday in the Commons Roebuck gave notice that on July 3 
(Tuesday week) he would table the following motion: 
"That this House, deeply lamenting the sufferings of our army during the 
winter campaign in the Crimea, and coinciding with the resolution of their 
committee that the conduct of the Administration was the first and chief cause of 
these misfortunes, hereby visits with its severe reprehension every member of the 
Cabinet whose counsels led to such disastrous results." 
Roebuck's motion therefore deliberately includes: Palmerston, 
Russell, Clarendon, Granville and Lansdowne, at one and the 
same time members of the present Cabinet and the previous one. 
The small, venomous, Thersites-like but crafty barrister, the 
perfect master of parliamentary tactics, saw himself forced into 
tabling this motion, as his constituents at Sheffield threatened to 
subject him to a vote of no confidence at a public meeting, 
because he had denounced Palmerston on Tuesday and expressed 
his confidence in the same Palmerston on Thursday. Prince 
Albert's unfortunate interference in matters between the Cabinet 
a Ch. Montesquieu, L'Esprit des Lois, V, XIII.— Ed. 
b The Times, No. 22088, June 23,  1855.—  Ed. 

=====第331页=====
The Mishap of June 18 301 
and Parliament, and his challenging of the authority of Parliament 
was a further reason for this motion, which threatens to rob the 
Queen once more of "her confidential servants". 
We shall report on the latest activities and fortunes of the 
Administrative Reformers, and the machinations of the clerics next 
time. 
Written on June 23, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 291, June 26, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 

=====第332页=====
302 
Karl Marx 
ANTI-CHURCH MOVEMENT.f—DEMONSTRATION 
IN HYDE PARK] 221 
London, June 25. It is an old and historically established maxim 
that obsolete social forces which are still nominally in possession of 
all the attributes of power and continue to vegetate long after the 
basis of their existence has rotted away, because the heirs are 
quarrelling among themselves over the inheritance even before the 
obituary notice has been printed and the testament read, such 
forces, when they face their final death struggle, will once more 
muster all their strength, pass from the defensive to the offensive, 
become defiant instead of evasive and seek to draw extreme 
conclusions from premises which have not only been put in 
question but already found wanting. This is the case today with 
the English oligarchy and the Church, its twin sister. Countless 
attempts at reorganisation have been made within the Established 
Church, both the High and the Low Church, attempts to come to 
an understanding with the Dissenters 222 and thus to set up a 
compact force to oppose the impious mass of the nation. There 
has been a rapid succession of religious coercive measures. The 
pious Earl of Shaftesbury, formerly known as Lord Ashley, 
mournfully announced in the House of Lords that in England 
alone five million had become wholly alienated not only from the 
Church but from Christianity.3 "Compelle intrare",h is the reply of 
the Established Church. It leaves it to Lord Ashley and similar 
dissenting, sectarian and overwrought pietists to pull the chestnuts 
out of the fire for it. 
Shaftesbury's speech on June 12, 1855. The Times, No. 22079, June 13, 
1855.—  Ed. 
"Compel them to come in, that my house may be filled" (Luke, 14  : 23).— Ed. 

=====第333页=====
Anti-Church Movement 303 
The first measure of religious coercion was the Beer Bill,3 which 
shut down all places of public entertainment on Sundays, except 
between 6 and 10 p.m. This Bill was smuggled through the House 
at the end of a sparsely attended sitting, after the pious men had 
bought the support of the big public-house owners of London by 
assuring them that the licensing system would continue, that is, 
that big capital would retain its monopoly. Then came the Sunday 
Trading Bill, the third reading of which has now taken place in 
the Commons and separate clauses of which have just been 
debated in the Committee of the Whole House.223 This new 
coercive measure too was sure to receive the votes of big capital, 
because only small shopkeepers keep open on Sunday and the 
proprietors of the big stores are quite willing to do away with the 
Sunday competition of the small fry by parliamentary means. In 
both cases there is a conspiracy of the Church with the monopoly 
of capital, but in both cases religious penal laws are to be imposed on 
the lower classes to set the conscience of the privileged classes at rest. 
Just as the Beer Bill did not hurt the aristocratic clubs so the Sunday 
Trading Bill does not interfere with the Sunday occupations of 
genteel society. The workers get their wages late on Saturday: it is for 
them alone that trade is carried on on Sundays. They are the only 
ones compelled to make their purchases, small as they are, on 
Sundays. The new bill is therefore directed against them alone. The 
French aristocracy said in the eighteenth century: For us, Voltaire; 
for the people, the mass and the tithes. The English aristocracy says 
in the nineteenth century: For us, sanctimonious phrases; for the 
people, Christian practice. The classical saints of Christianity 
mortified their body for the salvation of the souls of the masses; the 
modern, educated saints mortify the bodies of the masses for the 
salvation of their own souls. 
This alliance between a dissipated, degenerating and pleasure-
seeking aristocracy and the Church, an alliance based on squalid 
profiteering on the part of beer magnates and monopolistic 
wholesalers, occasioned yesterday a mass demonstration in Hyde 
Park, the like of which London has not seen since the death of 
George IV, "the first gentleman of Europe". We saw it from 
beginning to end and do not think it is an exaggeration to say that 
the English Revolution began in Hyde Park  yesterday.  The latest news 
from the Crimea acted as an effective ferment upon this 
"unparliamentary", "extraparliamentary", and "anti-parliamentary" 
demonstration. 
a Marx uses the English terms "Beer Bill" and, below, "Sunday Trading 
Bill".— Ed. 

=====第334页=====
304 Karl Marx 
When someone objected that the Sunday Trading Bill was 
directed exclusively against the poor and not at all against the rich, 
Lord Robert Grosvenor, who initiated the Bill, retorted that 
"the aristocracy was largely refraining from employing its servants and horses 
on Sundays". 
The following wall poster, issued by the Chartists, which could be 
seen throughout London at the end of last week announced in 
huge letters: 
"New Sunday Bill prohibiting newspapers, shaving, smoking, eating and drinking 
and all kinds of recreation and nourishment, both corporal and spiritual, which the 
poor people  still enjoy at the present time. An open-air meeting of artisans, workers and 
'the lower orders' generally of the capital will take place in Hyde Park on Sunday 
afternoon to see how religiously the aristocracy is observing the Sabbath and how 
anxious it is not to employ its servants and horses on that day, as Lord Robert 
Grosvenor said in his speech. The meeting is called for three o'clock on the right bank 
of the Serpentine (a small river in Hyde Park) on the side towards Kensington 
Gardens. Come and bring your wives and children in order that they may profit by the 
example their 'betters' set them!" 
It should be borne in mind, of course, that what Longchampsh 
means to the Parisians, the riding track along the Serpentine in 
Hyde Park means to the English haute volée c—the place where in 
the afternoon, particularly on Sunday, they parade their magnifi­
cent carriages and their finery and exercise their horses, followed 
by swarms of lackeys. It will be realised from the above poster that 
the struggle against clericalism assumes the same character as 
every serious struggle in England—that of a class struggle waged 
by the poor against the rich, the people against the aristocracy, the 
"lower orders" against their "betters". 
Approximately 50,000 people had gathered at the place 
announced on the immense lawn on the right bank of the 
Serpentine in Hyde Park at about 3 o'clock. Gradually the 
assembled multitude swelled to a total of at least 200,000 due to 
additions from the other bank. One could see that small groups of 
people were made to move from one spot to another. The police, 
who were present in force, were obviously endeavouring to 
deprive the organisers of the meeting of what Archimedes had 
asked for to move the earth, namely, one firm spot to stand upon. 
Finally a fairly large crowd made a firm stand and Bligh the 
Chartist constituted himself chairman on a small eminence in the 
midst of the throng. No sooner had he begun his harangue than 
From Grosvenor's speech in the House of Commons on June 13, 1855. The 
Times, No. 22080, Tune 14, 1855.— Ed. 
b 
A hippodrome on the outskirts of Paris.— Ed. 
The upper crust.— Ed. 

=====第335页=====
Anti-Church Movement 305 
Police Inspector Banks at the head of 40 truncheon-swinging 
constables explained to him that the Park was the private property 
of the Crown and that meetings could not be held there. After 
some negotiations in which Bligh sought to demonstrate to him 
that parks were public property and in which Banks rejoined he 
had strict orders to arrest him if he should insist on carrying out 
his intention. Bligh shouted amidst the bellowing of the masses 
surrounding him: 
"Her Majesty's police declare that Hyde Park is private property of the Crown and 
that Her Majesty a is unwilling to let her land be used by the people for their meetings. 
So let's move to Oxford Market." 
With the ironical cry: "God save the Queen!"b the throng broke 
up to walk to Oxford Market. But meanwhile Finlen, a member of 
the Chartist Executive,224 rushed to a tree some distance away 
followed by a crowd who in a twinkle formed so close and compact 
a circle around him that the police abandoned their attempt to get 
at him. 
"Six days a week," he said, "we are treated like slaves and now Parliament wants 
to rob us of the bit of freedom we still have on the seventh. These oligarchs and cap­
italists allied with sanctimonious parsons wish to do penance by mortifying us 
instead of themselves for the unconscionable murder in the Crimea of the sons of 
the people." 
We left this group to approach another where a speaker 
stretched out on the ground addressed his audience from this 
horizontal position. Suddenly, shouts could be heard on all sides: 
"Let's go to the Row, to the carriages!" The heaping of insults 
upon riders and occupants of carriages had already begun. The 
constables, who constantly received reinforcements from the city, 
drove the promenading pedestrians off the road. They thus 
helped to form a thick throng of people on either side of 
Rotten-Row, from Apsley House along the Serpentine as far as 
Kensington Gardens—a distance of more than a quarter of an 
hour walk. The spectators consisted of about two-thirds workers 
and one-third members of the middle class, all with women and 
children. The involuntary actors comprising elegant ladies and 
gentlemen, "commoners and lords", in their high coaches-and-
four with liveried lackeys in front and behind, joined by a few 
elderly gentlemen on horseback slightly under the weather from 
the effects of wine—were not showing off this time but were 
made to run the gauntlet. A babel of jeering, taunting, discordant 
ejaculations, in which no language is as rich as English, enveloped 
Victoria.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English words.— Ed. 

=====第336页=====
306 Karl Marx 
them from both sides. As it was an improvised concert, instru­
ments were lacking. The chorus therefore had to use its own 
organs and was compelled to confine itself to vocal music. And 
what a diabolical concert it was: a cacophony of grunting, hissing, 
whistling, squeaking, snarling, growling, croaking, shrieking, 
groaning, rattling, howling, gnashing sounds! A music that could 
drive men mad and move a stone. To this must be added 
outbursts of genuine old-English humour peculiarly mixed with 
long-contained seething wrath. "Go to church!"3 were the only 
articulate sounds that could be distinguished. One lady soothingly 
offered a prayer book in conventional binding from her carriage. 
"Give it to read to your horses!"b came the thunderous reply, 
shouted by a thousand voices. When the horses started to take 
fright and began to rear, buck and finally run away, jeopardising 
the lives of their genteel burdens, the derisive shouting grew 
louder, more menacing and more ruthless. Some of the noble 
lords and ladies, among them Lady Granville, the wife of a 
minister and President of the Privy Council, were forced to alight 
and use their own legs. When some elderly gentlemen rode past 
whose apparel and especially their broad-brimmed hats betrayed 
their special claim to perfectitude in matters of  belief,  the cries of 
fury as if by command were drowned by irrepressible laughter. One 
of these gentlemen lost his patience. Like Mephistopheles he made 
an impolite gesture, sticking out his tongue at the enemy.0  "He is a 
word-catcher, a parliamentary man! He fights with his own 
weapons!" someone shouted on one side of the road. "He is a saint! 
He is psalm singing!" was the antistrophe from the opposite side. 
Meanwhile the metropolitan electric telegraph had informed all 
police stations that a riot was about to break out in Hyde Park and 
the police were ordered to the theatre of military operations. Soon 
one detachment after another marched at short intervals through 
the double file of people, from Apsley House to Kensington 
Gardens, each received with the popular ditty: 
"Where are gone the geese? 
Ask the  police!  "e 
a Marx uses the English words "Go to church!" followed by a German 
translation in brackets.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English words "prayer book" and "Give it to read to your 
horses!" followed by a German translation in brackets.— Ed. 
Cf. Goethe, Faust, Der Tragödie erster Teil. Hexenküche. — Ed. 
Marx gives these and the following exclamations in English and translates 
them in brackets.— Ed. 
Marx quotes in English and gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第337页=====
Anti-Church Movement 307 
This was an allusion to a notorious theft of geese which a 
constable had perpetrated in Clerkenwell a short time ago. The 
spectacle lasted three hours. Only English lungs could perform 
such a feat. During the performance opinions such as "This is 
only the beginning!" "That is the first step!" "We hate them!" 
and the like were voiced by various groups. While rage was 
inscribed on the faces of the workers, such smiles of blissful 
self-satisfaction covered the physiognomies of the middle classes as 
we had never seen there before. Shortly before the end the 
demonstration increased in violence. Canes were menacingly 
raised at the carriages and the cry of "you rascals!" could be 
heard through the welter of discordant noises." During the three 
hours zealous Chartists, men and women, made their way through 
the throng distributing leaflets which stated in big type: 
"Reorganisation of Chartism! 
"A big public meeting will take place next Tuesday, June 26th, in the Literary and 
Scientific Institute in Friar Street, Doctors' Commons, to elect delegates to a 
conference for the reorganisation of Chartism in the capital. Admission free." 
Most of the London papers carry today only a brief account of 
the events in Hyde Park. No leading articles have appeared as yet, 
except in Lord Palmerston's Morning Post. It writes that 
"a scene in the highest degree disgraceful and dangerous was enacted yesterday 
in Hyde Park", an "outrage on law and decency. [...] It was distinctly illegal to 
interfere, by physical force, with the free action of the Legislature  [...].We  must 
have no repetition of violence on Sunday next, as has been threatened".* 
At the same time, however, it declares that the "fanatical" Lord 
Grosvenor is solely "responsible" for this  mischief,  and that he has 
provoked the "just indignation of the people"! As though 
Parliament had not passed Lord Grosvenor's Bill in three 
readings! Or perhaps he too brought his influence to bear "by 
physical force on the free action of the Legislature"? 
Written on June 25, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 295, June 28, 1855 
Marked with the sign x 
a Marx uses the English words followed by a German translation in 
parenthesis.— Ed. 
b The Morning Post, No. 25422, June 25, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第338页=====
308 
Karl Marx 
MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 
London, June 26. During yesterday's sitting in the Commons 3 
Mr. Otway rose and asked whether Lord Palmerston 
"intended to take any measures to induce Lord Grosvenor to withdraw the Sunday 
Trading Bill." (General cheering. ) 
Lord Palmerston replied: 
"If my noble friend" (Grosvenor) "hears that cheer I think he will be disposed 
to attend to it." (Cheers.) 
As one can see the mass demonstration in Hyde Park has 
intimidated the Commons. They are dropping the Bill and make 
bonne mine à mauvais jeu. c The Times describes the scene on 
Sunday in Hyde Park as a "great act of retributive justice", and 
calls the Bill a product of "class legislation", "a measure of 
organised hypocrisy" and pokes fun at this display of "parliamen­
tary theology ". d 
On the question of the Hangö massacre 225 the First Lord of the 
Admiralty, Sir Charles  Wood,  announces that today he has 
received dispatches from Admiral Dundas. According to them five 
seamen and the Finnish captain had been killed by the fire of the 
Russians, four seamen and two Finns had been wounded and 
The speeches by, Otway, Palmerston, Wood, Duncombe and Malins were 
published in The Times, No. 22090, June 26, 1855.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English terms "Sunday Trading Bill" and "cheers".— Ed. 
Make the best of a bad job.— Ed. 
d The Times, No. 22090, June 26,  1855.—  Ed. 

=====第339页=====
Miscellaneous Reports 309 
taken prisoner, and three officers, four seamen and two Finns had 
been taken prisoner without being wounded. Admiral Dundas had 
written a letter to the Governor of Helsingfors3 stating what had 
happened and remonstrating most strongly against the atrocious 
act of firing on a boat under a flag of truce. He had received an 
answer in which the Governor excused and to a certain extent 
justified the act. He declared that the officers and soldiers said 
they had not seen the flag of truce. They had been irritated 
because on some other occasions vessels had hoisted the Russian 
flag and it had been reported in the newspapers that English 
vessels had elsewhere hoisted the flag of truce to take soundings. 
The whole justification can be reduced to the short-sightedness of 
the Russian soldiers and officers. At any rate it is a sign of 
civilisation that Russian soldiers should read newspapers and be 
"irritated" by newspaper reports. 
The Administrative Reformers™ have announced another meet­
ing for tomorrow in the Drury Lane [Theatre]. As before: a 
meeting with tickets of admission and speakers by previous 
arrangement. Pontius Pilate asked: What is truth? Palmerston 
asked: What is worthiness} The Administrative Reformers have 
replied: worthiness is equivalent to a man's annual earnings.15 
Accordingly those reformers have undertaken a change in their 
internal organisation. Previously the members of the general 
committee—in reality electing themselves—had to go through the 
motions of an election in the form of a general vote taken within 
the association. Now anyone who pays £50 and above in annual 
subscriptions becomes a member of the general committee as a 
matter of course. Previously the ten-guinea and the one-guinea 
rule were considered sufficient for protecting the "movement" 
from plebeian importunity. Now the ten-guinea gentlemen are no 
longer considered sufficiently "respectable" and the one-guinea 
people are actually regarded as the mob. The posters advertising 
the meeting say literally: 
"Admission only by ticket, which can be obtained by members. Anyone 
subscribing £50 and above is a member of the general committee, anyone 
subscribing ten guineas or one guinea is a member of the association." 
The rights of members within the association are therefore 
calculated according to a sliding scale of guineas. The naked, 
J. M. Nordenstam.— Ed. 
In the original a pun on the word "Verdienst" which can mean either 
'merit", "deserts", "worthiness" or "earnings", "income".— Ed. 

=====第340页=====
310 Karl Marx 
undisguised dominion of guineas is brutally proclaimed. The City 
reformers have let their secret out. What agitators! Moreover, 
circumstances were not very favourable for them lately. Drum-
mond openly accused them in Parliament of "systematic immorali­
ty" and "corruption".3 And what fine examples of the purity of 
their class have followed each other in rapid succession, as if on 
command! Firstly The Lancet (medical journal) furnishes proof 
that the adulteration and contamination of all goods and 
foodstuffs is a practice by no means confined to the retail traders, 
but is done in the wholesale trade as a matter of principle. Then it 
transpires that "respectable" City firms have been circulating false 
dock warrants.0 Finally, the great fraudulent bankruptcy, directly 
connected with the theft of deposited securities, of the private 
bank of Strahan, Sir Jones Paul and Bates. In this last instance the 
aristocracy has learned to do homage to the "administrative" 
talent of the City gentlemen, for the bank "administered" mainly 
aristocratic guineas. Palmerston is amongst those to suffer, as is 
the Marquess of Clanricarde, and Admiral Napier has lost almost 
all his wealth. The Church has also been deprived of a good deal 
of worldly goods, since Messrs Strahan, Paul and Bates enjoyed a 
particular odour of sanctity, occasionally chaired meetings for the 
"conversion of heathens" at Exeter Hall, were amongst the first 
subscribers to the society for "the Dissemination of the Bible" and 
were on the committee of the "Association for the Reform of 
Criminals". Their faith had secured them credit. They were the 
favourite bank of clerical gentlemen and independent foundations. 
But their "administrative" talent spared nothing and no one from 
widows' and orphans' allowances down to the small savings of 
sailors. Why not let them administer the "public funds" which 
they are now reaching out for? 
"There are symptoms at this moment among ourselves," ruefully exclaims The 
Daily News, the organ par  excellence  of the City reformers, "which indicate that no time 
is to be lost in averting a dangerous lapse from a high and severe tone of morality 
among our industrial classes." 
The crisis of Messrs Strahan and Co. has of course given rise to 
a runc by the public on the counters of the City's private banks, 
Marx refers to Drummond's speech in the House of Commons on June 18, 
1855.  The Times, No. 22084, June 19, 1855.—Ed. 
Marx uses the English words "dock warrants".— Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第341页=====
Miscellaneous Reports 311 
which up to then had been regarded as far more respectable than 
the joint stock banks. Already the big private bankers are obliged 
"publicly" to invite each other periodically to examine their 
holdings of securities deposited with them, and also to request 
their customers through The Tirhes to inspect for themselves the 
effects entrusted to them. Another circumstance which arises at a 
very inopportune moment for the reforming City gentlemen is the 
following: As is well known, one of their kings, Rothschild, is 
standing as their elected representative at the threshold of the 
Commons, but is not being allowed to enter that Holy of Holies 
because he will not swear "on the true oath of a Christian" and 
because Lord John Russell, his colleague, will not "realise" the 
Jewish Bill.227  And yesterday Duncombe rose to his feet ha­
ving found out that, under an Act of Parliament of 1782, any 
member entering into a delivery contract with the government 
after he has been elected loses his seat in the House of Commons, 
and that Rothschild had stood security for the most recent loan of 
£16,000,000. Having discovered this he gave notice that tomorrow 
evening he would move that a writ be issued for a by-election in 
the City of London. And there is more. Malins followed in 
Duncombe's wake and gave notice of a similar motion against 
Lindsay, who had been directly charged by Sir Charles Wood in 
the reform debate with having negotiated contracts with the 
government for the supplying of ships, while he was and still is a 
member of Parliament. The incident is not only important because 
of the people who have been compromised, a City magnate and a 
City reform magnate! It is important because it reminds the public 
that it was amongst the high dignitaries of the City, those people 
entering into contracts for loans and supplies with the government 
both inside and outside Parliament, that Pitt, Perceval and 
Liverpool, who ignored the act of 1782, found their main sup­
port. The financial aristocracy—at that time more corrupt 
than under Louis Philippe—was the moving-force of the anti-
Jacobin war. Whilst they plucked the golden apples of the 
Hesperides, they demonstrated to the nation in notorious City 
meetings that 
"it must sacrifice money and blood in order to preserve the blessed comforts of 
our holy religion from the desecrating French, and to preserve itself from the 
mournful desperation of atheism". 
Thus the nation is reminded, at the most inopportune time, that 
the City, which is rebelling against the oligarchy, was the forcing 

=====第342页=====
312 Karl Marx 
house in which that same oligarchy grew and put forth its most 
luxuriant blooms. 
Written on June 26, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 297, June 29, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time 
Marked with the sign x 

=====第343页=====
313 
Frederick Engels 
FROM SEVASTOPOL 
Contrary to public expectation the mail of the Pacific, which 
arrived yesterday morning, brings no detailed account of the 
repulse of the Allies at Sevastopol on the 18th of June. We have, it 
is true, some bare statements respecting the number of killed and 
wounded in that affair, on which we briefly comment below. But 
instead of the expected dispatches, we have at last Gen. Pélissier's 
detailed account of the capture of the Mamelon and Quarries. 
Even this however is not of a nature to distinctly show the drift of 
the military policy of the man who now virtually commands the 
200,000 allied troops in the Crimea. We have to trust to negative 
rather than positive evidence if we desire to come to a conclusion 
on that subject. To guess what Pélissier intends to do, we must 
look not so much at what he does as at what he refrains from 
doing. But let us look again at the capture of the Mamelon; it has 
some features that repay examination. 3 
The 6th and 7th of June were devoted to a cannonade on the 
whole line of the allied batteries. But while on the left attack (the 
Flagstaff to the Quarantine Bastion) this cannonade was a mere 
demonstration, on the right attack (Redan to Mount Sapun) it was 
in good earnest. Here the Russian outworks were particularly 
subjected to a heavy fire. Their fire appearing to be sufficiently 
silenced and their defenders sufficiently weakened, on the evening 
of the 7th the assault was ordered. The French had two distinct 
positions to carry, forming two plateaux, separated from each 
other by a ravine; the English one plateau, with a ravine on either 
Instead of this paragraph the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "Detailed and official 
dispatches about the events of June 6, 7 and 8 arrived only a few days  ago."—Ed. 

=====第344页=====
314 Frederick Engels 
side.  The mode in which the two armies prepared for the assault 
was characteristic of their peculiar qualities and traditions. The 
French set apart four divisions, two for each separate attack. Thus, 
against the Mamelon Vert (Kamtchatka redoubt) two divisions 
were collected, and two more against Mount Sapun; each attack 
having two brigades, in distinct columns, in front for the charge, 
and two brigades in reserve. Thus eighteen battalions were to 
charge and eighteen to support—in all at least 28,000 to 30,000 
men. This disposition was perfectly in accordance with the 
regulations and traditions of the French army, which in grand 
charges always attacks in columns, and sometimes in rather too 
unwieldy ones. The English, if formed in the same way, would 
have required two divisions for their part of the business; two 
brigades for the attack and two for the reserve. True to their own 
system, however, they told off for the charge about 1,000 men, or 
about two battalions—hardly equal to half a French brigade. They 
had strong reserves no doubt; but, nevertheless, where the French 
would have employed three men they employed only one. This is 
a consequence partly of the British system of attacking in line 
instead of in column, and partly of the great tenacity of the British 
soldier in defensive positions. These 1,000 British soldiers were 
not even let loose all at once; at first 200 charged and carried the 
Russian works; then 200 more were sent as a reenforcement; the 
remainder followed in the same way; and then 1,000 British 
soldiers, once established in the Russian position, held it against 
six successive attacks, and under the continuous front and 
enfilading fire of the Russian works. 3 When the morning dawned, 
of their number above one-half were dead or wounded; but the 
place was theirs, and some of them had even now and then 
followed the Russians into the Redan. This was an exploit which 
no 1,000 Frenchmen could have achieved. But the passive 
endurance of the British soldier under fire knows hardly any 
bounds; and when, as in that night, the hand-to-hand combat 
takes the form of his favorite amusement, the street-row, then he 
is in his own element, and will fight six to one with all the reckless 
delight in the world. 
As to the French attack, Gen. Pélissier gives us a long account of 
the brigades and regiments engaged, and has a complimentary 
Instead of this sentence the German version has: "These 1,000 British soldiers 
were not even let loose all at once; at first 200 charged and carried the Russian 
works; the remainder followed in the same way, and these British soldiers, once 
established in the Russian position, held it against successive attacks, and under the 
continuous front and enfilading fire of the Russian works." — Ed. 

=====第345页=====
From Sevastopol 315 
word for each of them; but his statements as to the respective 
positions and lines of attack of each column are very indistinct, 
while his narrative of the development of the action is almost 
incomprehensible, and an indication of the losses is entirely 
wanting. By comparing this official bulletin with other accounts, 
we are enabled to make out that the French took the Mamelon in 
the first onset, followed the retiring Russians up to the Malakoff 
bastion, entered it here and there, were repulsed by the Russians, 
again lost the Mamelon, drew up in a semi-circle behind it, and by 
another advance finally took possession of it. On the other side of 
the Careening Bay ravine the Volhynsk redoubt was taken with 
little loss; the struggle at the Selenghinsk redoubt, which is 
situated to its rear, was more severe, but nothing like that at the 
Mamelon. Owing to the exaggerated number of troops which 
Pélissier brought to bear upon the points attacked, and to the 
unwieldy columns they must have formed, the French loss must 
have been very great. The fact that no official statement of it has 
been made, is sufficient to prove this. We should say from 1,500 
to 2,000 would not be exaggerated. 3 
As to the Russians, they were placed in peculiar circumstances. 
They could not garrison these outworks with great numbers of 
men, as this would have been to expose them to certain 
destruction by the enemy's artillery, even before the assault was 
attempted. Thus, they could only keep a minimum of defenders in 
these redoubts, and had to trust to the commanding fire of their 
artillery in the Malakoff and the Redan, as well as to the action of 
their reserves in the place. They had two battalions—about 800 
men—in the Mamelon. But the redoubts once taken, they never 
got into them again so as to establish themselves properly. They 
discovered that a besieged army may very quickly lose a position, 
but cannot easily regain it. b Beside this, the Mamelon redoubt was 
so complicated in its construction, by traverses and blindages, 
forming a sort of impromptu casemates, that although exceedingly 
well covered against artillery, its garrison was almost helpless, 
against an assault—each compartment being scarcely capable of 
holding a gun and the men to serve it. As soon, therefore, as the 
guns were dismounted, the infantry who had to defend the work 
against an assault, had no space for a position from which they 
could act upon the assaulting columns by simultaneous fire in 
masses. Broken up into small detachments they succumbed to the 
This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung.—Ed. 
The last two sentences do not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第346页=====
316 Frederick Engels 
impetuosity of the assailants, and again proved that where they 
cannot fight in large masses, the Russian infantry neither equals 
the intelligence and quickness of glance of the French, nor the 
desperate bull-dog valor of the English. 
The engagement of the 7th was followed by a ten days' repose, 
during which trenches were finished and connected, batteries 
traced, and guns and ammunition brought up. At the same time 
two reconnaissances were pushed into the interior of the country. 
The first, to Baidar, 12 miles from Balaklava, on the road which 
leads down to the south coast, was merely preliminary; the second, 
toward Aïtodor, six miles beyond Chorgun, on the Chernaya, was 
made in the right direction. Aïtodor is situated on the high 
ground leading toward the valley of the Upper Belbek, by which 
alone, as we have stated long ago, a the Russian position at 
Inkermann can be effectually turned. But . then, to send a 
reconnoitering column thither, and not to follow it up by 
occupying the ground in force and commencing operations at 
once,  is nothing but putting the enemy on his guard by pointing 
out to him from which side he is menaced. Now, it may be that 
the country about Aïtodor was found impracticable, but we doubt 
it; and even in that case, the intention of a flank march to turn the 
enemy is too plainly indicated in this maneuver. 0 If this flank 
march could be used as a mere feint, well and good; but we are 
convinced that it must be made the chief movement, and therefore 
it should not be hinted at before the Allies really mean to 
undertake it. 
Instead, however, of following up these weak demonstrations in 
the field, General Pélissier attempted something very different. 
The 18th of June, Waterloo day, 229 saw the English and French 
troops marching abreast to storm the Russian lines on the right 
attack. The English attacked the Redan, the French  Malakoff. 
Waterloo was to be thus avenged; but unfortunately the affair 
went wrong. They were both repulsed with terrific slaughter. The 
official lists state their loss at about 5,000, but from the known 
want of veracity in the French accounts we are induced to 
calculate it about 50 per cent higher. As no particulars have been 
received, the tactical features of this battle must be left entirely 
a See this volume, pp. 201-04.— Ed. 
Instead of this sentence the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "The intention of a flanking 
march to bypass the enemy was too plainly indicated in this manoeuvre to be 
misunderstood by the Russians." The rest of this paragraph does not occur in the 
Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第347页=====
From Sevastopol 317 
aside for the present. What we can take into consideration now is 
its strategical and political nature. 
Pélissier is held up by the entire press of Europe as a man who 
will not be commanded by telegraph from Paris, but who acts 
unflinchingly by his own judgment. We have had reasons to doubt 
this peculiar sort of obstinacy, and the fact of his attempt to 
avenge Waterloo "nobly," that is by a common victory of the 
French and English, fully confirms our doubt. The idea of such 
a feat could only come from his Majesty, the Emperor of the 
French—the great believer in anniversaries, the man who cannot 
let the 2d of December 3 pass by in any year without attempting 
some extraordinary trick; the man who, before the Chamber of 
Peers, b said that his special vocation was to avenge Waterloo. That 
Pélissier had the strictest orders to celebrate the Battle of Waterloo 
by a splendid anniversary there can be no doubt. The way in 
which he did'it is the only part of the business for which he is 
responsible. 0 
The assault upon the lines of the redoubt of Karabelnaya must, 
as we are more than ever convinced, be considered a blunder. But 
until we know the man thoroughly, we will continue to give 
Pélissier the benefit of every circumstance which at this distance 
from the spot may appear to involve a doubt. Now, it may be that 
the sanitary state of the Heracleatic Chersonese—a subject to 
which we long since called attention 0—is such that a speedy 
termination of the operations in that small space of ground is 
highly desirable. The exhalations from the decomposing bodies of 
25,000 men and 10,000 horses are such as to seriously affect the 
health of the army during Summer. Of the other abominations 
accumulated there we will not speak. Pélissier may think that it is 
a I.e., the anniversary of the Bonapartist coup in France, which took place on 
December 2,  1851.—  Ed. 
The Senate.— Ed. 
c Instead of the preceding two paragraphs the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "Instead 
of following up these weak demonstrations in the field Pélissier undertook the 
abortive assault of June 18. He did this on the orders of the man who had declared 
before the Chamber of Peers that 'his special vocation was to avenge Waterloo'. 
Pélissier is only responsible for the way he carried out his instructions. As no 
detailed reports have been forthcoming so far, the tactical features of this battle 
cannot be judged for the present. As regards strategy, every child realises now that 
the nearest road to Sevastopol leads through Inkerman and the Russian army 
defending it." The passage that follows, up to the words "The necessity of 
reenforcing her force in the Crimea...", does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung.— 
Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 109-12, 113-17,  215-17.  — Ed. 

=====第348页=====
318 Frederick Engels 
possible in a short time to drive the Russians from the south side, 
to destroy the place completely, to leave but a few men to guard it, 
and then to take the field with a strong army. We make this 
supposition because we prefer to see at least some rational motive 
in the actions of an old soldier. But if this is the case he mistook 
the strength of the place. We said at the time, that any attempt to 
follow up the successes of the 7th against the town itself would be 
defeated3; our.opinion is confirmed by events. We said the key to 
Sevastopol lay north of Inkermannb; the engagement of the 18th 
seems to prove it. 
Thus we are ready to admit that Gen. Pelissier was led by 
perfectly logical considerations to prefer an assault on Karabelnaya 
to an advance into the field; but at the same time we must equally 
admit that people on the spot are very apt to take minor facts for 
the premises of their conclusions, and that Pélissier, by the repulse 
of the 18th, appears to be convicted of having given in to this 
weakness; for if it shows strength of character to stick obstinately 
to the business in hand, it equally shows weakness of intellect to 
follow up that business in a roundabout way, because it has once 
been entered upon. Pelissier would be right in attempting to take 
Sevastopol at all hazards; but he is evidently wrong in not seeing 
that the nearest road into Sevastopol leads through Inkermann 
and the Russian army defending that position. 
Unless the allied armies take good care to profit without delay 
by their superiority, they will before long find themselves in a very 
awkward position. The necessity of reenforcing her force in the 
Crimea has long been recognized by Russia. The completion of 
the reserve battalions of the regular army, and the levy and 
organization of the militia in 200 battalions, ^Jbut more especially 
the reduction of the Austrian army of observation to 180,000 
men—the rest being either dismissed on furlough or stationed in 
the interior of the empire—now offer an opportunity to do this.c 
In consequence a reserve army has been formed at Odessa, about 
25,000 men of which are said to be stationed at Nikolaieff, some 
twelve to fifteen days' march from Sevastopol. Two divisions of 
grenadiers are also said to be on the march from Volhynia. By the 
middle of July therefore, and perhaps sooner, the Russians may 
again have recovered the superiority of numbers, unless decisive 
See this volume, pp. 264-66.— Ed. 
See this volume, p. 249.— Ed. 
In the Neue Oder-Zeitung the words between the dashes do not occur.— Ed. 

=====第349页=====
From Sevastopol 319 
defeats of the troops now opposing the Allies occur in the mean 
time.  We are, indeed, informed that 50,000 more Frenchmen are 
marching to Toulon and Marseilles for embarkation; but they will 
certainly be too late, and can hardly do more than fill up the gaps 
which battle and sickness (now reappearing in the allied camp) 
have made in the ranks.3 
The operations in the Sea of Azoff have destroyed one source 
of supply for the Russians; but as the Dnieper is far more than the 
Don the natural outlet of the Russian corn districts, there is no 
doubt that great quantities of it are at Kherson—more than the 
Russians in the Crimea require to feed them. Thence the 
transport to Sympheropol is so not very difficult. Whoever expects 
from the Azoff expedition a serious and immediate effect on the 
provisioning of Sevastopol, labors under a great error. 
The scales, though for some time past turned in favor of the 
Allies, may yet be balanced again, or even be turned against them. 
The Crimean campaign is far from being decided, if the Russians 
act promptly. 
Written about June 29, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4439, July 12, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1057, July 13, 1855 and the 
New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 772, July 14, 
1855 as a leading article; an abridged and 
altered German version was first published 
in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 301, July 2, 
1855,  marked with the sign x 
The German version ends here.— Ed. 

=====第350页=====
320 
Karl Marx 
MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS 
London, June 30. As Lord Grosvenor refuses to withdraw his 
Sunday Trading Bill 3 voluntarily, posters have appeared in 
London's busiest streets today inviting people to attend another 
monster demonstration in Hyde Park tomorrow afternoon. When 
Grosvenor asked whether the sudden change in opinion of the 
majority was inspired by the mob in Hyde Park, the House was 
childish enough to reply with a vigorous No! No!b 
In passing, replying to the question of a Tory peer, Panmure 
mentioned that the Ministers had issued a proclamation to the 
army in the name of the Queen, according to which certain corps 
and certain regiments, those at present in the theatre of war, are 
to receive (not only for the duration of their present service but 
also back-dated for several months) a significant increase in pay 
and an increase in their pensions.0 This announcement has, for 
the time being, been made in the name of the Queen,*1 while the 
House of Commons was in session and without the Ministers 
giving the House any information. Thus the Ministers are 
arrogating to themselves a right which constitutionally is the 
exclusive prerogative of the House of Commons, that of fixing the 
pay of the army. However, they have to go before the House in a 
few weeks' or days' time to have their promised increases passed. 
Marx uses the English name.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English words "No! No!". It was on June 26, 1855 that 
Grosvenor asked a question in the House of Commons about the demonstration in 
Hyde Park on June 24 (see this volume, pp. 303-04).— Ed. 
Panmure's speech in the House of Lords on June 28, 1855, in reply to a 
question by Richmond. The Times, No. 22093, June 29, 1855.— Ed. 
Victoria.— Ed. 

=====第351页=====
Miscellaneous Reports 321 
But the proclamation anticipated the vote of the House. If the 
House were to reject the demand it would come into conflict with 
the army. This is the answer to the finding of the Roebuck 
Committee to the effect that the Ministry was responsible for the 
misfortunes endured by the army. A step in the direction pointed 
by Prince Albert.3 
Bouverie's Bill, which had its second reading in the House of 
Commons yesterday,*5 is significant as far as English commercial 
law is concerned. In England up to now anyone receiving a 
definite share of the profits of a business was regarded as a 
partner and as such was liable with the whole of his  possessions  for 
the commercial commitments of that business. Bouverie's Bill, 
tabled in the name of the Ministry, aims to abolish this legal 
obligation. Even more important is his Bill concerning joint-stock 
companies. Up to now every member of a company of this kind was 
liable not only for the sum of his own share but also to the full extent of 
his possessions  for all the obligations of the company. According to one 
of the Bills the liability of the individual shareholder is to be 
limited to the amount of the shares he holds but this applies only 
to companies whose total capital amounts to at least £20,000, the 
articles of association of which are signed by shareholders whose 
shares total at least £15,000, and where at least 20 per cent of the 
total capital has been paid up. The mere necessity of a law of this 
kind proves how much the legislature has been in the hands of 
high finance until now, which has succeeded, in this the first 
trading nation in the world, in subjecting commercial contracts to 
the most absurd and arbitrary legal restrictions. The new Bill 
claims that it is its principle "to place labour and small capitalists 
on an equal footing (in terms of commercial law) with big capital." 
And how is this to be done? By excluding share-capital 
amounting to less than £20,000 from the benefits of this law and 
allowing it to remain subject to the old restrictions. Nothing 
proves more conclusively than the English legislation on joint-stock 
companies and commercial companies in general that big capital, 
not content with the superior economic weapons with which it 
fights the competition from the small capitalists, in England also 
resorts to legal privileges and exceptional laws. Until a few years 
ago, for example, a bank was not allowed to comprise more than 
six partners. It was a long time before joint-stock companies 
acquired the right to take legal action in the name of their boards 
For an account of Prince Albert's speech see this volume, pp. 273-76.— Ed. 
b June 29, 1855. The Times, No. 22094, June 30, 1855.— Ed. 
12—3754 

=====第352页=====
322 Karl Marx 
of directors or have actions brought against them. In order, 
however, to enjoy this privilege they must be registered or 
incorporated, and a law dating from 1837 declares that the Crown 
has the right to incorporate only on the basis of a report from the 
Board of Trade,3 so that whether a company is incorporated or 
not depends on the grace and favour of the Board of Trade. 
Banks, benevolent and mutual aid societies, etc., are completely 
excluded from the effects of the new Bill. 
One of the newspapers today publishes the following parliamen­
tary statistics: there are 327 constituencies.0 A number of these 
constituencies are controlled by electoral magnates. One magnate 
controls 9 constituencies, 4 magnates control each 8, 1 magnate 
controls 7, 3 magnates control 6, 8 magnates control 5, 26 
magnates control 4, 29 control 3, so that 72 magnates control 297 
constituencies. There remain 30 so-called "independent" con­
stituencies. The House of Commons comprises 654 members, 594 
of whom are elected by the 297 dependent constituencies. These 
594 include 274 people who are directly related to peers or belong 
to the aristocracy. 
Written on June 30, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 303, July 3, 1855 
Marked with the sign X Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
This figure does not include the 72 constituencies in Ireland.— Ed. 

=====第353页=====
323 
Karl Marx 
AGITATION OVER THE TIGHTENING-UP 
OF SUNDAY OBSERVANCE 230 
London, July 2. Yesterday there was a repeat of the demonstra­
tion against the Sunday Bill in Hyde Park, a but this time on a 
larger scale, under more ominous auspices and with more serious 
consequences. The general mood of gloomy agitation in London 
today is witness to that. 
The posters which called on people to hold a second meeting 
also invited them to assemble in front of the house of the pious 
Lord Grosvenor on Sunday at 10 a.m., and to accompany him on 
his way to church. But the pious gentleman had already left 
London on Saturday in a private carriage—in order to travel 
incognito. That he is more inclined by nature to make martyrs of 
other people rather than become a martyr himself has already 
been proved by his circular letter which appeared in all the 
London newspapers, in which on the one hand he sticks to his bill 
whilst on the other hand he is at pains to show that it is 
meaningless, pointless and insignificant.b His house was occupied 
all Sunday, not by psalm-singers but by constables, 200 in number. 
Also the house of his brother, the Marquis of Westminster, 
famous for his wealth. 
On Saturday Sir Richard Mayne, chief of the London police, 
had pasted notices on the walls of London not only "forbidding" a 
meeting in Hyde Park but also "forbidding" people to assemble 
there in "large numbers" and to exhibit any signs of approval or 
For an account of the first demonstration, held on June 24, see this volume, 
pp. 302-07.— Ed. 
b R. Grosvenor, "The Sunday Trading Bill. To the Editor of The Times", The 
Times, No. 22093, June 28, 1855.— Ed. 
12* 

=====第354页=====
324 Karl Marx 
disapproval. The result of these ukases was, even according to the 
report in the police circular, that as early as 2.30 p.m. 150,000 
people from all classes and of all ages, were surging to and fro, 
and that gradually the crowd in the park swelled to dimensions 
which were immensely large and astonishing even by London 
standards. Not only did London appear en masse; people again 
lined both sides of the road along the Serpentine, only this time 
the crowds were more closely packed and deeper than on the 
previous Sunday. The people who did not, however, appear were 
the upper crust. All in all perhaps 20 carriages appeared, the 
majority of which were small gigs and phaetons which were 
allowed to pass unmolested, whereas their more portly, larger 
bellied, and taller brothers, trimmed with more braid, were 
greeted with the same calls as previously and with the same babel 
of sounds, the waves of which made the air vibrate for about a 
mile around. The police ukases were rebutted by the mass meeting 
and the exercising of thousands of pairs of lungs. The upper crust 
had avoided the scene of action and by its absence recognised the 
sovereignty of the vox populi. 
It was 4 o'clock and the demonstration seemed to be fizzling out 
into a harmless Sunday diversion from lack of anything to keep it 
going. But that did not suit the police. Were they to retire a 
general laughing-stock, casting melancholy parting glances at their 
own notices, which people could read at the main gate of the park 
in huge letters? What is more, their high dignitaries were present, 
Sir Richard May ne and superintendents Gibbs and Walker on 
horseback, and inspectors Banks, Darkin and Brennan on foot. 
Eight hundred constables were strategically positioned, mainly 
hidden in buildings and ambuscades. Stronger detachments had 
been positioned at intervals nearby as reinforcements. The home 
of the chief park attendant, the powder magazine and the 
premises of the rescue services, all situated at a point where the 
road along the Serpentine turns into a path leading to Kensington 
Gardens, had been converted into improvised block houses 
manned by large forces of police and prepared for the accommo­
dation of prisoners and casualties. Hackney cabs were put in 
position outside Vine Street police station at Piccadilly ready to go 
to the scene of action and to escort the vanquished safely back. 
In short, the police had planned a far more "vigorous" 
campaign, as The Times puts it, "than any of which we have yet 
had notice in the Crimea". 3 The police needed bloody heads 
a The Times, No. 22095, July 2,  1855.—  Ed. 

=====第355页=====
Agitation over the Tightening-up of Sunday Observance 325 
and arrests so as not to go plunging directly from the sublime 
to the ridiculous. As soon as the two lines of people had begun 
to thin out more and the crowds had dispersed in various 
groups over the huge area of the park further away from the 
road, the police chiefs took up positions in the middle of the road 
between the two lines of people, and from their horses began 
issuing pompous-sounding orders right and left. Supposedly for 
the protection of passing carriages and riders. As, however, 
neither carriages nor riders appeared and there was thus nothing 
for them to protect, they began to pick individuals out of the 
crowd "under false pretences" and to have them arrested, the 
pretext being that they were  pickpockets.*  When these experiments 
became more numerous and the pretext no longer held good, a 
single cry ran through the crowds, and the hidden corps of 
constables rushed out of their ambuscades, quickly drew their 
truncheons, rained blows upon people's heads until they bled, 
here and there pulled an individual out of the crowd (a total of 
104 people were arrested in this manner), and dragged them off 
to the improvised block houses. The left-hand side of the road is 
only separated from the water of the Serpentine by a narrow strip 
of land. By a manoeuvre a police officer and his troop managed to 
drive the onlookers up to the very edge of the liquid element and 
were threatening to give them a cold bath. In an attempt to escape 
the police truncheons, one individual swam across the Serpentine 
to the opposite bank; however, a policeman set off after him in a 
boat, caught him and brought him back in triumph. 
How greatly had the character of the scene changed since last 
Sunday! Instead of the state carriages, dirty hackney cabs which 
drove to and fro from the police station at Vine Street to the 
improvised prisons in Hyde Park and from there to the police 
station. Instead of footmen up on the box a constable seated next 
to the drunken cab-driver. Instead of the elegant ladies and 
gentlemen inside the coaches there were prisoners with bloody 
heads,  tousled hair, hatless, their clothes torn, guarded by 
shifty-looking characters recruited from among the Irish lumpen-
proletariat and pressed into the London police. Instead of the 
swishing of fans the whizzing of the constables' leather trun­
cheons.1' Last Sunday the ruling classes had shown their fashiona­
ble physiognomy, now they showed their political physiognomy. 
Marx uses the English word and gives the German translation in brackets.— 
Ed. 
b Here and below Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第356页=====
326 Karl Marx 
Behind the kindly grinning old gentlemen, the fashionable 
dandies, the genteel and frail widows, the fragrant beauties in 
cashmere and ostrich feathers, adorned with garlands of diamonds 
and flowers—was the constable with his water-proof coat, greasy 
oilskin hat and truncheon. It was the reverse side of the coin. Last 
Sunday the crowd was confronted with the ruling class in its 
individual form. This time it appeared as political power, the law, 
the truncheon. This time to resist was to commit insurrection, and 
the English have to be heated up slowly and for a long time before 
they are prepared for insurrection. Thus the counter-demonstra­
tion was on the whole limited to cat-calling and hooting and 
whistling at the police vehicles, to isolated and weak attempts at 
freeing the prisoners, and above all to passive resistance and a 
phlegmatic determination to remain at the scene of action. 
Characteristic was the role played in this drama by the 
soldiers—partly from the Guards and partly from the 66th 
Regiment. They were present in large numbers. Twelve of them, 
Guards, some decorated with medals from the Crimea, were in the 
middle of a group of men, women and children who were the 
targets for police truncheons. One old man fell to the ground 
after receiving a blow. "The London stiff staffs3" (name of abuse 
for the police) "are worse than the Russians were at Inkerman,"231 
cried one of the heroes from the Crimea. The police grabbed him. 
He was immediately released to loud shouts from the crowd of 
"Three cheersb for the army!" The police considered it advisable 
to retire. In the meantime a number of grenadiers had joined the 
crowd, the soldiers formed a troop and, surrounded by the crowd 
and accompanied by the cry of "Long live the army, down with 
the police, down with the Sunday Bill!", they strutted up and 
down the park. The police were standing there not knowing quite 
what to do, when a sergeant from the guards appeared who loudly 
took them to task for their brutality, attempted to calm the 
soldiers and persuaded some of them to follow him to their 
barracks so as to avoid more serious collisions. The majority of the 
soldiers, however, stayed behind and, amongst the crowd, gave 
vent to their indignation against the police in impassioned terms. 
The antagonism between the police and the army in England goes 
back a long way. The present moment, when the army is the pet 
child c of the masses, is certainly not suited to diminish that in any 
way. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English expression.— Ed. 

=====第357页=====
Agitation over the Tightening-up of Sunday Observance 327 
An old man by the name of Russell is reported to have died 
today as a result of the injuries he received; half a dozen injured 
people are in St. George's Hospital. During the demonstration 
various attempts were again made to hold separate meetings. At 
one such meeting, at Albert Gate, outside that part of the park 
originally occupied by the police, one anonymous speaker ha­
rangued his public in roughly the following manner: 
"Men of Old England! Awake, rise from your slumbers, or be for ever fallen! 
Oppose the Government, the 'send-us-to-Church' Bill, every succeeding Sunday, as 
you have done today. [...] Don't fear to demand your just rights [...] but throw off the 
shackles of oligarchical oppression and misrule. If you do not [...] you will be 
irretrievably oppressed and ruined. Is it not a pity that the inhabitants of this great 
metropolis—the greatest in the civilised world—should have their liberties placed in 
the hands of my Lord Robert Grosvenor or such a man as Lord Ebrington? His 
Lordship wants to drive us to church and make us religious by act of Parliament; but it 
won't do [...]. What are we, and what are they! Look at the present war; is it not carried 
on at the expense and the sacrifice of blood of the productive classes? And what are 
the unproductive classes doing? They are bungling it."a 
The speaker and the meeting were of course interrupted by the 
police. 
At Greenwich, near the observatory, Londoners held a similar 
meeting attended by 10,000-15,000 people. It was also cut short by 
the police. 
Written on July 2, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 307, July 5, 1855 
Marked with the sign X 
a The text of this speech was given in the report on the demonstration 
published in The Times, No. 22095, July 2, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第358页=====
328 
Frederick Engels 
THE LATE REPULSE OF THE ALLIES 
The mail of the Canada reached us last evening from Boston, 
with Gen. Pélissier's report on the repulse of the Allies on the 18th 
of June (which will be found in our columns today) and with other 
documents which complete the history of that disastrous affair. 
Having thus before us all necessary sources of information, we 
proceed to give our readers an exact and impartial analysis of the 
entire operation. With regard to its general character it is enough 
to say that of the many blundering affairs we have had to notice in 
this Eastern war, this is by far the most perfect piece of bungling. 
The French advanced trenches were from 400 to î>00, and the 
English from 500 to 700 yards from the Russian batteries. 3 These 
distances mark the lengths of road which the respective columns 
of attack had to pass over without cover from the Russian fire, 
and unsupported by the fire of their own artillery; with sharp 
running, then, such as would destroy every vestige of order, they 
would be exposed to a fire of grape and musketry during from 
three to five minutes, a time quite sufficient to completely 
disorganize them. This single fact is characteristic of the whole 
plan. Unless the enemy's fire were completely silenced, and the 
accumulation of large masses of troops in the hostile works 
effectively prevented by incessant vertical shell firing, there was 
not the slightest chance of success. 
The Russians appear to have judged well of the plans of the 
Allies, if they were not, as Pélissier supposes, fully acquainted with 
Marx included this and the following two paragraphs in his report "Clashes 
between the Police and the People.—The Events in the Crimea" published in the 
Neue Oder-Zeitung (see this volume, pp. 333-36).— Ed. 

=====第359页=====
The Late Repulse of the Allies 329 
them. They but feebly replied to the besieging fire on the 17th, 
withdrew their guns behind the parapets during the day, and 
blinded the embrasures, so that scarcely any were disabled for the 
next day's work. This was decidedly the best plan, as their object 
could not be to extinguish the enemy's fire at that time. During 
the night the guns were brought back into their positions, the 
columns and reserves told off for the defense were stationed, and 
thus they were in a condition to meet any assault that could be 
made upon their position. 
The plan agreed upon between Pélissier and Raglan was to 
reopen their fire at daybreak on the 18th with all the vigor they 
could give to it for a couple of hours, and then on a sudden to 
launch simultaneously seven storming columns—one French 
against the bastion close to the Careening Bay, two French against 
the Malakoff bastion, three English against the Redan bastion and 
one English against the cluster of houses and the cemetery 
situated between the Redan and the head of the inner harbor. 
This plan was sensible enough if there was to be an assault at all; 
its execution would subdue the Russian fire and disperse the 
Russian masses concentrated for the defense before the actual 
attack took place. On the other hand, the allied troops would have 
to suffer from the Russian fire while crowding the trenches, and 
the defenders would very probably soon perceive the presence of 
columns destined to attack their position with the bayonet. But this 
was by far the lesser evil. The original plan therefore was the best 
that could be devised under the circumstances. 
However, we are informed that3  very late in the evening Pélissier 
learned that the Russians intended again to attack the Mamelon in 
force on the 18th. This should have been considered a godsend, for 
the defense of the Mamelon against any force the Russians could 
bring against it must have been safe, or else how could the Mamelon b 
serve as a base of operations for the assault upon the Malakoff? Thus 
the Russians, defeated in their assault upon the Mamelon, would 
have been in a sad plight to fight a second battle for the  Malakoff, 
and it would almost appear that under these circumstances the 
success of the operation against the latter position must have been 
The German version of this article, published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung under 
the title "The Assault of the 18th [June]", begins here. It is introduced as follows: 
"London, July 7. Yesterday we examined the Allies' original plan for the assault on 
June  18."  — Ed. 
b 
The version published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung has here: "(now christened 
the Brandon redoubt)".— Ed. 

=====第360页=====
330 Frederick Engels 
certain. Pélissier appears to have thought differently. He counter­
manded, late at night, the cannonade, and ordered the assault for 3 
o'clock in the morning, the signal to be given by three rockets. The 
English were informed of this change of disposition. 
This proceeding ended, as it was sure to do, in the way 
Napoleon used to say of bungling Generals: Ordre, contre-ordre, 
désordre. 3 Half an hour before the appointed time, the extreme 
right French column somehow or other got engaged with the 
enemy. Whether the Russians drew them out by a false sally, or 
whether, as Pélissier says, the General b mistook a French shell for 
the signal rockets, is not quite clear. At all events, Pélissier had to 
hurry his signal, and the columns, still engaged in finding their 
proper places in the trenches, had to start in half confusion, and 
in part from different starting points from those assigned to them. 
The middle French column, intended to turn the flank of the 
Malakoff,  effected its purpose and got into the Russian works; but 
the other two columns could make no headway in the hail-storm 
of case-shot and musketry which assailed them. Each column 
consisted of a brigade of four battalions; the second brigade of 
each division was in second line, while the Guard formed the 
general reserve. Thus nearly four divisions,or 20,000 men,were at 
hand for the purpose. The second line was brought up to the 
support of the first attack, but in vain; the Guards were sent 
forward, and they were arrested and then thrown back as well. 
Two battalions only remained disposable. It was now half-past 
eight. The brigade of the middle column, which had penetrated 
into the works, was ejected; on every point the French had been 
repulsed with great loss and no fresh troops were at hand. The 
English had not succeeded either. Pélissier gave the order for the 
retreat, which he says was effected with "dignity." 
On the English side the columns of attack were told off with 
that parsimoniousness characteristic of the British Army. The 
leading columns counted but 1,800 men each, or 1,000 men less 
than the French columns.0 Of these  1,800,  but 1,000 were intended 
In the Neue Oder-Zeitung this passage reads as follows: "The operation ended 
as it was bound to end, in the manner in which Napoleon, the real Napoleon, 
describes the fate of wavering and bungling generals: 'Ordre, contre-ordre, 
désordre'." —Ed. 
b J. D. N. Mayran.— Ed. 
Instead of the preceding two sentences the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "On the 
English side each of the leading columns comprised only 1,800 men, 1,000 men 
less than the French." — Ed. 

=====第361页=====
The Late Repulse of the Allies 331 
for fighting—the rest for working parties. In second line, the 
remainder of the brigade from which the force was taken, say 
1,200 to 1,400 men, were behind each column. In third line, the 
second brigade of each division was behind its first brigade. 
Finally, the Guards and Highlanders (first division) formed the 
general reserve. Thus, of the whole English infantry assembled 
on the ground, but 7,200 men were to be launched in the first onset, 
and of these but 4,000 were actual combatants. This weakness in the 
first columns was caused, first, by the traditions of the British service, 
and, secondly, by their habit of attacking in line; for all reports lead 
to the conclusion that even in this instance they attacked in line, and 
thus offered a gratuitously large aim to the grape of the enemy. The 
complication caused by the arrangement of four different lines 
one behind another, in narrow and irregular trenches, created 
great disorder and mischief from the beginning, and would have 
created utter confusion had the struggle become anything like 
serious. 
The first and third columns (from right to left) were to turn the 
flanks of the Redan, while the second was to attack its salient angle 
as soon as they had succeeded. The fourth or extreme left 
column, as stated, had to attack the head of the inner harbor. 
When the signal was given, as was the case with the French, the 
columns were still in movement toward their respective positions. 
The first column, however, jumped over the parapet of the 
trenches and was instantly saluted with a murderous fire of 
case-shot. The troops, disordered by the climbing, could not form. 
Col. Yea, who commanded, was already shouting for a bugler to 
sound the retreat; no bugler was found, and on they went in great 
disorder. Some penetrated to the abattis surrounding the Redan, 
but in vain. The mass of the column fell back at once and sought 
the shelter of the trenches. The third column advanced a minute 
or two later. It missed its road, and assailed the face of the Redan 
near the apex, instead of the flank. It staggered forward under a 
tremendous hail of projectiles, but was broken and retreated in 
complete disorder in a very few minutes. The whole affair lasted 
less than fifteen minutes. 3 Thus ended the attack upon the Redan, 
before any of the complicated reserves of Lord Raglan had time to 
come up to its support. The second column was so startled by this 
sudden breakdown of its flanking bodies that it did not even stir 
out of the trenches. 
a This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第362页=====
332 Frederick Engels 
The fourth column, commanded by Maj. Gen. Eyre, whose 
report we publish,3 alone succeeded in establishing itself in the 
cemetery and the houses surrounding. Here about 1,800 men held 
out during the day. They could not retreat, for the ground behind 
them was open and under the cross fire of the Russians. Thus they 
fought as well as they could till 9 o'clock at night, when they effected 
their retreat during the darkness. Their losses amounted to more 
than one-third of their number. 
Thus ended Pélissier's grand attack upon the Karabelnaya 
suburb. It was hastily determined upon, more hastily changed in 
its main features at a late period, and carried out with extreme 
blundering. The Russian was right who said to an English officer 
during the armistice of the 19th "Your Generals must have been 
drunk yesterday when they ordered the assault." 
A newspaper correspondent writing from the scene describes it 
as "an infantry Balaklava."233 This is perfectly just, and sums up 
in the briefest manner the criticisms which all intelligent military 
men must make upon this calamitous repulse.b 
Written about July 6, 1855 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4447, July 21, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1060, July 24, 1855 and the 
New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 724, July 28, 
1855 as a leading article; the German 
version was published in the Neue Oder-
Zeitung, partly in Marx's report printed in 
No. 313 on July 9, and as a separate article 
in No. 317 on July 11, 1855, marked with 
the sign x Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 
The German version makes no mention of Eyre or his report.—Ed. 
The last paragraph does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第363页=====
333 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
CLASHES BETWEEN THE POLICE AND THE PEOPLE.— 
THE EVENTS IN THE CRIMEA 234 
London, July 6. London witnessed a continuous series of clashes, 
lasting from Monday to yesterday evening, between the police and 
the "mob"; the former with their truncheons behaved provocative­
ly, the latter reciprocated by throwing stones. We saw scenes in 
Marlborough Street and the nearby streets which were strongly 
reminiscent of Paris. Duncombe asked Parliament yesterday 
evening to investigate the "base and brutal" conduct of the police 
last Sunday.3 The masses intend to visit the clubs in Pall Mallb the 
day after tomorrow. The Chartists are planning an armed 
procession — armed not with sabres and muskets but with tools and 
sticks—to move from Blackfriars Bridge to Hyde Park carrying 
banners with the inscription "No Mayne Law".c (This is deliberately 
ambiguous. Maine Law, as everybody knows, is the name of the 
puritanical American law prohibiting alcoholic drinks.235 Mayne is 
the name of the chief of the London police.) It will have been obvious 
from our previous reportsd that the demonstrations in Hyde Park 
were improvised events brought about by the instinct of the masses. 
The unrest was afterwards increased and heightened by the 
provocative brutality of the police, whose  chief,  Sir Richard Mayne, 
proved worthy of the decoration he had received from Paris. It is 
however even now possible to discern several distinct parties which 
seek to accelerate, guide and utilise the mass movement for their own 
more far-reaching ends. These parties are: 
a July I, 1855.—Ed. 
Street in London.—Ed. 
c "No Mayne Law" and "Maine Law" are given in English in the article 
together with a German translation.—Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 297-307, 323-27.— Ed. 

=====第364页=====
334 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
First the Government  itself.  During Bonaparte's stay in London, 236 
all wall posters directed against him disappeared as if by magic. 
Now even the most virulent posters are not removed by the police. 
Everything indicates a hidden purpose: the constables' enjoined 
brutality, the provocative language of government counsel at the 
Court3 in Marlborough Street, the unlawful employment of the 
arrested persons on the treadmill,3  the insulting manner of the 
official newspapers, and the Cabinet's vacillating behaviour in 
Parliament. Does Palmerston need a small coup d'état to maintain 
his Government, or does he require widespread internal dis­
turbances to divert attention from the Crimea? If we understand 
correctly this reckless statesman, who hides his profound and 
ruthless calculations under the cloak of frivolous superficiality, we 
can say of him, as Voltaire says of Habakuk,that he is "capable de 
tout" b™ 
Secondly the advocates of Administrative Reform.2*8 They try to use 
the mass movement to intimidate the aristocracy on the one hand, 
and as a means of winning popularity for themselves on the other 
hand. It is for this reason that in their name and for their account, 
the case of those arrested last Sunday was conducted by Ballantine 
before the police-court3 in Marlborough Street.This is why they 
ransomed all those sentenced yesterday by depositing their fines. 
This is why their newspapers defend the "mob" (as the ministerial 
Globe calls the people) and attack the police and the Ministry. 
Thirdly the Chartists, whose aims are self-evident. 
Official and private reports on the unfortunate attack of June 
18 have at last appeared. The publication of the official dispatches 
was put off for several days, and there was certainly good reason 
for the delay. This is undoubtedly a most perfect example of the 
blunders made in the Eastern affair. 
The French advanced trenches were from 400 to 500, and the 
English from 500 to 700 yards from the Russian batteries.0 These 
distances mark the lengths of road which the respective columns 
of attack had to pass over without cover from the Russian fire, 
and unsupported by the fire of their own artillery; with sharp 
running, then, such as would destroy every vestige of order, would 
expose them defencelessly to musket fire during three to five 
Marx and Engels use the English term.— Ed. 
Capable of anything.— Ed. 
This and the following two paragraphs largely correspond to the second, third 
and fourth paragraphs of Engels' article "The Late Repulse of the Allies" (see this 
volume, pp. 328-32).—Ed. 

=====第365页=====
Clashes between the Police and the People 335 
minutes, a time quite sufficient to completely disorganise them. 
This single fact is characteristic of the whole plan. Unless the 
enemy's fire were completely silenced, and the accumulation of 
large masses of troops in the hostile works effectively prevented by 
incessant vertical shell firing, there was not the slightest chance of 
success. 
The Russians appear to have judged well of the plans of the 
Allies, if they were not, as Pélissier supposes, fully acquainted with 
them. They but feebly replied to the fire of the Allies on the 17th, 
withdrew their guns behind the parapets during the day, and in 
general made such arrangements that scarcely any other prepara­
tions were required for the next day's work. During the night the 
guns were brought back into their positions, the columns and 
reserves told off for the defence were stationed. 
The plan originally agreed upon between Pélissier and Raglan 
was to reopen their fire at daybreak on the 18th with all the 
vigour they could give to it for a couple of hours, and then on a 
sudden to launch simultaneously seven storming columns—one 
French against the bastion close to the Careening Bay, two French 
against the Malakoff bastion, three English against the Redan 
bastion and one English against the cluster of houses and the 
cemetery situated between the Redan and the head of the inner 
harbour. This plan was sensible enough if there was to be an 
assault at all; its execution would subdue the Russian fire and 
disperse the Russian masses concentrated for the defence before 
the actual attack took place. On the other hand, the Allied troops 
would have to suffer from the Russian fire while crowding the 
trenches, and the defenders would very probably soon perceive 
the presence of columns destined to attack their position with the 
bayonet. But this was by far the lesser evil. The original plan with 
all its shortcomings was still the best that could be devised under 
the circumstances. How the plan was failed, how Pélissier's 
premature laurel wreath withered away and how under the 
protective eagles of the restored Empire, the Allied armies 
suffered an "infantry Balaklava" 239—all this we shall discuss 
tomorrow. 
This summer seems to have severe tribulations in store for the 
"saints". The foremost bill broker of London, and apparently the 
chief of the Quakers,240 Gurney (one of whose daughters is 
married to Bunsen's son), Gurney, who is as rich as he is pious, 
seems to be badly compromised by the fraudulent Strand 
bankruptcy. He discounted bills of exchange amounting to 
£37,000 for Strahan and Co. though he knew that they were 

=====第366页=====
336 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
bankrupt, thus enabling them to defraud the public for a few 
months longer. He himself managed to extricate himself without 
incurring any loss. The mundane press delights in making 
malicious remarks about the iniquities committed even by the 
select. 
Written about July 6, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 313, July 9, 1855 Published in English in full for the 
first time Marked with the sign x 
The English version of part of the text 
was published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4447, July 21, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1060, July 24, 1855 and in 
the New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 724, 
July 28, 1855 as a leading article 

=====第367页=====
337 
Karl Marx 
FROM PARLIAMENT. 
[_ROEBUCK'S AND BULWER'S MOTIONS] 
London, July 11. As is generally known, Roebuck's motion 
censuring all the members of the old Coalition Cabinet3 has been 
put down for next Tuesday. Whilst numerous meetings supportr 
ing his motion are being held at Birmingham, Sheffield, Newcas­
tle, etc., and at the same time public petitions are being signed in 
support of it in every corner of London, members of Parliament 
are decamping to Paris, Naples and their country homes, in order 
to avoid the division. In an attempt to prevent this exodus, 
supported by Palmerston in every respect, Roebuck yesterday 
moved for power to call over the Commons next Tuesday. The 
"Call"b is an old parliamentary practice which had sunk into 
oblivion since the time of the debate on Catholic Emancipation.241 
At the opening of the sitting the name of every single Member of 
Parliament is called out. Those who are absent are subject to 
arrest by the parliamentary serjeant-at-arms,0 a public apology 
before the assembled House and the payment of certain fines. By 
a majority of 133 to 108, however, the Commons refused Roebuck 
the right to coerce members by means of a Call. Nothing could be 
more characteristic of the British Parliament and its press organs 
than their attitude towards Roebuck's motion. The motion does 
not emanate from any member of the "official" opposition. That 
is its first blemish. It is directed not only against members of the 
present Cabinet but also against members of the dissolved Cabinet. 
Roebuck first gave notice of his motion in the House of Commons on June 
22, 1855. See this volume, pp.  297-301.—  Ed. 
Here and below Marx uses the English word.—Ed. 
Marx uses the English  term.—Ed. 

=====第368页=====
338 Karl Marx 
It is not, therefore, a purely party manoeuvre. It declares that the 
sins of the old Ministry are not expiated by the forming of a new 
Ministry. It opens the way for a motion calling for impeachment. 
That is the other great blemish of this motion. For the official 
opposition is of course only willing to wage the parliamentary war 
"within the limits of a change of Ministers". It is far removed from 
waging war against ministerial responsibility. The clique of Outs is 
no less anxious about maintaining ministerial omnipotence than 
the clique of Ins.* The skill in conducting parliamentary battles 
consists of course precisely in ensuring that during the fight it is 
never the office that is hit but always the person holding the office 
at a given time, and even he only to an extent that will permit him 
after being brought down as a Minister immediately to come 
forward as a candidate for the Ministry. The oligarchy does not 
perpetuate itself'by retaining power permanently in the same hand, 
but by dropping it with one hand in order to catch it again with 
the other, and so on. The Tories are therefore just as dissatisfied 
with Roebuck's motion as the Whigs are. 
As to the press, the reaction of The Times is crucial. Was there a 
newspaper that clamoured louder for the Roebuck Committee to 
be set up, as long as its purpose was, on the one hand, to bring 
about a change of Ministers and, on the other, to provide an 
outlet for the public passion? However, from the moment that 
Roebuck comes forward and, supported by the findings of his 
Committee, threatens to lay all the members of the coalition open to 
explicit censure by Parliament, is there a newspaper which observes a 
more stubborn silence than The Times? As far as The Times is 
concerned, Roebuck's motion does not exist; yesterday's incident in 
Parliament concerning the "Call" does not exist; the meetings at 
Birmingham, Sheffield, etc., do not exist in its columns. Roebuck 
himself is, of course, no Brutus. On the one hand, he has seen how 
miserably the Whigs have rewarded him for the services he has 
rendered over many years. On the other hand, he has his 
constituents behind him. He represents a large body of constituents 
whom he has to pay in popularity as he cannot pay them in cash. And 
finally, the role of a modern Warwick, the parliamentary 
King-Maker, can hardly be displeasing to this ambitious but so far 
scarcely successful barrister. The Tories who form the opposition 
cannot, of course, oppose Roebuck's motion in the same way as the 
Whigs can. They are therefore seeking to forestall it. This is the 
Marx uses the English words "Outs" and "Ins" (i.e. members of the 
opposition on the one hand and the ruling party on the other).— Ed. 

=====第369页=====
From Parliament 339 
secret behind Bulwer's motion calling for a vote of no  confidence  in the 
Ministry,3 based on Lord John Russell's strange revelations about the 
Vienna conferences.b Bulwer's motion remains entirely "within" the 
limits of a government reshuffle. It takes the fate of the Ministry out 
of Roebuck's hands. If it succeeds then it will be the Tories who have 
toppled the Whigs, and once holding the Ministry, conventional 
"magnanimity" would forbid them to pursue their victory and to 
continue supporting Roebuck. But the artfulness of the Tories at the 
same time enables Palmerston to employ old parliamentary tricks. 
The dismissal of Russell, whether voluntary or imposed, will serve to 
parry Bulwer's motion just as Bulwer has parried Roebuck's motion. 
Russell's departure would be certain to bring Palmerston's Cabinet 
down were it not to occur shortly before the end of the session. Now, 
however, it may on the contrary prolong the life of his Cabinet. If so, 
then no English Minister before Palmerston has managed with such 
skill and good fortune to use the people's clamouring in order to 
force himself upon the parliamentary parties on the one hand, and, 
on the other, to use the petty parliamentary interests, groupings and 
formalities that exist to force himself upon the people. He is like the 
old man of the sea whom Sindbad the Sailor found impossible to 
shake off once he had allowed him to climb onto his shoulders. 
Written on July 11, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 323, July 14, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign x 
a The motion was tabled in the House of Commons on July 10, 1855. The 
Times, No. 22103, July 11, 1855.—Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 222-26.— Ed. 

=====第370页=====
340 
Karl Marx 
FROM THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT. 
[—BULWER'S MOTION.—THE IRISH QUESTION] 
London, July 13. It is difficult for those not initiated into the 
mysteries of jurisprudence to understand why it should be that, in 
the most straightforward lawsuits, unexpected legal problems arise 
which owe their existence, not to the nature of the lawsuit, but to 
the rules and formalities of legal procedure. It is the handling of 
these legal ceremonies that makes your lawyer, just as it is the 
handling of ecclesiastical ceremonies that makes your Brahmin. 
Just as in the course of development of religion, so in the course 
of development of law too, form becomes content. But what legal 
procedure is to courts of law, the agenda and standing orders are 
to legislative bodies. The history of agrarian law proves that the 
old Roman oligarchs, the originators of chicanery in legal 
proceedings, were also the first to introduce procedural chicanery 
into legislation. In both respects they have been outdone by 
England. The technical difficulties involved in tabling a motion, 
the various metamorphoses that a bill has to go through before it 
can become law; the formalities which permit the opponent of a 
motion or a bill to prevent the former from entering the House 
and the latter from leaving it—all this provides an inexhaustible 
arsenal of parliamentary chicanery, pettifogging and tactics. But 
no English Minister before Palmerston has so thoroughly lent the 
House of Commons243 the appearance, tone and character of a 
Court of Chancery.* Where diplomacy does not suffice, he has 
recourse to chicanery. Under his guidance every debate on an 
objectionable motion is turned into a preliminary debate about the 
day when the debate shall actually take place and the case be put. 
Marx uses the English  term.—Ed. 

=====第371页=====
From the Houses of Parliament 341 
So it was with Milner Gibson's motion, so it was with Layard's 
motion and so it is now with Bulwer's motion.3 So overloaded were 
the orders of the day at the close of the session that Bulwer was 
only able to biing in his motion on a day when the House went 
into a Committee of Supply,b i.e. when the Government puts its 
financial requirements before the House of Commons.244 Friday is 
generally set aside for this business. However, it depends, of 
course, on the Government when it asks the Commons for supplies 
and hence when the House goes into a Committee of Supply. 
Palmerston promptly told Bulwer that he would not, to use the 
technical term, go into Supply that Friday, but proceed with the 
Bill on the limited liability of trading companies, and that Bulwer 
might "fix a day for  himself".0  Last Tuesday, therefore, Disraeli 
gave notice that he would appeal to the House the following 
Thursday (yesterday) to set aside this piece of chicanery. 
Palmerston forestalled him. He rose during yesterday's sitting and 
declared amidst the general laughter of the House that it was 
certainly not his intention either to delay the debate on Bulwer's 
vote of no-confidence or, by placing technical difficulties in the 
way, to prevent the honourable House from forming an opinion. 
But, he went on, despite every effort, the supplementary 
documents relating to the Vienna Conference could not have been 
laid upon the table of the House of Commons before the 
following day, and how could the House form an opinion without 
having seen the documents of the case? He was, he said, prepared 
to set aside Monday for a discussion of Bulwer's motion.d Disraeli 
pointed out that "the supplementary documents" bore no relation 
whatever to Bulwer's motion; the Bill on the limited liability of 
trading companies was quite important in its own way, but what 
the nation presently wanted to know was: 
"whether the Cabinet is collectively liable for its actions or whether the principle of 
limited liability is also applicable here. Above all, it wanted to know the conditions 
under which the partners of the firm in Downing Street6 conducted their business." 
For the motions of Layard (tabled April 27), Gibson (May 11) and Bulwer 
(July 10) see this volume, pp. 167, 187, 223, 338-39.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English name here and below.—Ed. 
Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on July 10, 1855. The Times, 
No. 22103, July 11, 1855.—Ed. 
The speeches by Palmerston, Disraeli, Bulwer, Russell and Shee in the House 
of Commons on July 12, 1855, were published in The Times, No. 22104, July 13, 
1855.—  Ed. 
10 Downing Street is the residence of the British Prime Minister. Here the 
reference is to the government as a whole.— Ed. 

=====第372页=====
342 Karl Marx 
Bulwer said he would accept Monday as the day for the debate. 
Russell, for his part, took advantage of this incident to attempt to 
tone down and distort the meaning of the statement he made last 
Friday. 3 But in vain; the second, amended version arrived too late, 
as is patently evident from today's Times. Indeed, for several days 
The Times has been using every artifice to save Palmerston's 
Cabinet at Russell's expense, wherein it is steadfastly supported by 
the simple-minded Morning Advertiser, which regains its whole­
hearted faith in Palmerston each time Parliament shows signs of 
losing it. Meanwhile Palmerston has gained a few days' respite in 
which to do some manoeuvring. How he exploited each of those 
days is evident from the Irish rowh which occurred yesterday in 
the House of Commons. 
For two years, as everyone knows, three bills have been drifting 
through Parliament, their purpose being to regulate the relations 
between Irish landlords and tenants. One of these bills lays down 
how much compensation the tenant is entitled to claim on 
improvements effected on the land, in the event of his landlord 
giving him notice to quit. Hitherto the improvements effected by 
Irish tenants (virtually all of whom hold a one-year lease) only 
served to enable the landlord to demand a higher rent on 
expiration of the lease. Thus the tenant, should he not wish to 
renew the agreement on less favourable terms, either loses the 
farm and, with the farm, the capital he has laid out on 
improvements, or he is compelled to pay the landlord interest, 
over and above the original rent, for improvements effected with 
his (the tenant's) capital. Support for the above-mentioned bills 
was one of the conditions with which the coalition Cabinet bought 
the vote of the Irish Brigade.245 Hence, in 1854, they were passed 
by the Commons, but deferred by the Lords, with the connivance 
of the Ministers, until the following session (1855), when they 
suffered such drastic revision that all their teeth were drawn, and 
in this mutilated form were returned to the Commons. There, 
last Thursday, the main clause of the Compensation Bill was 
sacrificed on the altar of landed property and the Irish were 
astonished to discover that the scales had been tipped against 
them, partly by the votes of members of the Government, partly 
by the votes of its immediate allies. Serjeant Shee's furious 
onslaught upon Palmerston portended a riotc in Parliament's 
a July 6, 1855.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English words "serjeant" and "riot".— Ed. 

=====第373页=====
From the Houses of Parliament 343 
"Irish Quarter", something which might, at this particular 
juncture, have serious consequences. Palmerston therefore, 
through the medium of Sadleir, ex-member of the coalition and 
broker to the Irish Brigade, arranged for a deputation of eighteen 
Irish Members of Parliament to wait upon him the day before 
yesterday with the request that he use his influence to have the 
parliamentary vote rescinded and to carry the clause through the 
House in another division. He, of course, declared that he was 
ready to do anything so as to secure the Irish votes against the 
motion of no-confidence. The premature exploding of this in­
trigue in the House of Commons gave rise to one of the rowdy scenes 
typical of the decline of an oligarchic Parliament. The Irish dispose 
of 105 votes. However, it transpired that the majority had not given a 
mandate to the eighteen-strong deputation. For that matter, 
Palmerston can no longer make quite the same use of the Irish in 
Ministerial crises as he was wont to do in O'Connell's day. With the 
disintegration of all the old parliamentary factions, the Irish Quarter 
too has split up and become fragmented. At all events, the incident 
demonstrates how Palmerston is exploiting the respite he gained to 
manipulate the various coteries. At the same time he is awaiting 
favourable news of some kind from the theatre of war, a minor event 
of some kind capable of parliamentary—if not military  — 
exploitation. The submarine telegraph has taken the conduct of the 
war out of the hands of the generals and subjected it to the 
amateurish astrological whims of Bonaparte and to parliamentary 
and diplomatic intrigue. Hence the inexplicable and completely 
unprecedented character of the second Crimean campaign. 
Written on July 13, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 325, July 16, 1855 ' Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign x 

=====第374页=====
344 
Frederick Engels 
THE GREAT CRIMEAN BLUNDER 
If "time is money" in trade, time is victory in war. To let the 
favorable moment slip away, to miss the opportunity when your 
own superior strength should be brought to bear upon your 
opponent, is as great a fault as can be committed before an 
enemy. The fault is doubled if you commit it when acting on the 
offensive; for while merely defending a position the consequences 
of your neglect may be remedied, but when you are in an enemy's 
country, on an errand of invasion, then such inattention may 
involve the ruin of your army. All this is very trite, and there is 
not a lieutenant or cornet in the world but would treat it as a 
matter of course. Yet there is no rule of strategy or tactics sinned 
against offener than this; and it would appear as if Gen. Pélissier, 
the impetuous man of action, the "Marshal Forward" 247 of the 
Crimean army, were the very man doomed to exemplify in his 
own person this common neglect of commonplace things. 
The road into Sevastopol leads round by Inkermann to the 
north side of the fortress, as we have said over and over again.3  It 
is not to be supposed that Pélissier and his staff do not know this 
as well as we do. But to go to the north side the allied army must 
take the field with its main strength and defeat the Russians, 
afterward investing the north side, and detaching a corps to keep 
the Russian field-army at a distance. The moment to do this was 
when the Sardinian corps had arrived, and the Turks, under 
Omer Pasha, were at Kamiesh. At that time the Allies must have 
been considerably stronger than the Russians. But nothing of the 
sort was done. The expedition to Kertch and the Sea of Azoff was 
a See this volume, pp. 203,  3\8.—Ed. 

=====第375页=====
The Great Crimean Blunder 345 
undertaken, and assault after assault was attempted. The field 
operations were confined to reconnaissances and to an extension 
of the camping ground to the entrance of Baidar Valley. Now, at 
last, we learn what is the professed reason for this inactivity: the 
means of transport are not forthcoming, and after fifteen months 
campaigning the Allies are as much tied to the sea, to Kamiesh 
and Balaklava harbors, as ever! 
This is really intolerable. The Crimea is not a desert island 
somewhere about the North Pole. It is a country the resources of 
which may certainly be exhausted as to food, but which is still able 
to furnish plenty of provender, draught animals, carts and beasts 
of burden, to anybody who has the boldness to take them. 
Cautious and slow movements, forward and backward within a few 
miles of the Chernaya, are of course not the means to get hold of 
these useful articles; but even if we leave the camels, ponies and 
arbas of the Crimea entirely out of the question, there is plenty 
of means of transport to be had on the Asiatic and European 
shores of the Black Sea, within two days' steaming from Balaklava. 
Why are they not impressed into the allied service? We say 
impressed, for impressment, commonly called requisition, is the 
proper way to make them available. To employ Spanish muleteers 
and Bulgarian laborers at a high price will never do; and in a 
country like Turkey even less than anywhere else. A regiment of 
cavalry scouring the shores of Anatolia would very soon bring 
hundreds of conveyances and thousands of animals together, 
along with the forage required. The war is prosecuted on behalf 
of the Turks, and to furnish means of transport is the least that 
can be expected of them. In every continental war the country in 
which armies operate is expected to do the same. To be more 
delicate with Turks is doubly absurd; if the Turks have not to 
work for their Allies, they will have to work for their Pashas, who 
will treat them much worse. They may not like it, but neither do 
they like to toil for their Pashas; and if they will not yield to 
discipline and order, a little application of martial law will soon 
break them in, as the Pashas always keep them under a similar 
sort of law. It is perfectly ridiculous that, with such resources 
within reach, the allied Generals should still complain of inability 
to move for want of transports. 
The Russians, indeed, have given them lessons enough how they 
should act. The 3d, 4th, and 5th army-corps, beside several 
divisions of the reserves, were transported into the Crimea at a 
time when the Allies could not bring up food from Balaklava to 
the trenches. The troops were partly carried across the steppes in 

=====第376页=====
346 Frederick Engels 
wagons, and they always had plenty of food. And yet the country 
within a semicircle of 200 miles around Perekop is but very thinly 
inhabited. But the resources of the more distant provinces were 
put under contribution; and surely, to bring the wagons of 
Ekaterinoslav, Poltava and  Charkoff,  to assist the Russians in the 
Crimea, is more difficult than to get the conveyances of Anatolia 
and Roumelia to work there for the Allies. 
Nevertheless, under the pretext of want of transports, the 
opportunity to conquer the Crimea as far as Sympheropol has 
been allowed to slip by. Now the situation is different. The 
Russians have formed a reserve army for the Crimea between 
Odessa and Cherson. What this army consists of we can judge by 
the simple fact that from the Western army the whole of the 
second army-corps and two divisions of grenadiers have been 
detached toward the formation of this new force. The advanced 
guard of this reenforcement must already have passed Cherson. 
These troops consist in all of five divisions or eighty-two battalions 
of infantry; one division or thirty-two squadrons of cavalry; and 
from fifty to eighty guns. To these we must add a number of 
reserves, and also a division at least of the reserve cavalry; and as 
the above eighty-eight battalions belong to the troops which have 
been chiefly under the eye of the Emperor,3 they must have their 
full war numbers. Allowing, therefore, for the loss on the march, 
the whole force assembled between Odessa and Perekop, and 
intended for the Crimea, may safely be estimated at something 
like 70,000 to 80,000 men. The heads of their columns must be 
past Cherson, perhaps past Perekop, by this time; and before July 
is out they will begin to tell upon the Allies. 
Now, what have the Allies to oppose to these reenforcements? 
Their ranks are again thinned by cholera and fever, no less than 
by the slaughter of the different assaults. The British reenforce­
ments are slow in arriving, and very few regiments indeed are 
being sent off. The French Government state that they do not 
intend to send out fresh divisions, but merely detachments from 
the depots to fill up the gaps made in the ranks of the various 
regiments at the seat of war. If these reenforcements arrive in 
time they will hardly suffice to bring up the allied army to the 
strength it had in the beginning of June; that is to say, 210,000 
men at the outside, including Turks and Sardinians. The 
probability is it will never exceed 180,000 men at any time; to 
which force the Russians, by the beginning of August, will be able 
a Alexander  II.—Ed. 

=====第377页=====
The Great Crimean Blunder 347 
to oppose at least 200,000 men in good positions, in command of 
the country at their rear, and in possession of the south side of 
Sevastopol as a bridgehead. 
Then the chances are that the Allies will be driven back upon 
the plateau behind the Chernaya, unable to move forward or 
backward, and with an army now so numerous that it must change 
this narrow piece of ground into one hotbed of disease. And then 
Pélissier will repent his want of energy and resolution as regards 
the advance into the field, and his excess of energy as regards the 
storming of the place. Still, there is yet time for a move in the 
field. The best moment has passed, but for all that, a bold advance 
might secure even now a wider range of ground to the Allies. But 
it does not look as if they were going to avail themselves of this 
chance. 
It must, however, be stated, in fairness to Pélissier, that public 
opinion in Paris, and in Europe generally, lays the principal fault 
at the door of Louis Bonaparte. That unfortunate would-be 
general is said to meddle in everything. The matter is not quite 
clear yet, but in a short time the nature of the interference of this 
ambitious adventurer in the Crimean military operations must be 
cleared up, and we shall then know where the blame of these 
enormous blunders is to be placed. 
Written about July 14, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4452, July 27, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1061, July 27, 1855 and the 
New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 725, 
August 4, 1855 as a leading article; an 
abridged German version was included in 
the report by Marx and Engels published 
in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No.327, July 17, 
1855,  marked with the sign X 

=====第378页=====
348 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
RUSSELL'S RESIGNATION.—THE EVENTS 
IN THE CRIMEA 248 
London, July 14. Our last report but one 3 treated Lord John 
Russell's resignation, whether voluntary or under duress, as a fait 
accompli. It took place yesterday afternoon, and it is in fact a 
composite resignation, both voluntary and under duress. For the 
section of the Whigs most eager to obtain posts, headed by 
Bouverie, were driven by Palmerston into a minor revolt. They 
stated that they would be obliged to vote for Bulwer's motion1 
unless Lord John resigned. No resistance could be offered to this. 
Not satisfied with their grand deed, the disloyal Whig mob 
collected signatures in the lobby of the House of Commons for a 
petition requesting Palmerston to induce the Queen to accept 
Russell's resignation which had already been submitted. At any 
rate Russell may have gained one satisfaction from these base 
manoeuvres, namely that of having created a party in his own 
image. 
The resignation of a man who, as Urquhart says, is in the habit 
of clasping his hands behind his back to give himself moral 
support, would hardly have affected the continued existence of 
the Cabinet had not the majority of the House of Commons been 
eager to use any pretext allowing it to postpone the fateful 
dissolution. And dissolution of the House is the inevitable 
consequence of passing Bulwer's motion. If Palmerston were to 
retain his post despite the vote of no-confidence, he would have to 
See this volume, p. 339.— Ed. 
For further details of Buhver's motion, tabled on July 10, 1855, see this 
volume, pp. 337-43.—Ed. 

=====第379页=====
Russell's Resignation 349 
dissolve the House, and if he were succeeded by Derby, the latter 
would likewise have to dissolve it. The House seems hardly 
inclined to sacrifice itself on the altar of patriotism. 
Sir George Grey has set up a commission to investigate the 
police brutalities. It consists of the Recorders3 of London, 
Liverpool and Manchester and will meet next Tuesday. 
If in commerce time is money, in warfare time is victory. The 
greatest blunder that can be committed in warfare is to miss the 
favourable moment, the moment when superior forces can be 
hurled against the enemy. The blunder is magnified if it is 
committed not during defensive operations, when the conse­
quences of neglect can be repaired, but during offensive operations, 
in a war of invasion, where such carelessness can cause the loss of 
an army. These are truisms which, as every cadet knows, are 
self-evident. And yet no other rule of strategy or tactics is 
transgressed as frequently as this one, and General Pélissier, the 
impetuous man of action, the "Marshal Forward" 249 of the 
Crimean army, seems to be destined by his action to illustrate the 
common disregard of these commonplace rules. 
The road to Sevastopol leads through Inkerman to the northern 
side of the fortress. No one knows this better than Pélissier and his 
staff.  But in order to conquer the northern side, the Allied armies 
have to take the field with their main forces, beat the Russians, 
encircle the north side and detach a corps to keep the Russian 
field army at a distance. The favourable moment to do this came 
when the Sardinian corps and the Turks under Omer Pasha 
arrived. The Allies were then considerably stronger than the 
Russians. But nothing of the sort was undertaken. The expedition 
to Kerch and the Sea of Azov was launched and one assault after 
another attempted. Field operations were restricted to reconnoitr­
ing and extending the camp up to the entrance to the valley of 
Baidar. The alleged reason for this inactivity is now at last 
revealed. Means of transport are said to be lacking, and after a 
campaign of fifteen months the Allies are just as much confined to 
the Sea, Kamysh and Balaklava as ever. This is indeed unsurpass­
able.  The Crimea is not a desolate island somewhere near the 
South pole. It is a country whose food supplies are undoubtedly 
not inexhaustible, but which is capable of providing large quantities 
of fodder, draught-animals and carts if one has sufficient skill and 
daring to take them. Timorous and slow forward and backward 
movements within a circle of a few English miles around the 
Marx and Engels use the English  term.—Ed. 

=====第380页=====
350 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Chernaya are of course not a suitable means to get hold of them. 
But even if we leave the camels, ponies and arbas of the Crimea 
completely out of account, there still remain ample means of 
transport on the European and Asian shores of the Black Sea 
which steamers can reach within two days. Why are they not 
commandeered for use by the Allies? The Russians have certainly 
given them enough lessons demonstrating how they ought to act. 
The 3rd, 4th and 5th army corps and several reserve divisions were 
transported to the Crimea at a time when the Allies had despaired 
of bringing provisions from Balaklava to the trenches. Some of 
the troops were moved in carts across the steppe, and they seem 
to have suffered acutely from lack of food. And yet the country 
within a radius of 200 miles from Perekop is only thinly populated. 
But the resources of the more distant provinces were requisitioned, 
and it is certainly more difficult for the Russians to send carts from 
Yekaterinoslav, Poltava, Kharkov, etc., to the Crimea, than for the 
Allies in the Crimea to procure means of transport in Anatolia 
and Rumelia. In any case, under the pretext of lack of transport, 
the Allies let the chance to conquer the Crimea up to Simferopol 
slip. Now the position has changed. The Russians have formed a 
reserve army for the Crimea located between Odessa and Cherson. 
The strength of this army can only be estimated by us on the basis 
of the detachments made from the western army; these consist 
of the entire 2nd army corps and two infantry divisions. Together 
this amounts to five infantry divisions (82 battalions), one cavalry 
division (32 squadrons) and 80 cannon. Infantry and cavalry 
reserves have to be added to this. Taking into account the losses 
it suffered during the march, the army destined for the Crimea 
and assembled between Odessa and Perekop can therefore be 
assessed at approximately 70,000 to 80,000 men. The vanguard 
of their columns must by now have already passed through Perekop, 
and their weight will be felt by the Allies before the end of 
What can the Allies set against these reinforcements? Their 
ranks are being thinned again by cholera and fever just as much 
as by the various attempted assaults. British reinforcements are 
rather slow in arriving—very few regiments have in fact sailed. 
The 13,000 men reported by usa to have left some time ago have 
proved to be a government  bluff.  The French government for its 
part declares that it does not intend to send fresh divisions but 
merely detachments from the depots to make good the losses 
See this volume, p. 299.— Ed. 

=====第381页=====
Russell's Resignation 351 
incurred at the theatre of war. These reinforcements, provided 
they arrive in time, will hardly be sufficient to bring the Allied 
army up to the strength it had in June, i.e. 200,000 men, 
including Turks and Sardinians. It will probably amount to no 
more than 180,000 men, who at the beginning of August will be 
opposed by at least 200,000 Russians in good positions, in 
command of the country in their rear and holding the south side 
of Sevastopol as a bridgehead. If under these circumstances the 
allied army were again squeezed into the narrow plateau behind 
the Chernaya, these human masses would by their momentum 
turn the restricted space into a graveyard. 
There is still time to take the offensive. True the most 
favourable moment has been missed, but nevertheless a bold 
advance by the allied army would even now ensure an extension 
of their living space. But there is no indication that they intend to 
use this opportunity. 
Finally, in justification of Pélissier one might mention that 
public opinion here and in Paris has sought and found the cause 
of the wretched state of the second Crimean campaign in the 
intervention of Louis Bonaparte, the general from afar. 
Written on July 14, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 327, July 17, 1855 
Marked with the sign X 
The English version was first published 
in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4452, 
July 27, 1855, reprinted in the New-
York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1061, 
July 27, 1855 and the New-York Weekly 
Tribune, No. 725, August 4, 1855 as a 
leading article Printed according to the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 

=====第382页=====
352 
Karl Marx 
RUSSELL'S DISMISSAL 
London, July 17.  Whether voluntary or under duress, Russell's 
dismissal has served to parry Bulwer's motion 3 just as Bulwer 
parried Roebuck's motion. This view, which we expressed in our 
report of July ll,a was confirmed beyond any shadow of doubt by 
yesterday's sitting in the Commons.b It is an old Whig axiom that 
"parties are like snails—the tails move the heads". The present 
Whig Cabinet, however, seems to be polypoid; it appears to thrive 
on amputation. It survives the loss of its limbs, its head, anything 
except its tail. Although Russell was not the head of the Cabinet, 
he was the brains of the party which forms the Cabinet and which 
is represented by it. Bouverie, the Vice-President of the Board of 
Trade,c represents the tail of the Whig polyp. He discovered that 
the Whig body would have to be decapitated to keep the Whig 
rump alive, and he made this discovery known to Palmerston in 
the name of and on behalf of the Whig tail. Russell yesterday 
assured that tail of his "contempt". Disraeli tormented Bouverie 
with a "physiology of friendship" and a biological description of 
the various types in which the species being known as  "friend"  is 
distinguishable. Finally, Bouverie's attempt to justify the action 
by saying that he and the tail had discarded Russell in order to 
save him, completes the genre picture of this party of office-
hunters. 
The natural head of the Whig party being amputated in this 
way, its usurped head, Lord Palmerston, has become all the more 
a See this volume, pp. 337-39.— Ed. 
A report of the House of Commons debate of July 16, 1855 was published in 
The Times, No. 22108, July 17, 1855.—Ed. 
Marx uses the English  term.—Ed. 

=====第383页=====
Russell's Dismissal 353 
firmly attached to the rump. After the fall of Aberdeen and 
Newcastle he used Gladstone, Graham and Herbert to take 
possession of the inheritance of the Coalition Cabinet. After the 
departure of Gladstone, Graham and Herbert he used Lord John 
Russell to help him form a purely Whig Cabinet. Finally he used 
the Whig tail to whisk Russell away and thus to become sole ruler 
in the Cabinet. All those metamorphoses were just so many steps 
on the way to the formation of a purely Palmerston Cabinet. 
Russell's statements show that he repeatedly tendered Palmerston 
his resignation, but was persuaded each time by him to withdraw 
it. In exactly the same way Palmerston persuaded Aberdeen's 
Cabinet to resist Roebuck's Committee of Inquiry to the utmost. 
On both occasions with the same degree of success and to the 
same end. 
He linked Bulwer's motion so closely to Russell that it fell 
through of its own accord as soon as the corpus delicti, Russell, 
vanished from the Cabinet. Bulwer was therefore obliged to 
declare that he was withdrawing his motion. However, he could 
not resist the temptation of actually delivering the speech which 
was to have supported his motion. He forgot that the motion on 
which his speech was based no longer existed. Palmerston 
exploited this unfortunate situation. He immediately assumed the 
pose of a gladiator after the battle had been called off. He was 
rude,  blustering and boastful, but in this way he incurred 
chastisement at the hands .of Disraeli, which, as the expression on 
his face revealed, caused even this accomplished play-actor to lose 
his usual cynical composure. However, the most important part of 
Disraeli's reply was the following statement: 
"I have reason to believe that the views which Lord Russell brought from 
Vienna were favourably received, not merely by a majority, but by the whole of 
his colleagues, and that nothing but circumstances which they did not anticipate [...] 
prevented the plan of the noble Lord being cordially and unanimously accepted. I 
do not make that statement without due authority. I make it with the same 
conviction that I spoke six weeks ago of the ambiguous language and uncertain 
conduct of the Government, the truth of which subsequent events have already 
justified. I make it with the conviction that, even before this Session of Parliament 
terminates, evidence confirming that statement will be in the possession of the 
House." 
The "circumstances" to which Disraeli refers were, as he 
explains in the course of his speech, "the difficulties presented by 
the French". Disraeli indicates that Clarendon's correspondence, 
which was intended for use in Parliament, contradicts the secret 
instructions issued by the Ministry. He concluded his speech with 
the following words: 
13—3754 

=====第384页=====
354 Karl Marx 
"A belief exists in the land that there is guilt in the management of our affairs. 
A foreign document appears" (Buol's circular), "the people are agitated, they 
think, they talk, their representatives in this House ask questions. What happens? 
The foremost of our statesmen dare not meet the controversy which such questions 
bring forward. He mysteriously disappears. [...] But who dares meet with it? The 
First Minister of the Crown, who has addressed this House tonight in accents and in 
language utterly unworthy of his position, and utterly unworthy of the occasion, 
which have convinced me that if the honour and interests of the country be any 
longer intrusted to his care, the first will be degraded, and the latter, [...] will be 
betrayed.  " 
Roebuck surpassed Disraeli in the intensity of his language.  " I want 
to know who are the traitors who are now in the Cabinet?" First Aberdeen 
and Newcastle, Then Graham and Gladstone and Herbert. Then 
Russell. Who is next? 
In the meantime the position of the man who secretly ruled 
over the coalition, as he now officially rules the Ministry, is quite 
secure. If another vote of no-confidence were to take place before 
the end of the session, which is not likely, he will dissolve 
Parliament. At all events he has six months before him in which to 
conduct Britain's foreign policy without restriction, not even 
disturbed by the noise and mock battles of the Commons. 
Written on July 17, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 333, July 20, 1855 
Marked with the sign x Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第385页=====
355 
Karl Marx 
FROM PARLIAMENT 
London, July 18. The turbulent, uproarious and noisy night 
sitting of the Commons of July 16 was inevitably followed by a 
reaction of languor, fatigue, and enervation. The Ministry, well 
versed in the secrets of parliamentary pathology, was counting on 
this general mood of dejection as a means of preventing any 
division on Roebuck's motion, 3 and not only the division but the 
debate  itself.  Not a single member of the Ministry spoke before 
midnight, shortly before the close of the sitting, although for a 
moment there was a lull in the proceedings in the House which 
invited statements from Ministers, and despite repeated demands 
from all sides of the House. The Cabinet persisted in stoic silence 
and left it to the representatives of the Marquess of Exeter, the 
representative of Lord Ward, and similar peers' representatives in 
the Commons to bury the honourable House in that tedious mire 
which Dante, in his "Inferno", makes the eternal residence of the 
indolent.b Two amendments to Roebuck's motion had been tabled, 
one from General Peel and the other from Colonel Adair, both 
proposed by military men and both lapsing into flanking marches.0 
Peel's amendment demands that the House vote on the "previous 
question",251 i.e. neither for nor against the main motion, 
declining to answer Roebuck's question. Colonel Adair demands 
approval of the "policy which decided upon the expedition to 
Sevastopol" and that "this policy be persevered in". Roebuck's 
censure in respect of the bad execution of the Crimean expedition 
a For Marx's discussion of Roebuck's motion see this volume, pp. 337-38.— Ed. 
Dante, Divina commedia. Part I, "Inferno", Canto  III.—Ed. 
c The debate was reported in The Times, No. 22109, July 18, 1855.—Ed. 
13* 

=====第386页=====
356 Karl Marx 
is thus countered by him with praise for its good origin. 
The Cabinet refrained from making any statement as to which 
of the amendments it intended to adopt as the Ministerial 
amendment. It seemed to want to feel the pulse of the House, in 
order to seek refuge either in General Peel's question without an 
answer or in Colonel Adair's answer without a question. At last the 
House seemed to have sunk into that semi-sleep that Palmerston 
was waiting for. Then he sent forward the most insignificant 
member of the Cabinet, Sir Charles Wood, to declare that the 
Ministry was backing Peel's amendment. Supported by cries of 
"Divide! Divide!" from the benches of his allies, Palmerston rose 
and "hoped the House would come to a decision tonight". He 
thought he had managed to burke3 Roebuck and even to rob him 
of the honour of a "great debate", a parliamentary tournament. 
But Disraeli was not the only one to oppose the division. Bright, 
with his characteristic massive earnestness, rose to his feet: 
"The Government had evidently wished to shirk this question, and had 
abstained until midnight from declaring what course they intended to take. The 
question was the most important one ever to come before the House. The debate, 
he thought, might last a whole week to the advantage of the country." 
Thus obliged to accept the adjournment of the debate Palmerston 
had to abandon his original plan of campaign. He suffered a 
defeat. 
Roebuck's speech possessed the great merit of brevity. With 
simplicity and clarity he summed up the reasons for his verdict, 
not as a barrister but as a judge, a manner befitting him as 
chairman of the Committee of Inquiry. He evidently had to 
contend with the same obstacles which are preventing the allied 
fleet from entering the harbour of Sevastopol—namely the sunken 
ships, the Aberdeens, Herberts, Gladstones, Grahams, etc. It was 
only by manoeuvring his way past them that he could reach 
Palmerston and the other surviving members of the Coalition 
Cabinet. They were barring the way to the present Cabinet. 
Roebuck tried to dispose of them by means of compliments. 
Newcastle and Herbert had to be praised for the conscientious way 
they had discharged their official duties, and Graham too. The 
other sins which they had committed from lack of insight had 
been punished with their exclusion from Downing Street.b All that 
Marx uses the English verb "to burke" in the corresponding German 
grammatical form (geburkt).—Ed. 
10 Downing Street is the British Prime Minister's residence. Here the reference 
is to the government as a whole.— Ed. 

=====第387页=====
From Parliament 357 
remains is to deal with the wrongdoers who have not yet been 
punished. This, he said, was the real purpose of his motion. He 
attacked Palmerston especially not only as an accomplice, but in 
particular as the person in charge of the militia. In order to keep 
his motion within the traditional limits set by Parliament Roebuck 
evidently took the point out of it. The arguments produced by the 
ministerial seconds were so feeble that the soporific form in which 
they were developed actually had a soothing effect. The evidence 
given by the witnesses is incomplete, called some. You are 
threatening to ostracise us, cried others. The whole affair 
happened so long ago, said Lord Cecil. Why not condemn Sir 
Robert Peel belatedly for what he did? Every member of the 
Cabinet is in a general manner responsible for the acts of the 
Cabinet, but no one in particular. That was the view of the 
"liberal" Phillimore. You are endangering the French alliance and 
setting yourselves up as a jury over the Emperor of the French.3 
That was the view expressed by Lowe (of The Times) followed by 
Sir James Graham. Graham, the man of clear conscience, states 
that he himself is dissatisfied with General Peel's pure negative. 
He insists that the House should decide "Guilty" or "Not guilty". He 
will not be satisfied with a verdict of "not proven"b such as the 
Scottish courts use to dismiss doubtful criminal cases. Do you really 
want to reintroduce the antiquated and unparliamentary procedure 
of impeachment0252? The press, public opinion is to blame for 
everything. It forced the Ministers to undertake the expedition, at an 
inopportune time and with inadequate means. If you condemn the 
Ministry then you ought to condemn the House of Commons, which 
gave its backing! And finally Sir Charles Wood's attempt at a 
justification. If Roebuck exonerates even Newcastle and Herbert and 
Graham, how can he accuse us? We were nothing, and we are 
responsible for nothing. Thus Wood with his "feeling which 
penetrates nothing".0 
Written on July 18, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 335, July 21, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 
a Napoleon  III.—Ed. 
Marx uses the English term and gives the German translation in brackets.— 
Ed. 
c Marx gives the English term in brackets.—Ed. 
An expression used by the Duke of Alba in Schiller's Don Carlos (Act II, Scene 
5).—Ed. 

=====第388页=====
358 
Frederick Engels 
WAR PROSPECTS 25 
At our last advices there was a lull in the warlike operations in 
the Crimea. No more assaults had taken place; the guns were all 
but silent; and but for the rifle-firing carried on constantly 
between the two lines of intrenchments, for the sapping and 
mining by which the Allies were pushing on toward the Malakoff 
hill, and for an occasional sortie by the Russians, we might 
suppose that hostilities had been suspended. But this can be 
nothing but the calm that precedes the storm; and ere this, 
that storm must have burst. There is every probability that a 
struggle more savage than Inkermann, the Mamelon Vert, or the 
assault of June  18, 254 has already been consummated at Seva­
stopol. 
In fact the month of August must to a certain degree decide the 
result of the campaign. By this time the great part, if not all of the 
Russian reenforcements must have arrived, while the ranks of the 
Allies cannot but be thinned by sickness. If they hold their ground 
on the plateau of the Chersonesus it will be as much as they can 
do. That they will not take the south side of Sevastopol this year is 
a notion abandoned now even by the British press. They are 
reduced to the hope of knocking the place to pieces bit by bit, and 
if they manage to proceed at the speed they have hitherto 
exhibited, the siege will equal in duration that of Troy. There is 
no reason to expect that they will do their work with increased 
rapidity, for we are now all but officially informed that the vicious 
system hitherto followed is to be obstinately continued. The 
Crimean correspondent of the Constitutionnel of Paris, a man of 
high rank in the French army, and believed to be Gen. Regnault 

=====第389页=====
War Prospects 359 
de St. Jean d'Angély, Commander of the Guards, has announced 
the fact, that the public may spare themselves the trouble of 
making speculations as to a field campaign and eventual invest­
ment of the north side of Sevastopol. Under present cir­
cumstances, he says, this could not be done without raising the 
siege and abandoning to the Russians the entire plateau; and 
therefore it has been decided to knock away as hard as possible at 
the position already attacked, until it is completely destroyed. 3 
Now, the announcements of this letter may be relied on, as there 
is every reason to believe that the French Emperorb not only 
approves, but even revises every letter from this source before it is 
printed, and as Regnault is one of his special pets. 
What is to be the consequence of all this we can easily discover. 
The Russian army at and about Sevastopol now consists of the 
third and fourth corps, two divisions of the fifth and one of the 
sixth corps, beside marines, sailors, local troops, Cossacks and 
cavalry—presenting a force under arms of 180 battalions, or 
90,000 infantry, with 30,000 artillery and cavalry, beside about 
40,000 sick and wounded. Even the French Moniteur estimates 
their effective strength under arms at 110,000 men. c Now the 
whole of the second corps (50 battalions, 32 squadrons, 96 guns) 
and two divisions of grenadiers, with one division of cavalry (24 
battalions, 32 squadrons, 72 guns), are on the march or already at 
Sevastopol, representing an additional force of 55,000 infantry, 
10,000 cavalry and Cossacks, and  5,000  artillery. The Russians 
thus will shortly have concentrated a force of at least 175,000 men 
or considerably more than the Allies can have left after their 
recent losses by combats and disease. That with these the Russians 
should be able at least to hold their own, particularly as they can 
constantly relieve the garrison by fresh troops after the old ones 
are exhausted by fatigue, is certainly the least that is to be 
expected from them. 
The Allies, on the other hand, have no chance of receiving 
similar reenforcements. They now number 21 divisions of infantry 
(12 French, 4 English, 3 Turkish, 2 Piedmontese), or about 190 
battalions; 3 divisions of cavalry (1 French, 1 English, 1 Turkish), 
or about 60 squadrons; and a corresponding number of guns. But 
as their battalions, and especially their squadrons, are very much 
thinned by the losses of the campaign, the whole force will not 
a "Devant Sébastopol, 26 juin", Le Constitutionnel, No. 192, July 11, 1855.— Ed. 
b Napoleon III.— Ed. 
Le Moniteur universel, No. 198, July 17, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第390页=====
360 Frederick Engels 
exceed 110,000 infantry, 7,500 cavalry, and 20,000 to 25,000a 
artillery, train, and non-combatants fit for duty. Now if the 
forces of the two contending parties were so nicely balanced 
before the arrival of the Russian reenforcements, the scale must 
evidently turn against the Allies as soon as they arrive. All the 
allied reenforcements arrived and now being sent out are merely 
detachments from the depots to keep up the battalions and 
squadrons engaged; and they are not very strong if we are to 
believe the statements of the Press. However, three divisions are 
said to be on the march to Marseilles and Toulon, where steamers 
are concentrating; while, in England, the regiments intended for 
the Crimea are ordered to be ready for immediate embarkation. 
They will perhaps amount to another division of infantry and one 
of cavalry. Thus about 33,000 infantry, with perhaps 2,500 cavalry 
and artillery may be gradually arriving in the Crimea during 
August and September; but all this depends very much upon the 
celerity with which they are got off. At all events, the Allies will 
find themselves once more in a numerical inferiority, and may 
again be locked up on the plateau where they spent the last dreary 
Winter. Whether the Russians can now succeed in driving them 
off that stronghold we will not undertake to say. But to hold their 
own is evidently the only thing the Allies can expect, until they 
receive reenforcements on a gigantic scale. Thus the war promises 
to be reduced to a series of resultless and bloody encounters, in 
which each party will send forth fresh bodies of troops, day after 
day, to meet the enemy in hand-to-hand struggles, whether on the 
ramparts of the town, on the parapets of the trenches, or on the 
escarped hights around Inkermann and Balaklava. No position of 
hostile armies can be imagined in which the shedding of more 
blood can lead to results less important than we must expect from 
such fights. 
There is, however, one chance of something decisive occurring. 
If the Russians, beside the troops they have sent, can afford to 
send another 50,000 men, so as to insure to their army an 
incontestable superiority, serious defeats may be incurred by the 
Allies, so as to force them to reembark. To judge of this possibility 
we must look at the force the Russians have under arms on the 
whole extent of their frontier. The Crimean army, including the 
reenforcements mentioned above, we set down at about 175,000 
men. In the Caucasus, where, beside the local troops and Cossacks, 
Marx and Engels give other figures — 30,000 to 35,000—in their article 
"From Parliament.— From the Theatre of War" (see this volume, pp. 363-66).— Ed. 

=====第391页=====
War Prospects 361 
the 16th and 17th divisions are engaged, they may have about 
60,000 men. In Bessarabia they are said to have 60,000 men 
under Lüders —mostly combined battalions and reserves, as we 
should say, since only one division of the infantry of the fifth 
corps is there, and nothing has ever been stated about troops of 
the first or second corps having marched in that direction. In 
Poland and Volhynia there would remain two divisions of guards, 
one of grenadiers, three of the first army-corps, and various 
reserves—amounting to about 160,000 men. The greater portion 
of the reserves and part of the guards are concentrated on the 
Baltic in the following manner: 50,000 men under Sievers in the 
German Baltic Provinces, 30,000 in Finland under Berg, and 
50,000 men in and about St. Petersburg, as an army of reserve 
under Rüdiger; in all about 585,000 men. The remainder of the 
Russian forces, about 65,000 men, are in the interior; and thus the 
total armed force would make up 650,000 men. Considering the 
enormous levies made by Russia, this number does not appear at 
all exaggerated. 
Now, it is clear that at this advanced season of the year no 
serious danger of a landing on the Baltic coast is to be 
apprehended, and a general shifting toward the south of the 
various detachments placed there might be effected so as to 
liberate say 30,000 men, to be replaced by the militia or other 
troops from the interior. These 30,000 men marching toward 
Poland, would liberate in that country an equal number, and by 
the time the Austrians have reduced their army on the frontier to 
the harmless number of 70,000 or 80,000 men, which must soon 
be the case, another 30,000 to 40,000 men from the Polish army 
might be spared. Thus the troops might be found for such a 
reenforcement as would preclude all possibility of the Allies ever 
mastering the Crimea singlehanded, and they might be brought to 
the scene of war by the middle of October. But the question arises 
whether it will be possible for the Government to feed such a large 
number of troops during the Winter, especially since the Sea of 
Azoff has been cleared of Russian vessels. As to this we have not 
sufficient data to venture an opinion; but if that can be done, and 
the measure be adopted, the Allies might as well batter away at the 
rocks that surround Balaklava harbor as at the ramparts of 
Sevastopol defended directly and indirectly by a force of 250,000 
men. 
Russia has hitherto been held in check by 300,000 Austrians on 
the flank of her line of communication with the Crimea. Let her 
once get rid of that trammel, and the Allies will soon see what a 

=====第392页=====
362 Frederick Engels 
power they have to deal with. They have allowed the time to slip 
away when, aided indirectly by Austria, they might have taken 
Sevastopol. Now, that Russia begins to be safe on that side, and 
has only the Allies to deal with, it is too late. 
Written about July 20, 1855 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4459, August 4, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1064, August 7, 1855 and the 
New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 726, August 
11, 1855 as a leading article; an abridged 
German version was included in the report 
by Marx and Engels published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, No. 337, July 23, 1855, 
marked with the sign X Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第393页=====
363 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
FROM PARLIAMENT.—FROM THE THEATRE 
OF WAR255 
London, July 20. The debate on Roebuck's motion3 did not turn 
out in the way the Ministry was fond of thinking. Even yesterday 
morning it was prophesying in its semi-official organs that 
Roebuck's motion would be defeated by five votes to one. Last 
night it considered itself fortunate in obtaining 289 votes to 182 
for the previous question,0256 i.e. the refusal of the House to 
decide on the motion at all. The same House that forced 
Aberdeen to resign because he refused to set up a Committee of 
Inquiry, saved Palmerston by refusing to come to a conclusion on 
the verdict of its own Committee. The adjournment of Parliament 
adjourns the fate of Palmerston's Cabinet until the new session. 
That is when its lease of life will end. We shall return later to the 
sitting  itself. 
At present there is a lull in the war operations in the Crimea. 
No more attempted assaults, the cannon are almost silenced; and 
if it were not for the constant exchange of rifle fire between the 
two lines of trenches, if the allies were not advancing their position 
up the Malakhov hill by mining and sapping, and if the Russians 
did not make the occasional sorties, one might think that all 
hostilities had been suspended. 
That is the calm before the storm. In two or three weeks a battle 
will begin, man against man, much fiercer than at Inkerman, the 
Green Mamelon or the assault of June  18. 257 The month of 
August ought to be decisive up to a certain point: the Russian 
forces which are now on their way will have arrived,and the allied 
a See this volume, pp. 337-38, 356-57.— Ed. 
The authors use the English words "previous question".—Ed. 

=====第394页=====
364 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
forces will have been reduced by sickness. The life-and-death battle 
will then begin, and the allies will have enough to do maintaining 
their ground on the plateau. 
Even the English press has now given up the idea of the south 
side of Sevastopol being taken this year. They are now reduced to 
the hope of subduing Sevastopol bit by bit; and if they manage to 
proceed with the same speed as they have up to now the siege will 
last as long as that of Troy. There is absolutely no reason to 
believe that they will speed up their task, for we have been as 
good as told officially that the deficient system adopted so far will 
be stubbornly continued. The Crimea correspondent of the 
Constitutionnel, a man of high rank in the French army (it is said to 
be General Regnault de Saint-Jean-d'Angély, commander of the 
guards), has announced to the public that it can spare itself the 
effort of indulging in speculation about a campaign in the open 
and the possible blockade of the northside of Sevastopol. He 
maintains that under the present circumstances this could not 
happen without first abandoning the siege and surrendering the 
whole of the plateau to the Russians. It has therefore been 
decided to hammer away as fiercely as possible at the position 
which has already been attacked until it has been completely 
destroyed/ The announcements contained in this letter can be 
regarded as semi-official, as there is every reason to believe that 
Bonaparte not only approves of them but that he also checks every 
report from this source before it goes to print. Regnault is one of 
his special favourites—the Minister of War who, at the time of the 
Legislative Assembly, gave his signature to the dismissal of 
Changarnier. 258 
The consequences of all this are not hard to predict. The 
Russian army in and around Sevastopol consisted of the 3rd and 
4th Corps, two divisions of the 5th and one of the 6th Corps, 
apart from marines, sailors, local troops, Cossacks and cavalry, all 
in all an army of 180 battalions or 90,000 infantry with 30,000 
men of the artillery, cavalry, etc., plus about 40,000 sick and 
wounded. Even the French Moniteur estimates their effective force 
under arms to be 110,000 men. b Now, the whole of the 2nd Corps 
(50 battalions, 32 squadrons and 96 cannon) and two divisions of 
infantry with a division of cavalry (24 battalions, 32 squad­
rons,  72 cannon) are marching towards or are already near Sevas­
topol. They represent an additional force of 55,000 infant-
"Devant Sébastopol, 26 juin", Le Constitutionnel, No. 192, July 11, 1855.— Ed. 
Le Moniteur universel, No. 198, July 17, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第395页=====
From Parliament 365 
ry, 10,000 cavalry and Cossacks and  5,000  artillery. Thus the Rus­
sians will soon have concentrated an army of at least 175,000 
men, considerably more than the allies can have after their most 
recent losses in the sorties and from sickness. It is all the more to 
be expected that the Russians will be capable of at least holding 
the territory they have held so far, since they are able constantly 
to relieve with fresh forces the garrison troops exhausted by their 
efforts. 
The allies on the other hand have no chance of receiving similar 
reinforcements. They now number 21 divisions of infantry (12 
French, 4 English, 3 Turkish, 2 Piedmontese), or approximately 
190 battalions, 3 divisions of cavalry (1 French, 1 English, 1 
Turkish), or approximately 60 squadrons and a corresponding 
number of cannon but, since their battalions and particularly their 
squadrons have been substantially thinned by the losses in the 
campaign, their total strength will not exceed 110,000 infantry, 
7,500 cavalry and 30,000-35,000 artillery, vehicle train and those 
unfit for active service. If the forces of the two opposing parties 
were thus almost equally balanced before the arrival of the 
Russian reinforcements, the scale must clearly tip to the disadvan­
tage of the allies as soon as those reinforcements arrive. What has 
been sent so far have merely been detachments from the depots, 
who were to make up the losses suffered by the battalions and 
squadrons engaged in combat, and they cannot be many in 
number, if the press reports are reliable. In the meantime it is 
reported that 3 divisions are marching to Marseilles and Toulon 
where steamships are being concentrated, whilst in England 
regiments intended for the Crimea have received orders to be 
ready for immediate embarkation. They will comprise approxi­
mately one division of infantry and one division of cavalry. Thus 
approximately 33,000 infantry with perhaps 2,500 cavalry and 
artillery might arrive little by little in the Crimea in August and 
September. This, however, depends entirely on how quickly they 
embark. At all events the allies will again find themselves 
numerically inferior and can be wedged in on the plateau once 
more, where they were brought to ruin during last year's sad 
winter. 
Whether the Russians will succeed this time in driving them 
from that fortified hiding-place we dare not say. But it is clear that 
all the allies can expect to do is to maintain their own ground, 
unless they were to receive reinforcements on a gigantic scale. 
Thus the war could be reduced to a series of encounters and 
hand-to-hand fights, as fruitless as they are bloody, with each side 

=====第396页=====
366 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
sending forward fresh troops daily to meet the enemy in 
hand-to-hand fighting, whether it be on the ramparts of the city, 
on the parapets of the trenches, or on the escarpments round 
Inkerman and Balaklava. Of all the possibilities it is most likely 
that matters will take that course. No situation involving two 
enemy armies could be devised where greater spilling of blood will 
lead to results of less significance than can be expected from 
engagements of this kind. And this has been brought about by the 
mediocrity of the commanders-in-chief on both sides, by impotent 
dilettantism at Paris and deliberate treachery in London. 
Written on July 20, 1855 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, Published in English in full for the 
No. 337, July 23, 1855 fim  time 
Marked with the sign x 
The English version of part of the text 
was published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4459, August 4, 1855, and 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1064, August 7, 1855 and 
the New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 726, 
August 11, 1855 

=====第397页=====
367 
Karl Marx 
PALMERSTON.— THE PHYSIOLOGY 
OF THE RULING CLASS OF GREAT BRITAIN 
London, July 23. If the guarantee of the Turkish loan259 should 
run into the same opposition this evening as it did last Friday, 
then Palmerston will immediately dissolve the House of Commons. 
To the adroit all circumstances are favourable. Dissolving the 
Commons as a result of Bulwer's motion, or dissolving it on account 
of Roebuck's motion3—both methods are equally risky. The 
diplomatic activity at the Vienna conferences,260 the administration 
organising the winter campaign—neither position is suitable for 
appealing to the electorate from Parliament. But the "guarantee of the 
Turkish loan"\ Scenery, situation and motive are transformed as if by 
a stroke of magic. It is no longer Parliament that condemns the 
Cabinet on the grounds of treachery or incompetence. It is the 
Cabinet which accuses Parliament of hindering the conduct of the 
war, of jeopardising the French alliance and of abandoning Turkey. 
The Cabinet no longer appeals to the country to absolve it from 
Parliament's condemnation. It appeals to the country to condemn 
Parliament. In fact the loan is so formulated that Turkey receives no 
money directly, but, under the most humiliating conditions for a 
nation, she is put under guardianship and has to allow the sum 
allegedly loaned to her to be administered and dispensed by English 
commissioners. The English administration has stood the test so 
brilliantly during the Eastern war that it must indeed be tempted to 
extend its blessings to foreign realms. The Western Powers have 
taken possession of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Constan­
tinople, and not just the Ministry of Foreign Affairs but the Ministry 
For a description of the Bulwer-Lytton and Roebuck motions and their 
discussion in the House of Commons see this volume, pp. 337-43, 353-57.— Ed. 

=====第398页=====
368 Karl Marx 
of Home Affairs too. Since Omer Pasha was transplanted from 
Bulgaria to the Crimea, Turkey has ceased to exercise authority over 
her own army. The Western Powers are now trying to seize the 
Turkish finances. For the first time the Ottoman Empire is 
contracting public debts without receiving a loan. It finds itself in the 
position of an estate owner who does not only raise an advance on 
a mortgage but also binds himself to relinquish to his creditor 
the administration of the sum advanced. The one remaining 
step is to relinquish the estate  itself.  Palmerston has demoralised 
Greece and paralysed Spain b) means of a similar system 
of loans. But appearances are on his side. The participation 
of the peace party in the opposition to the loan adds strength 
to these appearances. Thanks to a nimble somersault he again 
stands as the representative of war against the whole opposition 
as the representatives of peace. We know which war he intends 
to conduct. Chaining Finland more securely to Russia in the Baltic 
by means of useless and unproductive acts of murder and arson. 
Perpetuating in the Crimea a series of butcheries in which defeat 
alone, not victory, can produce a decision. Following his old 
habit he casts foreign alliances into the parliamentary scales. 
Bonaparte has already had the loan sanctioned by his so-called 
"legislative corps". The English Parliament must condescend 
to becoming the echo of the "legislative corps"—the echo of an 
echo,  or the alliance will be jeopardised. Using the French alliance 
as a shield to ward off all blows from  himself,  Palmerston at the 
same time has the satisfaction of seeing it receive a pummelling. As 
a proof that he can send "the right man to fill the right place"3 
Palmerston has promoted Sir W[illiam] Molesworth to Colonial 
Secretary, and Sir B[enjamin] Hall to Commissioner of Forests and 
Land Revenues'5 in place of Molesworth. Molesworth belongs 
to Wakefield's school of colonisation.261 Its principle is to make 
land in the colonies artificially dear and labour artificially cheap 
in order to engender the "necessary combination of productive 
forces". The experimental use of this theory in Canada drove 
immigrants away from that country to the United States and 
Australia. 
In London there are three committees of inquiry in session at 
the moment, one appointed by the Cabinet, the other two by 
From Layard's speech in the House of Commons on June 15, 1855. The 
Times, No. 22082, June 16, 1855.—Ed. 
Marx calls it Minister der Waldungen und Domänen. The actual title was up to 
1857 Commissioner of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues and in that year was 
changed to Commissioner of Works and Public Buildings.—Ed. 

=====第399页=====
Palmerston 369 
Parliament. The first, composed of the Recorders3 of London, 
Manchester and Liverpool, investigating the events in Hyde Park,h 
finds itself flooded daily with evidence not only that the constables 
used unprecedented brutality, but also that this brutality was 
intentional and used on orders. If it were uncompromising the 
inquiry would have to begin with Sir George Grey and the Cabinet 
as the principal offenders. The second committee, under Berkeley's 
chairmanship, dealing with the effects of the Act on the "sale of 
spirits on Sundays", shows the sanctimonious superficiality of 
Sabbatarian experiments for the improvement of society. Instead 
of decreasing, the number of excesses from drunkenness has 
increased. The only difference is their partial displacement from 
Sundays to Mondays. The third committee, chaired by Scholefield, 
is concerned with the adulteration of food and drink and of all 
commodities contributing to the maintenance of life.262 Adultera­
tion seems to be the rule, purity the exception. For the most part 
the substances added to impart colour, odour and taste to 
worthless materials are poisonous, and all of them are detrimental 
to health. Trade appears here as a vast laboratory of fraud, the list 
of commodities as a diabolical catalogue of phantoms, free 
competition as the freedom to poison and be poisoned. 
The Report of the Inspectors of Factories for the half-year ending 
April 30c has been laid before both Houses of Parliament—an 
invaluable contribution to the characterisation of the Manchester 
men of peace and the class disputing the aristocracy's monopoly of 
government. In the report the "accidents arising from machinery" 
are classified under the headings: 
1. "Causing death", 2. "Loss of right hand or arm. Loss of part of right hand. 
Loss of left hand or arm. Loss of part of left hand. [...] Fracture of hand or foot. 
Injuries to head and face" and 3. "Lacerations, contusions and other injuries not 
enumerated above." 
We read of a young woman "who lost her right hand", of a 
child who "had the nasal bones crushed in and the sight of both 
eyes destroyed by this machine", of a man whose "left leg was cut 
off, [...] right arm broken in three or four places", whose head 
a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 323-27.— Ed. 
c Reports of the Inspectors of  Factories  to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for 
the Home Department, for the Half Year Ending 30th April 1855.—Ed. 
Here and in the rest of this passage the Report has "Amputation of" where 
Marx writes "Loss of".— Ed. 
Marx paraphrased the extract.— Ed. 

=====第400页=====
370 Karl Marx 
was cut and "mutilated in a shocking manner"; of a youth who had 
his "left arm torn out at the shoulder joint", among other injuries, 
and of another man who had "both arms torn out of the shoulder 
joints,  his abdomen lacerated, the intestines protruded, both legs 
broken, head contused", etc., etc. The industrial bulletin of the 
factory inspectors is more terrible and more appalling than any of 
the war bulletins from the Crimea. Women and children provide a 
regular and sizeable contingent in the list of the wounded and 
killed. Deaths and injuries are no more praiseworthy than the 
colours marked on the body of a Negro by the plantation owner's 
whip.  They are almost exclusively caused by the absence of the 
legally prescribed protective guards around the machines. It will be 
recalled that the manufacturers of Manchester—this metropolis of 
the party of peace at any price—assailed the Cabinet with 
deputations and protests against the Act ordering certain safety 
precautions in the use of machinery. Since they were unable to 
change the law at present, they attempted by intrigues to get rid 
of the Factory Inspector L[eonard] Horner, and to manoeuvre a 
more pliant guardian of the law into his place. So far without 
success. They claimed that the introduction of the safety equip­
ment would eat up their profit. Horner has now proved that there 
are few factories in his district which could not be made safe for 
£10.  The total number of accidents arising from machinery 
during the six months covered by the report is  1,788,  among these 
18 fatal accidents. The sum total of money fines imposed on the 
manufacturers, of compensation for injuries paid by them, etc., is 
£298 for the same period. To make up this sum fines for 
"permitting work during illegal hours", for "employing children 
under 8 years of age", etc., are included in it, so that the fines 
imposed for the 18 deaths and the 1,770 mutilations fall far short 
of £298. £298! This is less than the cost of a third-class 
racehorse! 263 
The Roebuck committee and the British oligarchy! Scholefield's 
committee and the British commercial class! The report of the 
Factory Inspectors and the British factory owners—these three 
headings provide a graphic idea of the physiology of the 
classes now ruling in Great Britain. 
Written on July 23, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 343, July 26, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time 
Marked with the sign X 

=====第401页=====
Karl Marx 
LORD JOHN RUSSELL 

=====第402页=====
Written July 25-August 12, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
Nos.  347, 359, 363, 365, 369 and 377, 
July 28, August 4, 7, 8, 10 and 15, 1855 
Marked with the sign X 
An abridged English version was pub­
lished in the New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 4479, August 28, 1855 Printed according to the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 

=====第403页=====
373 
[I] 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 347, July 28, 1855] 
London, July 25. Lord John Russell was fond of quoting an old 
Whig axiom that "parties were like snails, for with them it is the 
tail that moves the head". He hardly could have surmised that to 
save itself the tail will strike off the head. If not the head of the 
"last Whig cabinets", he was indisputably the head of the Whig 
Party. Burke said once that 
"the number of estates, country-houses, castles, forest lands and the like which 
the Russells had wrested away from the English people was quite incredible"  .a 
The great repute in which Lord John Russell has been held and 
the prominent role which he has dared to play for over a quarter 
of a century would be even more incredible if the "number of 
estates" which his family has usurped did not furnish the clue to 
the puzzle. 
Lord John seems to have spent his whole life simply chasing 
after posts and holding on so stubbornly to the posts he captured 
that he forfeited all claim to power. So it was in 1836-1841 when he 
was given the post of leader of the House of Commons. So in 
1846-1852 when he could call himself Prime Minister. The 
semblance of power that enveloped him as the leader of an 
opposition assaulting the exchequer always disappeared the day he 
came to power. As soon as he changed from an Out to an Inb he 
"A Letter from the Right Honourable Edmund Burke to a Noble Lord, on 
the Attacks Made upon him and his Pension, in the House of Lords, by the Duke of 
Bedford...", p. 37. Marx gives the English words "quite incredible" in brackets after 
the corresponding German words.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English words "Out" (member of the opposition) and "In" 
(member of the Government).—Ed. 

=====第404页=====
374 Karl Marx 
was done for. With no other English statesman did power so 
abruptly change into powerlessness. But, on the other hand, no 
other knew so well as he how to transform powerlessness into 
power. 
The sham power Lord John Russell periodically wielded was not 
only sustained by the influence exerted by the family of the Duke 
of Bedford, whose younger son he was, but also by the absence of 
all the qualities which generally fit a person to rule over others. 
His Lilliputian views on everything spread to others like a 
contagion and contributed more to confuse the judgment of his 
hearers than the most ingenious misrepresentation could have 
done. His real talent consists in his capacity to reduce everything 
that he touches to his own dwarfish dimensions, to diminish the 
external world to an infinitesimal size and to transform it into a 
vulgar microcosm of his own invention. His instinct to belittle the 
magnificent is excelled only by the skill with which he can make 
the petty appear great. 
Lord John Russell's entire life has been lived on false pretences: 
the false pretences of parliamentary reform, the false pretences of 
religious freedom, the false pretences of Free Trade. So sincere 
was his belief in the sufficiency of false pretences that he 
considered it quite feasible to become, not only a British statesman 
on the basis of false pretences, but also a poet, thinker and 
historian. Only this can account for the existence of such 
balderdash as his tragedy Don Carlos, or, Persecution, or his Essay on 
the History of the English Government and Constitution, from the Reign 
of Henry VII to the Present Time, or his Memoirs of the Affairs of 
Europe from the Peace of Utrecht.265 To his egoistic narrow-
mindedness every object is nothing but a tabula rasa on which he 
is at liberty to write his own name. His opinions have never 
depended upon the actual facts; on the contrary, he regards facts 
as dependent on the way he arranges them in his rhetorical 
efforts. As a speaker he has not produced a single idea worth 
mentioning, not one profound maxim, no penetrating observation, 
no impressive description, no beautiful thought, no poignant 
allusion, no humorous portrait, no true emotion. Russell's "most 
docile mediocrity", as Roebuck admits in his history of the reform 
ministry,3 surprised his audience even when performing the 
greatest deed of his public life: when he tabled his so-called 
Reform Bill266 in the House of Commons. He has a peculiar 
J. A. Roebuck, History of the Whig Ministry of 1830, to the Passing of the Reform 
Bill, Vol. II, p. 67.— Ed. 

=====第405页=====
Lord John Russell 375 
manner of combining his dry, drawling and monotonous delivery 
resembling that of an auctioneer with schoolboy illustrations from 
history and a certain solemn gibberish on "the beauty of the 
constitution", the "universal liberties of this country", "civilisa­
tion" and "progress". He gets really heated only when personally 
provoked or goaded by his opponents into abandoning his pose of 
affected arrogance and self-satisfaction and displaying all the 
symptoms of extreme helplessness. In England it is generally 
agreed that his numerous failures are due to a certain natural 
rashness. This rashness, too, is really merely a false pretence. It is 
brought about by the subterfuges and expedients intended only 
for the given moment necessarily coming into conflict with the 
adverse circumstances of the next moment. Russell does not act 
instinctively but calculatingly; but his calculations are petty like the 
man himself—they are always merely makeshifts intended for the 
next hour. Hence his constant wavering and dodging, his rapid 
advances and disgraceful retreats, his insolent words prudently 
retracted, pledges proudly made and wretchedly redeemed, and, if 
nothing else was of any avail, there were sobs and tears to move 
the world to pity. His whole life can be viewed, therefore, either as 
a systematic shama or as an uninterrupted blunder. 
It may seem astonishing that a public figure should have 
survived such a host of stillborn measures, crushed projects and 
abortive schemes. But just as a polyp thrives on amputation, so 
Lord John Russell on abortion. Most of his plans were advanced 
solely for the purpose of placating his discontented allies, the 
so-called Radicals, while an understanding with his adversaries, the 
Conservatives, ensured the "burking" of these plans. Who can say 
that since the days of the reformed Parliament he ever staked the 
fate of his Cabinet on a single one of his "comprehensive and 
liberal measures", or of his "great reforms presented by instal­
ments". On the contrary. The proposal of measures to satisfy the 
Liberals and their withdrawal to satisfy the Conservatives contri­
buted more than anything else to maintain and prolong his 
Ministry. There were times when Peel deliberately kept him at the 
helm in order not to be compelled to do things which he knew 
Russell would only prattle about. In such periods of secret 
understanding with the official opponent Russell exhibited impu­
dence vis-à-vis his official allies. He became bold—on false 
pretences. 
a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第406页=====
376 Karl Marx 
We shall cast a retrospective glance on his performance 
from 1830 until the present day. This commonplace genius has 
deserved it. 
[II] 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 359, August 4, 1855] 
London, August  l. 267 
"If I was a painter," said Cobbett, "there would I place the old oak (the British 
Constitution), corroded at the root, his top dead, his trunk hollow, loosened at his 
base,  rocking with every blast, and there would I place Lord John Russell, in the 
person of a tom-tit, endeavoring to put all right by picking at a nest of animalculae 
seated in the half-rotten bark of one of the meanest branches. There are some who 
even think that he is eating the buds while he pretends to clear the tree of 
injurious insects." 
So minute were Lord John Russell's reform efforts during his 
antediluvian career from 1813 to 1830; but minute as they were, 
they were not even sincere, and he never hesitated to repudiate 
them as soon as he perceived merely the scent of a ministerial 
post. 
Since 1807 the Whigs had pined in vain for a share in the 
proceeds of taxation, when in 1827 the formation of Canning's 
cabinet, with whom they pretended to agree on the subject of 
commerce and of foreign policy, seemed to afford them the 
long-sought-for opportunity. Russell, at that time, had given notice 
of one of his tom-tit Parliamentary reform motions. But upon 
Canning's stern declaration that he should oppose Parliamentary 
reform to the end of his life, up rose Lord John and withdrew his 
motion. He said 
"Parliamentary reform was a question on which there was a great diversity of 
opinion among those who advocated it, and to which the leaders of the Whigs were 
always unwilling to be pledged as to a party question. It was now for the last time 
that he brought forward this question."3 
He concluded his speech with the insolent statement that "the 
people no longer wished for Parliamentary reform". He, who had 
always made a show of his noisy opposition to Castlereagh's six 
infamous gagging acts of 1819,268 now refrained from voting on 
Russell's speech in the House of Commons on May 3, 1827. Quotations from 
and references to Parliamentary speeches are as a rule based on Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates.—Ed. 

=====第407页=====
Lord John Russell 377 
Mr. Hume's motion3 for the repeal of one of those acts which 
made a man liable to transportation for life for uttering in print 
anything which had even a tendency to bring either house of 
Parliament into contempt. 
Thus,  at the conclusion of the first period of his Parliamentary 
life, we find Lord John Russell disavowing his support of Reform, 
to which he paid lip service for more than ten years, and fully 
concurring with the opinion of that Whig prototype, Horace 
Walpole, who remarked to Conway thatb 
"popular Bills are never really proposed but as an engine of party, and not as a 
pledge for the realisation of any such extravagant ideas". 
It was, then, by no means Russell's fault that instead of bringing 
forward the motion for reform for the last time in 1827, he had to 
table it again four years later, on March 1, 1831, in the shape of 
the famous Reform Bill. He was not even the author of this Bill, 
which he still exhibits as his great claim to the admiration of the 
world in general, and England in particular.0 In its principal 
features—the breaking up of the greater part of the nomination 
boroughs, the addition of county members, the enfranchisement 
of copyholders, lease-holders,d269 and twenty four of the chief 
commercial and industrial towns of England—it was copied from 
the Bill which Lord Grey (the chief of the Reform Ministry in 
1830) had moved in the House of Commons in 1797, when 
heading the Opposition, and which he had wisely forgotten about 
when he was a member of the Cabinet in 1806. It was the identical 
Bill, slightly modified. The ejection of Wellington from the 
Cabinet, because he had declared against Parliamentary Reform; 
the July Revolution in France; the threatening great political 
unions formed by the middle and working classes at Birming­
ham, Manchester, London, and elsewhere; the rural war in the 
agricultural counties270; the "bonfires" in the most fertile regions 
of England6—all these circumstances compelled the Whigs to 
propose some measure of Reform. They gave way grudgingly, 
Tabled in the House of Commons on May 31, 1827.—Ed. 
The New-York Daily Tribune has: "we find him fully concurring with the 
opinion of that Whig prototype, Horace Walpole,  that".—Ed. 
c Instead of the words "and England in particular" the New-York Daily Tribune 
has "and the gratitude of the English nation in particular".— Ed. 
Marx uses the English words "boroughs", "copyholders", "lease-holders" 
and, below, "freeholders".— Ed. 
e The New-York Daily Tribune further has: "('Out of the fires came the Reform,' 
says a celebrated writer)".— Ed. 

=====第408页=====
378 Karl Marx 
slowly, and after vainly reiterated efforts to keep their places by a 
compromise with the Tories.3 They were prevented by the 
formidable attitude of the people, and also by the uncompromis­
ing intransigence of the Tories. Hardly, however, had the Reform 
Bill become law, and begun to work, when, to quote Mr. Bright's 
words (spoken on June 5, 1849), the people "began to feel that 
they had been cheated".15 
Never, perhaps, had a mighty, and, to all appearances, 
successful popular movement been turned into such a mock result. 
Not only were the working classes altogether excluded from any 
political influence, but the middle classes themselves soon discov­
ered that Lord Althorp, the soul of the Reform cabinet, had not 
used a rhetorical figure when telling his Tory adversaries that 
"the Reform Bill was the most aristocratic act ever offered to the nation". 
The new country representation was far larger than the increase 
in votes granted to the towns. The franchise given to the 
tenants-at-will rendered0 the counties, still more efficiently than 
before, the tools of the aristocracy. The substitution of the £10 
householders for the payers of scot and lot, actually disfranchised 
a great number of former town voters. The granting or 
withdrawal of the franchise was, on the whole, calculated not to 
increase middle-class influence, but to exclude Tory patronage 
and promote Whig patronage. By a series of the most extraordi­
nary tricks, frauds, and juggles, the inequality of the electoral 
districts was maintained, the monstrous disproportion between the 
number of representatives, on the one hand, and the size of the 
population and the importance of the constituencies, on the other, 
restored. If some fifty-six rotten boroughs, each with a handful of 
inhabitants, were extinguished, whole counties and populous 
towns were transformed into rotten boroughs. John Russell 
himself -confesses, in a letter to his electors in Stroud, on the 
principles of the Reform Act (1839), that 
"the £10 franchise was fettered by regulation, and the annual registration was 
made a source of vexation .and expense". 
The New-York Daily Tribune has: "It was their only means of rushing into 
office. They gave way grudgingly, slowly, and after vainly reiterated efforts at one 
time to shuffle out of the only liberal clauses of their own measure, and again to 
abandon it altogether, and to keep their places by a compromise with the 
Tories." — Ed. 
John Bright's speech in the House of Commons.—Ed. 
The New-York Daily Tribune has: "tenants-at-will occupying at an annual 
value of £50, rendered".— Ed. 

=====第409页=====
Lord John Russell 379 
Intimidation and patronage, where they could not be per­
petuated, were replaced by bribery, which, from the passage of the 
Reform Bill, became the main prop of the British Constitution. 
Such was the Reform Bill of which Russell was the mouthpiece, 
but not the author. The only clauses since proved to be due to his 
invention are that which compels all freeholders,™ except parsons, 
to have had a year of possession, and the other clause preserving 
the privileges of Tavistock, the family "rotten borough" of the 
Russells. 
Russell was but a subordinate member of the Reform Ministry, 
without a vote in the Cabinet, viz.: Paymaster of the Forces, from 
1830 to November 1834. He was, perhaps, the most insignificant 
man among his colleagues, but he was nevertheless the youngest 
son of the influential Duke of Bedford. Hence it was decided to 
grant him the privilege of introducing the Reform Bill in the 
House of Commons. One obstacle stood in the way of this family 
arrangement. During the Reform movement, before 1830, Russell 
had always figured as "Henry Brougham's little man".3 Russell 
could not be entrusted with bringing in the Reform Bill as long as 
Brougham sat beside him in the Lower House. The obstacle was 
removed by throwing the conceited plebeian on the woolsack in 
the House of Lords.273 Because very soon the more prominent 
members of the original Reform cabinet either became members 
of the House of Lords (e.g. Althorp in 1834), died, or went over 
to the Tories, not only the entire inheritance of the Reform 
Ministry devolved upon Russell but soon he was regarded as the 
father of the child whose godfather he had been. He thrived on 
the false pretence of being the author of a Reform Bill which was 
itself a falsification and a piece of juggling. Apart from this he 
distinguished himself in the years 1830 to 1834 only by the 
irritable acrimony with which he opposed all inquiry into the 
pension-list.b 
a Marx uses the English words "little man" and gives the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
Instead of the passage beginning with the words "One obstacle stood in the-
way of this family arrangement" and ending with the words "inquiry into the 
pension-list" the New-York Daily Tribune has: "Beside the Reform-Bill discussion, 
Lord John distinguished himself by the acrimony and virulence with which he 
opposed all inquiry into the pension-list. Some years later, when all the prominent 
members of the original Reform cabinet, having been removed to the Lords, died 
out, or separated from the Whigs, Lord John not only entered upon their 
inheritance, but soon passed in the eyes of the country as the natural father of the 
bill of which he had been but the godfather by courtesy."—Ed. 

=====第410页=====
380 Karl Marx 
[III] 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 363, August 7, 1855] 
London, August 3. Let us return to our character sketch of Russell. 
He is worth dealing with at greater length, first because he is the 
classical representative of modern Whiggery, and second because his 
story, at least from one aspect, comprises the history of the reformed 
Parliament up to the present day. 
In introducing the Reform Bill Russell made the following 
statement with regard to the ballot3 and short parliaments (the 
Whigs, of course, had prolonged the annual parliaments of 
England to three years in 1694 and to seven years in I7l7)b: 
"There can be no doubt that the ballot has much to recommend it; the 
arguments which I have heard advanced in its favour are as ingenious as any that I 
ever heard on any subject. But the House must beware of arriving at a hasty 
decision.... The question of short parliaments, is one of the utmost importance, which 
I shall leave to be brought before the House by some other member at a future 
time,  in order not to embarrass the great subject with details." 
On June 6, 1833 he claimed to have 
"refrained from bringing forward those two measures in order to avoid a 
collision with the Lords, although opinions (!) deeply seated in his heart. He was 
convinced of their being most essential to the happiness, prosperity and welfare of 
this country." 
(At the same time we have here an example of his species of 
rhetoric.)0 
On account of this "deeply seated conviction" he proved to be a 
constant and relentless enemy of the ballot and short 
parliaments throughout his entire ministerial career. At the time 
these statements were made they served as a twofold expedient. 
They mollified the distrustful democrats of the House of 
Commons, and they intimidated the intractable aristocrats of the 
House of Lords. Yet as soon as Russell had secured the support of 
the new court of Queen Victoria (see Brougham's reply to Russell's 
letter to the electors of Stroud, 1839)d, thus imagining himself to 
Marx uses the English word here and below.—Ed. 
The preceding two paragraphs do not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune. The 
quotation from Russell's speech in the House of Commons on March 1, 1831, which 
follows immediately is shorter and is introduced with the words: "On bringing in the 
Reform Bill, he said:".— Ed. 
The sentence in brackets does not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 
"Lord Brougham's Reply to Lord John Russell's Letter to the Electors of 
Stroud...", The Times, No.  17041,  May 14, 1839. The words in brackets do not 
occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 

=====第411页=====
Lord John Russell 381 
be an immortal office-holder, out he comes with his statement of 
November 1837, justifying "the extreme length to which the 
Reform Bill had gone" by the fact that it ruled out the possibility 
of ever proceeding any further. 
"The object of the Reform Bill," he stated, "was to increase the preponderance of 
the landed interest, and it was intended as a permanent settlement of a great 
constitutional question." 
In short, he made the finality statement that earned him the 
title of "Finality John".3 But this finality, this standing still, was no 
more seriously meant than the talk of proceeding further.13 It is 
true,  he opposed Hume's parliamentary reform motion in 1848. 
With the combined might of the Whigs, Tories and Peelites274 he 
again defeated Hume over a similar motion in 1849 by a majority 
of 268 to 82. Emboldened by his conservative reserves he spoke 
out provocatively: 
"In framing and proposing the Reform Bill, what we wished was to adapt the 
representation of this House to the other powers of the State, and keep it in 
harmony with the Constitution. Mr. Bright and those who agree with him are so 
exceedingly narrow-minded, they have intellect and understanding bound up in such a 
narrow round that it is quite impossible to get them to understand the great 
principles on which our ancestors founded the Constitution of the country, and 
which we, their successors, humbly admire and endeavour to follow. The House of 
Commons, in the 17 years that have elapsed since the Reform Bill, has satisfied all 
reasonable expectations. The existing system, although somewhat anomalous, works 
well: the better for its anomalies."0 
However, as in 1851 Russell was defeated over Locke King's 
motion for extending the county franchise to £10 occupiers—and 
as he was even compelled to resign for a few days—his "broad" 
mind suddenly grasped the necessity for a new reform bill. He gave 
the House his pledge that he would introduce it. He did not say 
what his "measure" was but he drew a bill of exchange on it, 
payable during the next session of Parliament. 
The Westminster Review, the organ of the so-called Radicals allied 
to Russell, wrote at the time, 
"the pretence of the present ministry to office had become a byword of scorn and 
reproach; and at length, when its exclusion and party annihilation seemed imminent, 
forth comes Lord John with the promise of a new Reform Bill for 1852. Keep me in 
Russell's speeches in the House of Commons on November 20 and 21, 1837. 
Marx gives the nickname in English, and also "finality" in the next sentence.— Ed. 
Instead of this sentence the New-York Daily Tribune has: "But this finality was 
as false a pretence as his reform itself."—Ed. 
Russell's speech in the House of Commons on June 5, 1849. The last sentence 
but one is omitted in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 

=====第412页=====
382 Karl Marx 
office, he says, till that time, and I will satisfy your longings for a large and liberal 
measure of reform." 3 
In 1852 he indeed proposed a Reform Bill, this time of his very 
own invention, but of such astonishingly Lilliputian proportions 
that neither the Conservatives considered it worth attacking, nor 
the Liberals worth defending. Still, the aborted reform afforded 
the little man the pretext, when he was eventually forced out of 
the Ministry, for hurling a Scythian arrow as he fled at the 
victorious Lord Derby, who succeeded him. He made his exit with 
the pompous threat that he "would insist on the extension of the 
suffrage"}"  The extension of the suffrage had now become a 
"matter of the heart" for him.c Scarcely had he been thrown out 
of the Cabinet when this child of expediency, now called by his 
own supporters Foul-Weather Jack,d invited to his private resi­
dence at Chesham Place the various factions whose marriage 
brought into being the sickly monster of the coalition. He did not 
forget to send for the "exceedingly narrow-minded" Brights and 
Cobdens, begging their forgiveness at this solemn meeting for his 
own broad-mindedness and giving them a new promissory note for 
a "larger" amount of reform. As a member of the coalition 
Cabinet in 1854 he amused the Commons with yet another reform 
project, which he knew was destined to become another Iphigenia 
to be sacrificed by  himself,  another Agamemnon, for the sake of 
another Trojan War. He performed the sacrifice in the melo­
dramatic style of Metastasio, his eyes filled with tears, which 
however dried up as soon as the "unpaid" seat which he occupied 
in the Cabinet was exchanged for the Presidency of the Cabinet at 
a salary of £2,000 as a result of a miserable intrigue against 
Mr. Strutt, a member of his own party.e 
In the New-York Daily Tribune one more sentence of this passage is quoted: 
"The Reformers of the House of Commons yielded to that reasoning."— F ft. 
b From Russell's speech in the House of Commons on February 23, 1852.— Ed. 
c This sentence does not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 
Marx uses the English nickname and gives a German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
e The next paragraph is omitted in the New-York Daily Tribune and the end of 
this paragraph reads as follows: "Hardly out of office, this child of expediency, 
now emphatically called by his own followers Foul-Weather Jack, summoned to his 
private residence at Chesham-place the different sections of the Liberal party to 
make solemn asseverations of his own large-mindedness, and to hand to them 
another promissory bill of a larger amount of reform. When a member of the 
Coalition cabinet, he amused the House with a Reform bill which he knew would 
prove another Iphigenia, to be sacrificed by  himself,  another Agamemnon, for the 
benefit of another Trojan war. He performed the sacrifice indeed in true 
melodramatic style, his eyes filled with tears, but these soon passed away."—Ed. 

=====第413页=====
Lord John Russell 383 
The second reform plan was supposed to shore up his falling 
Cabinet, the third to bring down the Tory Cabinet. The second 
was a subterfuge, the third a piece of chicanery. He arranged the 
second so that no one would accept it; he presented the third at a 
moment when no one could accept it. With both he demonstrated 
that if fate had made him a Minister, nature had made him a 
tinker, just like Christopher Sly.a Even of the first Reform Bill, the 
only one put into effect, he grasped only the oligarchical knack 
and not the historical tack. 
[IV] 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 365, August 8, 1855] 
London, August 4.b On the outbreak of the Anti-Jacobin War the 
influence of the Whigs in England entered a period of decline, and 
continued to sink lower and lower. On account of this they turned 
their eyes on  Ireland,  resolving to use it to tip the balance, and 
inscribed on their party banners Irish Emancipation. When they 
came into office for an instant in 1806 they did, in fact, bring a 
minor Irish Emancipation Bill before the House of Commons, 
carrying it through its second reading, only to withdraw it 
voluntarily in order to flatter the bigot idiocy of George III. In 
1812 they attempted to foist themselves on the Prince Regent 
(later George IV) as the only possible instruments of reconciliation 
with Ireland, albeit in vain.0 Before and during the reform 
agitation they fawned on O'Connell, and the "hopes of Ireland" 
served as powerful engines of war on their  behalf.  Yet the first act 
of the Reform Ministry at the first sitting of the first reformed 
Parliament was a declaration of war against Ireland with the 
"brutal and bloody" measure of the "Coercion Bill",275 subjecting 
Ireland to martial law.d The Whigs fulfilled their old pledges "with 
Character in Shakespeare's The Taming of the Shrew.—Ed. 
The date is omitted in the New-York Daily Tribune and the article begins with 
the following sentence: "Another of the false pretenses on which he sought a niche 
in the temple of fame was his efforts on behalf of Ireland." — Ed. 
This sentence does not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 
In the New-York Daily Tribune this sentence reads: "...a declaration of civil war 
against Ireland, a 'brutal and bloody measure', the Irish Coercion 'Red-Coat 
Tribunal bill', according to which men were to be tried in Ireland by military 
officers, instead of by Judges and Juries". (The phrase "brutal and bloody 
measure" was used by Daniel O'Connell in the House of Commons on February 5, 
1833.)  — Ed. 

=====第414页=====
384 Karl Marx 
fire, imprisonment, transportation and even death". O'Connell 
was persecuted and convicted of sedition. The Whigs, however, 
had only introduced and carried the Coercion Bill against Ireland 
by expressly committing themselves to present another bill, a bill 
concerning the Church of England in  Ireland.  Furthermore, they 
had also promised that this bill should contain a clause placing 
certain surplus funds from the revenues of the Established Church 
in Ireland at the disposal of Parliament. Parliament, in its turn, 
was to employ them in the interests of Ireland. The importance of 
this clause lay in the recognition of the principle that Parliament 
possessed the power to expropriate the Established Church—a 
principle of which Lord John Russell ought to have been 
convinced all the more firmly as the entire immense fortune of his 
family consists of former Church estates. The Whigs promised to 
stand or fall by the Church Bill. But as soon as the Coercion Bill 
had been passed they withdrew the above clause, the only one of 
any value in the Church Bill, on the pretext of avoiding a collision 
with the House of Lords. They voted against and defeated their 
own motion. This occurred in 1834. Towards the end of that year, 
however, an electric shock seemed to have re\nved the Irish 
sympathies of the Whigs. The fact of the matter is that they had to 
relinquish the Cabinet in the autumn of 1834 to Sir Robert Peel. 
They had been hurled back into the Opposition benches. And 
straightaway we find our John Russell eagerly engaged in his work 
of reconciliation with Ireland.3 He was the main agent in 
negotiating the Lichfield House compact?76 which was concluded 
in January 1835. The Whigs hereby left patronage (the allocation 
of offices, etc.) in Ireland to O'Connell, while O'Connell secured 
them the Irish vote both inside and outside Parliament. But a 
pretext was needed to drive the Tories out of Downing Street.b 
With characteristic "impudence", Russell chose the Church revenues 
of Ireland as his battlefield, and as his battlecry the very same 
clause—notorious under the name of the Appropriation Clause— 
which he and his colleagues in the Reform Ministry had themselves 
withdrawn and abandoned shortly before. Peel was indeed beaten 
with the slogan of the "Appropriation Clause". The Melbourne 
Cabinet was formed and Lord John Russell installed himself as 
Home Secretary and Leader of the House of Commons/ Now he 
The last two sentences do not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 
b 10 Downing Street is the official residence of the British Prime Min­
ister.—• Ed. 
The New-York Daily Tribune has: "... and Lord Russell became leader in the 
House of Commons."—Ed. 

=====第415页=====
Lord John Russell 385 
began to sing his own praises: on the one hand for his intellec­
tual constancy, because although now in office he continued to 
adhere to his opinions about the Appropriation Clause; on the other 
hand for his moral moderation in refraining to act on these opin­
ions.  He never translated them from words into action. When he 
was Prime Minister, in 1846, his moral moderation triumphed 
so emphatically over his intellectual constancy that he even re­
pudiated his "opinion". He knew of no measures more fatal, he 
exclaimed, than those threatening the Established Church in its 
fundamental root, its revenues.3 
In February 1833 John Russell, in the name of the Reform 
Ministry, denounced the Irish Repeal agitation.217 
"Its real object," he exclaimed to the Commons, "is to overturn at once the 
United Parliament, and to establish, in place of King, Lords and Commons of the 
United Kingdom, some parliament of which Mr O'Connell was to be the leader and 
the chief." 
In February 1834 the Repeal agitation was again denounced in 
the Speech from the Throne, and the Reform Ministry proposed 
an address 
"to record in the most solemn manner the fixed determination of Parliament to 
maintain unimpaired and undisturbed the legislative union of the three realms".c 
But hardly had John Russell been cast up on the Opposition 
sandbanks when he declared: 
"with respect to the repeal of the union, the subject was open to amendment or 
question, just as any other act of the Legislature", 
that is no more and no less than any beer Bill.d 
In March 1846 John Russell brought down Peel's administration 
by means of a coalition with the Tories, who were burning with 
desire to punish their leader for his disloyalty over the Corn Laws. 
Peel's Irish "Arms ßi//" 278 served as a pretext, and Russell, full of 
moral outrage, lodged an unconditional protest against it. He 
becomes Prime Minister. His first act is to move the very same "Arms 
The New-York Daily Tribune has: "he could not conceive a more fatal measure 
than the disestablishment of the Church, and he declined to take any further notice 
of the project of 1835".—Ed. 
Russell's speech in the House of Commons on February 6, 1833.—Ed. 
"Address in Answer to the King's Speech", House of Commons, February 4, 
1834.—  Ed. 
The words "i.e. no more and no less than any beer Bill" do not occur in the 
New-York Daily Tribune.— Ed. 
14—3754 

=====第416页=====
386 Karl Marx 
Bill".3 However, he made a fool of himself to no avail. O'Connell had 
just been calling monster meetings against Peel's Bill, he had 
organised petitions with 50,000 signatures; he was in Dublin, whence 
he was manipulating all the springs of agitation. King Dan (the 
popular nickname of Daniel O'Connell)b would have lost all if he had 
appeared to be Russell's accomplice at this juncture. He therefore 
served notice on the little man in threatening terms to withdraw his 
Arms Bill at once. Russell withdrew it. O'Connell, despite his secret 
dealings with the Whigs, then heaped humiliation on top of defeat, 
an art he has brought to perfection. So as to leave no doubt at  whose 
behest the retreat had been sounded, he announced the withdrawal 
of the Arms Bill to the repealers in Conciliation Hall in Dublin on 
August 17, the same day John Russell announced it to the Commons. 
In 1844 Russell charged Sir Robert Peel with "having filled Ireland 
with troops, and with not governing but militarily occupying that 
country".c In 1848 Russell occupied Ireland militarily, imposed the 
felony acts, proclaimed the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Acts279 
and boasted of the "energetic measures" of Clarendon.d This 
energy, too, was a false pretence. In Ireland there were on the one 
hand the O'Connellites and the priests, in secret agreement with the 
Whigs; on the other, Smith O'Brien and his supporters. The latter 
were simply dupese who took the repeal game seriously and thus 
came to a comical end. The "energetic measures" taken by the 
Russell government and the brutalities they committed were thus not 
called for by circumstances. Their object was not the maintenance of 
English supremacy in Ireland, but rather the prolongation of the 
Whig regime in England. 
[V] 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 369, August 10, 1855] 
London, August 6. The Corn Laws2S0 were introduced in England 
in 1815, the Tories and the Whigs having agreed to raise their 
The following text up to the words "In 1844 Russell charged Sir Robert Peel..." 
does not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 
Marx uses the English nickname and gives a German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
Russell's speech in the House of Commons on February 13, 1844.— Ed. 
The rest of the paragraph does not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第417页=====
Lord John Russell 387 
rent of land by means of a tax on the nation. This object was 
attained not only because the Corn Laws—laws against the import 
of corn from abroad — artificially raised the price of grain in some 
years.  Taking the period 1815-1846 as a whole, what was perhaps 
even more important was the illusion of the tenant-farmers that 
the Corn Laws were able to maintain the price of corn at an a 
priori determined level in all circumstances. This illusion had an 
effect on leases. We find that in order to revive this illusion time 
and again, Parliament was constantly occupied with new, improved 
versions of the Corn Laws of 1815. If corn prices proved unruly, 
and fell despite the dictates of the Corn Laws, parliamentary 
committees were appointed to investigate the reasons for "agricul­
tural distress".3 In so far as it was the object of these 
parliamentary investigations, "agricultural distress" was in reality 
limited to the disproportion between the prices paid by the tenant 
to the landowner for his land and the prices at which he sold the 
products of his land to the public—the disproportion between rent of 
land and grain prices. The problem therefore could be solved by 
simply reducing rent, the landed aristocracy's source of income. 
Instead of this, the latter naturally preferred to "reduce" corn 
prices by legislative means; one Corn Law was succeeded by 
another, slightly modified; failure was blamed on insignificant 
details which could be corrected by a new Act of Parliament. 
Though the price of corn was thus kept above the natural level 
under certain conditions, rent was kept above its natural level 
under all conditions. As this was a matter of the "holiest in­
terests" of the landed aristocracy, of their cash income, both their 
factions, Tories and Whigs, were equally ready to revere the 
Corn Laws as a lodestar elevated above their party struggles. 
The Whigs even withstood the temptation of entertaining lib­
eral "views" on this matter—especially as at that time there seemed 
little prospect of covering any losses on land tenure by winning back 
their hereditary tenure of government posts. In order to secure the 
vote of the finance aristocracy both factions voted for the Bank Act 
of 1819, whereby the interest on national debts contracted in 
depreciated money should be paid at full value. Having borrowed, 
say, £50, the nation had to repay £100. In this way the assent of the 
finance aristocracy to the Corn Laws was obtained. A fraudulent 
increase of the national interest rates in return for a fraudulent 
increase of rent—this was the gist of the agreement between finance 
d Here and below Marx uses the English expression In the first case he gives a 
German translation in brackets.—Ed. 
14* 

=====第418页=====
388 Karl Marx 
aristocracy and landed aristocracy.3 It is not then surprising that 
Lord John Russell branded any Corn Law reform as mischievous, 
absurd, impracticable and unnecessary in the parliamentary 
elections of 1835 and 1837. From the start of his ministerial career 
he rejected every such proposal, at first politely, then passionately. 
In his defence of high corn duties he was a long way ahead of Sir 
Robert Peel. The prospect of famine in 1838 and 1839 did not 
succeed in shaking either him, or the other members of the 
Melbourne Cabinet. What the distress of the nation could not do, the 
distress of the Cabinet could.b A deficit in the exchequer of 
£7,500,000 and Palmerston's foreign policy, which threatened to 
cause a war with France, led the House of Commons to pass a vote of 
no confidence in the Melbourne Cabinet proposed by Peel. This 
occurred on June 4, 1841. The Whigs, always as eager to chase posts 
as unable to fill them and reluctant to give them up, attempted in 
vain to sidestep fate by dissolving Parliament. Then there awoke in 
John Russell's profound soul the idea of conjuring away the 
Anti-Corn-Law agitation just as he had helped to conjure away the 
reform movement. So he suddenly advocated a "moderate fixed 
duty" instead of the sliding  tariffc281  — friend that he is of 
"moderate" political chastity and "moderate" reforms. He had the 
audacity to parade through the streets of London in a procession of 
government candidates accompanied by banner-bearers with two 
loaves impaled on their poles in blatant contrast to each other, one 
being a two-penny loaf with the inscription "Peel  loaf",  the other a 
shilling loaf inscribed "Russell  loaf".  The nation, however, refused to 
be misled this time. It knew from experience that the Whigs 
promised bread and paid out stones. Despite Russell's ridiculous 
carnival capers the general election left the Whigs with a minority of 
76. They were at last forced to decamp. Russell avenged himself for 
the disservice which the moderate fixed duty of 1841 had done him 
by calmly letting Peel's "sliding scale" crystallise into law in 1842. He 
now despised the "moderate fixed duty"; he turned his back on it; 
he dropped it without expending a single word on it.d 
a Instead of the preceding text of instalment [V] the Neiu-York Daily Tribune 
has: "Let us now look at his Free-trade pretenses. The Corn Laws had been 
enacted in 1815, by the concurrence of Tories and Whigs."—Ed. 
Instead of the preceding two sentences the New-York Daily Tribune has: 
"During the prospect of dearth (1838-1839) he and Melbourne did not 
contemplate any alteration in the existing duties." — Ed. 
Russell's speech in the House of Commons on June 7,  1841.—  Ed. 
The last two sentences do not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 

=====第419页=====
Lord John Russell 389 
During the years 1841-45 the Anti-Corn-Law League262 grew to 
colossal dimensions. The old alliance between landed aristocracy 
and finance aristocracy could no longer safeguard the Corn Laws, 
for the industrial bourgeoisie had increasingly supplanted the 
finance aristocracy as the chief element of the middle class. For 
the industrial bourgeoisie, however, the abolition of the Corn Laws 
was a matter of survival. Repeal of the Corn Laws meant for the 
industrial bourgeoisie reduced production costs, expansion of 
foreign trade, increase in profits, a reduction of the main source 
of revenue, and hence of the power, of the landed aristocracy, and 
the enhancement of their own political power. In the autumn of 
1845 they found fearsome allies in the potato blight in Ireland, 
the high corn prices in England and the failure of the harvest in most 
of Europe.3 Intimidated by the menacing economic outlook, Sir 
Robert Peel therefore held a series of Cabinet meetings at the end of 
October and the first weeks of November 1845 at which he proposed 
the suspension of the Corn Laws and even hinted at the necessity of a 
definitive repeal. There was a delay in the decisions of the Cabinet 
owing to the stubborn resistance of his colleague Stanley (now Lord 
Derby). 
At that time, during the Parliamentary recess, John Russell was 
on holiday in Edinburgh, where he got wind of the proceedings in 
Peel's Cabinet. He decided to exploit the delay caused by Stanley 
and forestall Peel in this popular position, giving himself the 
appearance of having forced Peel's handb and thus robbing any 
prospective moves by him of their moral weight. Accordingly, on 
November 22, 1845 he addressed a letter from Edinburgh to his 
City voters full of angry and malicious references to Peel, on the 
pretext that the ministers were delaying too long coming to a 
decision about the emergency in Ireland. The periodical famines 
in Ireland in 1831, '35, '37 and '39 had never been able to shake 
the faith of Russell and his colleagues in the Corn Laws. But now 
he was all fire. Even such an appalling disaster as the famine of 
two nations conjured up before the eyes of the little man nothing 
but visions of mousetraps for his rival "in office". In his letter he 
a In the New-York Daily Tribune the preceding part of this paragraph is 
condensed as follows: "During the years 1841-45, the Anti-Corn-Law League 
became formidable. In the autumn of 1845, it found new and terrible allies in the 
famine in Ireland, the corn-dearth in England, and the failure of the harvest all 
over Europe."—Ed. 
b Instead of the words "the appearance of having forced Peel's hand" the 
New-York Daily Tribune has: "the appearance of having forced Free trade upon 
Peel".—Erf. 

=====第420页=====
390 Karl Marx 
tried to conceal the real motive for his sudden conversion to Free 
Trade with the following wretched confession: 
"I confess that on the general subject my views have, in the course of twenty 
years,  undergone a great alteration. I used to be of opinion that corn was an 
exception to the general rules of political economy; but observation and experience 
have convinced me that we ought to abstain from all interference with the supply of 
food."3 
In the same letter he reproached Peel for not yet having 
interfered with the supply of food to Ireland.0  Peel caught the 
little man in his own trap. He resigned, leaving a note with the 
Queen 0 pledging Russell his support should he undertake to carry 
out the abolition of the Corn Laws. The Queen summoned Russell 
and asked him to form a new Cabinet. He came, saw—and 
declared that he was unable to do so, even with the support of his 
rival. That was not what he had intended. For him it was merely a 
false pretence, and they were threatening to take him at his word! 
Peel stepped in again and repealed the Corn Laws. As a result of 
his act the Tory party collapsed and disintegrated. Russell allied 
himself with it in order to defeat Peel. So much for his claim to 
the title of "Free Trade Minister" of which he was still boasting in 
Parliament only a few days ago. 
[VI] 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 377, August 15, 1855] 
London, August 12. Let us return once again to Lord John Russell 
so as to conclude his character sketch/ At the outset of his career 
he acquired a sort of reputation on the plea of his tolerance and at 
the end of his career on the plea of his bigotry, on the first 
occasion by his motion for the repeal of the "Test and Corporation 
Acts",283 on the second occasion by his "Ecclesiastical Titles Bill".6 
The Test and Corporation Acts prevented dissenters from holding 
"Lord John Russell to the Electors of the City of London. Edinburgh, 
Nov. 22", The Times, No. 19092, November 27, 1845.—Ed. 
The rest of this paragraph does not occur in the New-York Daily 
Tribune.—Ed. 
Victoria.— Ed. 
This sentence does not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 
Here and below Marx uses the English word "repeal" and gives the names 
of the acts in English or in a Germanised English form. He gives the German 
translation of the name of the second act in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第421页=====
Lord John Russell 391 
civil service posts. They had long been a dead letter when Russell 
moved his famous repeal motion in 1827. He defended it on the 
ground that he was convinced that "the repeal will enhance the 
security of the Church of England".a A contemporary writer 
informs us: "No one was more astonished that the motion was 
carried than the mover  himself."  The solution to the riddle is 
obvious if one notes that the Tory Ministry itself moved the 
Catholic Emancipation Bill284 the following year (1829), and hence 
must have been only too glad to get rid of the "Test and 
Corporation Acts" in the meantime. Apart from this the dissenters 
have never received anything from Lord John except promises 
whenever he was in opposition. While in office he even opposed 
the abolition of church rates.b 
His anti-Popery cryc is, however, even more characteristic of the 
shallowness of the man and the pettiness of his motives. We have 
seen that in 1848 and 1849 he defeated the reform motions of his 
own allies by an alliance of the Whigs with the Peelites and Tories. 
Being so dependent on the conservative opposition his Ministry 
had grown very weak and shaky by 1850 when the Papal Bull 
establishing a Roman Catholic hierarchy in England and the 
appointment of Cardinal Wiseman Archbishop of Westminster 
provoked some surface agitation amongst the most hypocritical 
and fatuous sections of the English people. Russell, at any rate, 
was not caught unawares by the Pope's measures. His father-in-
law, Lord Minto, was in Rome when the Roman Gazetted 
announced the appointment of Wiseman in 1848. In fact, we 
know from Cardinal Wiseman's Letter to the English People that 
the Pope had informed Lord Minto of the Bull establishing the 
hierarchy in England as early as 1848.e Russell himself took some 
preparatory steps by having the titles of the Catholic clergy in 
Ireland and the colonies officially recognised by Clarendon and 
Grey. But now, in view of the weakness of his Cabinet, perturbed 
by the historical recollection that the anti-Popery cry threw the 
Whigs out of the government in 1807, fearing that Stanley might 
imitate Perceval and forestall him, Russell, during the Parliamen-
Russell's speech in the House of Commons on June 7, 1827. The Neue 
Oder-Zeitung gives 1828 as the date of Russell's motion — probably a misprint.— Ed. 
Marx gives the English term "church rates" in brackets after the German 
equivalent.— Ed. 
Russell's attacks on Pius IX.— Ed. 
Gazzetta di Roma.—Ed. 
"Cardinal Wiseman's Manifesto", The Times, No.  20651,  November 20, 
1855.—  Ed. 

=====第422页=====
392 Karl Marx 
tary recess, as he had tried to forestall Sir Robert Peel over the 
repeal of the Corn Laws—pursued by all these forebodings and 
phantoms, the little man turned a complete somersault into an 
unrestrained Protestant frenzy. On November 4, 1850 a he 
published the notorious "Letter to the Bishop of Durham", in 
which he assured the Bishop: 
"I agree with you in considering the late aggression of the Pope upon our 
Protestantism as insolent and insidious, and I therefore feel as indignant as you can 
do upon this subject." 
He speaks of "the laborious endeavours which are now making 
to confine the intellect and enslave the soul". He calls the Catholic 
ceremonies "mummeries of superstition, upon which the great 
mass of the nation looks with contempt", and he finally promises 
the Bishop to see to it that new laws are passed against the Papal 
usurpation should the old ones be inadequate. The same Lord 
John had declared in 1845, though then admittedly out of office: 
"I believe that we may repeal those disallowing clauses which prevent a Roman 
Catholic Bishop from assuming a title held by a Bishop of the Established Church. 
Nothing can be more absurd and puerile than to keep such distinctions." 
In 1851 he presented his Ecclesiastical Titles Bill286 in order to 
maintain these "absurd and puerile" distinctions. But having been 
defeated during the year by a combination of the Irish Brigade 
with the Peelites, Manchester Men,287 etc.—on the occasion of 
Locke King's motion for the extension of the suffrage—his 
Protestant zeal evaporated and he promised an alteration of the 
Bill, which in fact came into the world stillborn.c 
As his anti-Popery zeal was a false pretence, so was his Jewish 
Emancipation zeal. All the world knows that his Jewish Disabilities 
Billd is an annual farce—bait to catch the votes which the Austrian 
Baron Rothschild commands in the City. A false pretence, too, 
were his anti-slavery declarations. 
"Your [...] opposition," Lord Brougham writes to him, "to all the motions in 
favour of the Negroes, and your resistance even to the attempts for stopping the newly 
established slave trade, widened the breach between you and the country [...]. The 
fancy that you, the opposers of all the motions against the slave trade in 1838, the 
The New-York Daily Tribune has: "just the day before the anniversary of Guv 
Fawkes"285.— Ed. 
Russell's speech in the House of Commons on July 9, 1845.— Ed. 
This paragraph continues thus in the New-York Daily Tribune: "Some months 
later, being ejected from office, he fawned again on what he had called the Pope's 
minions." — Ed. 
Marx gives the name of the bill in English.— Ed. 

=====第423页=====
Lord John Russell 393 
enemies of every interference with the colonial Assemblies, which are composed of 
slave traders, should all of a sudden have become so enamoured of the Negro cause as 
almost to risk your tenure of place upon a bill for its furtherance in 1839, would argue 
a strange aptitude for being gulled [...]."d 
False pretences, too, were his legal reforms. When Parliament 
passed a vote of no confidence on the Whig Cabinet in 1841, and 
with the imminent dissolution of the Commons boding little 
success, Russell attempted to rush a Chancery Bill through the 
House, in order to 
"remedy one of the most urgent evils of our legal system, the delays in the 
Courts of Equity, by the creation of two new judges of equity" (judges whose 
guiding principle is not the letter of the law but equity, or fairness). 
Russell called this Bill of his "a large instalment of legal 
reform". His real intention was to smuggle two Whig sympathisers 
into the newly created posts, before the formation of a Tory 
Cabinet which was to be expected. Seeing through his game, Sir 
Edward Sugden (now Lord St. Leonards) moved an amendment 
that the Bill should not take effect until October 10 (that is after 
the opening of the newly elected Parliament).c Although not the 
slightest alteration had been made to the content of the Bill, 
regarded by Russell as so "urgent", he immediately withdrew it 
after the passing of the amendment. It had become a "farce" and 
had lost its point.d 
Colonial reforms, educational schemes, the "liberties of the 
subject", public press and public meetings, enthusiasm for war 
and yearning for peace—all of them were but false pretences for 
Lord John Russell. The whole man is one false pretence, his whole 
life a lie, all his activity a continuous chain of petty intrigues for 
the achievement of shabby ends—the devouring of public money 
and the usurpation of the mere semblance of power. No one has 
ever illustrated more strikingly the truth of the biblical words that 
no man can add one cubit unto his stature." Placed by birth, 
connections, and social accidents on a colossal pedestal, he always 
remained the same homunculus—a dwarf dancing on the tip, of a 
pyramid. History has, perhaps, never exhibited any other man — 
so great in pettiness. 
"Lord Brougham's Reply to Lord John Russell's Letter to the Electors of 
Stroud...", The Times, No.  17041,  May 14, 1839.—Ed. 
Marx uses the English terms "Chancery Bill", "Courts of Equity", "judges of 
equity".—Ed. 
The words in brackets do not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 
The last sentence does not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.— Ed. 
e Matthew, 6:27.— Ed. 

=====第424页=====
394 
Karl Marx 
THE LATE BIRMINGHAM CONFERENCE 
It is a great mistake to judge of the movement in England by 
the reports in the London press. Take, for instance, the late 
Birmingham Conference. The majority of the London newspapers 
did not even notice it, while the remainder contained only the 
meager intelligence of its having taken place. Yet what was this 
Conference? It was a public Congress composed of delegates from 
Birmingham, London, Huddersfield, Newcastle, Halifax,  Shef­
field, Leeds, Derby, Bradford, Nottingham and other places, 
convened to take the task of discussing the most important subject 
of the day—the foreign policy of England—out of the hands of 
an incapable and collapsing Parliament. 
The movement, undoubtedly, had been instigated by the 
meetings addressed by Mr. Urquhart throughout the factory 
districts, and the distinguishing feature of the Conference just 
held at Birmingham was the harmonious working together of 
men from the middle and the laboring classes. The Conference 
divided itself into various Committees charged to report on the 
most prominent questions of British foreign policy. I have been 
favored with a detailed account of the proceedings and the 
documents connected therewith, of which I proceed to place the 
most characteristic before the readers of the Tribune. The first is a 
correspondence between the Secretary of the Conference and Lord 
Malmesbury, the Foreign Minister of Lord Derby, concerning the 
treaty on the Danish succession289 of May 8, 1852. Lord Malmesbury 
writes3: 
Instead of the preceding text the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "London, July 27. In 
contrast to the Administrative Reform Association, a State Reform Association' U 
has been set up in London. It has included Ernest Jones and several other Chartist 

=====第425页=====
The Late Birmingham Conference 395 
"Sir: I have had the honor of receiving your invitation to attend the 
Birmingham Conference on the 17th, 18th and 19th July. It will not be in my 
power to do so. As you request me to furnish you with any useful information on 
the subject of the proposed subjects of inquiry, I do not hesitate to observe that 
your resolution passed on July 6, respecting the Danish treaty of 8th May, 1852, is 
founded on a totally erroneous view of the cases and facts. It is not true that the 
succession to Denmark, the Sound and Schleswig-Holstein, is secured to Russia by 
that treaty. Russia has obtained no right, present or prospective, that she did not 
possess before the treaty. There are now four male heirs to the crown of Denmark 
alive. The treaty prescribes that if their extinction should become universal, the 
high contracting parties—namely, Austria, Prussia, Russia, England, France and 
Sweden—shall engage to take into consideration any further proposition made to 
them by the King of Denmark 11 for securing the succession on the principle of the 
integrity of the Danish monarchy. Should this remote contingency occur, the 
contracting powers would therefore meet again to settle the Danish succession, and 
I leave you to judge whether the Five Powers who signed the treaty of 8th May 
with Russia are likely in such a case to determine that, as head of the house of 
Holstein-Gottorp, she should annex to her dominions the whole of the present 
Danish monarchy. 
"I have the honor etc. 
Malmesbury." 
The following is the answer of the Secretary to Lord Malmesbury's 
letter: 
"My Lord: I am instructed by the Birmingham Conference to thank your 
lordship for your very important communication on the subject of the Danish 
Treaty. We gather from it that in the case of the expected failure of the four heirs 
leaders in its Committee. At a public meeting which it held the day before 
yesterday it declared its principal aim to be a reform of Parliament on the basis of 
universal suffrage. 
"The Birmingham Conference closed its deliberations on July 23. It was attended 
by delegates from Huddersfield, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, London, Halifax,  Shef­
field, Leeds, Derby, Bradford, Nottingham and Birmingham, who convened in 
Birmingham to form a judgment on the foreign policy of the ruling class and its 
representatives in Cabinet and Parliament. As the Birmingham Daily  Press  notes, the 
Chartists 'had refrained from involvement in any organised movement for years, 
but not in this. They took part in it heart and soul because they felt that it pursued 
no interest hostile or alien to them, indeed no class interest at all'. 
"Urquhart's presence in the factory districts undoubtedly gave the impulse to 
this remarkable conference, whose sittings he attended to the very end. As lack of 
time prevented us from making use of the invitation to attend the conference, we 
are now presenting in extracts some interesting documents from the printed report 
of the Conference, which has been sent to us. The venal London press suppresses 
or distorts the facts. The following correspondence took place between the Earl of 
Malmesbury and the Secretary of the Committee appointed by the Conference:".— 
Ed. 
a Frederick  VIL—Ed. 
This and the following document are quoted from Birmingham Conference. 
Report of Committee on the Danish Treaty.—Ed. 

=====第426页=====
396 Karl Marx 
to the United Monarchy of Denmark, England and Russia are pledged to interfere 
between the King of Denmark on the one hand, and the several States of 
Denmark, Schleswig and Holstein on the other. We are at a loss to know by what 
right such an interference can be justified, and we cannot but think the fact of war 
with Russia ought to be taken advantage of in order to enable us to abstain from so 
immoral and illegal action. You give us to understand that you think the character 
of the six Powers is a security against the admission of Russia to the whole 
succession in right, first, of Holstein-Gottorp, and secondly, of the principle of the 
integrity of the monarchy. We are most anxious to learn from your lordship who 
will come in for the whole if Russia does not, and, if England did not mean Russia 
to come in for the whole, why did she not make Russia's renunciation of 
Holstein-Gottorp a condition of the treaty? As your lordship signed the treaty in 
question, it is to be presumed either that these questions are unanswerable, or that 
your lordship will be the person of all others, best able to give to them a 
satisfactory answer. I am, therefore, instructed to request that your lordship will be 
so kind as to answer these questions, and thus relieve us from a source of great 
uneasiness. I have the honor to be, etc., 
"Langford." 
The correspondence stops here — Lord Malmesbury not having 
felt inclined to go on. His Lordship's inability to answer those 
questions is, however, not without an excuse—the noble lord 
having found all points concerning the Danish Succession so well 
settled by Lord Palmerston's Protocol of July 4, 1850,a that the 
Treaty required indeed his mere signature. 
The second document is the report of the committee appointed 
by the Conference, on the famous FourPoints.h2911 quote as follows0: 
"In endeavoring to ascertain the charactei of the Four Points as the basis of 
peace, your Committee have considered the development given to them by the 
Conference at Vienna, the amount of support or opposition that each proposal for 
such development has received from the respective Powers, the time and the 
manner in which the Points were first laid down by the Cabinets of England and 
France, the source from which they originally sprang, and their relevance to the 
avowed object of the War—viz., the Independence and Integrity of the Ottoman 
Empire. We find their source in the following proposition, laid down in the 
The final text of this Protocol was signed on August 2, 1850.—Ed. 
Birmingham Conference. Report of Committee on the  Proposed  Bases of Pacification 
known as "The Four Points". The quotations that follow are taken from that 
pu blication.—Ed. 
Instead of the last two paragraphs the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "The 
correspondence naturally stops here although his Lordship could have pointed out 
that his participation in this business was purely formal. Palmerston and Baron 
Brunnow had already signed the  Protocol  that laid down the clauses and principles 
of the future treaty. 
"The Conference had formed various committees to inquire into and report on 
different matters. Most important of all is indisputably the Memoir of the Committee 
on the Four Points, from which we quote the most important passages:".—Ed. 

=====第427页=====
The Late Birmingham Conference 397 
dispatch of Count Nesselrode, of June 29, 1854, and headed, 'Consolidation of the 
Rights of the Christians in Turkey': 'Setting out from the idea that the civil rights 
to be obtained for all the Christian subjects of the Porte are inseparable from 
religious rights, as is stipulated by the Protocol—and would in fact become 
valueless to our co-religionists if, in acquiring new rights, they should lose their old 
ones—we have already declared, that, if this were the case, the demands made by 
the Emperor on the Porte would be fulfilled, the cause of the dispute done away 
with, and his Majesty would be ready to give his concurrence to a European guaranty 
for this privilege.' 
"This proposal, which is a proposal for the perpetual interference, not of one, 
but of five Powers, in the internal affairs of Turkey, was accepted on the part of 
England and France, in the shape of what is now known as the Fourth Point, 
couched in the following terms by Drouyn de Lhuys, in his dispatch of 22d of July, 
1854,  which was the reply to Count Nesselrode: 'That no Power shall claim the 
right to exercise any official protectorate over the subjects of the Sublime Porte, to' 
whatever rights they may belong, but that France, Austria, Great Britain, Prussia 
and Russia, shall lend their mutual cooperation in order to obtain from the 
initiative of the Ottoman Government the consecration and observance of the 
religious privileges of the various Christian communities, and turn the generous 
intentions manifested by the Sultan to the account of their various co-religionists, 
so that there shall not result therefrom any infringement of the dignity and 
independence of his crown.' 
"The effect of the Fourth Point is to destroy the independence of the Ottoman 
Empire, which it is the avowed object of the war to defend, but its illegality consists 
in the fact that this proposed surrender has been made by England and France 
without the consent of Turkey, and persisted in by them in spite of Turkey's 
refusal to discuss the point at the Conference of Vienna. To use the words of 
Sidney Herbert, 'the matter is complicated by the fact that we are agreed with our 
enemy but not with our ally.' 
"Had we been beaten in war by Russia and compelled to sue for peace we could 
not legally have made such a proposal on the part of another Power. In order to 
remove this illegality it would be necessary first for England and France to go over 
openly to Russia and to declare war against Turkey. As the Fourth Point is the 
surrender of the independence of Turkey, so the First Point is the surrender of 
her integrity; and, as in the Fourth Point, that surrender is made without the 
consent of the party concerned; such consent to the development of the First Point 
having been expressly reserved by the Turkish Plenipotentiary. 
"We find that the separation of Wallachia, Moldavia and Servia from Turkey is 
concealed under the statement that they are still to be subject to the Porte.[...] The 
phrase, 'no exclusive protection shall in future be exercised over those provinces, ' 
is developed in five succeeding articles, which put the Five Powers in the same 
condition with the Porte as Joint Suzerain, and receives its finishing stroke from 
the proposal made by France and England at the sixth meeting of the Conference, 
that Wallachia and Moldavia should be united in a single State, under a hereditary 
Prince chosen from one of the reigning families of Europe. But the infamy of this 
surrender, alike of the avowed purposes of England, and of the rights of our 
ally—Turkey—is enhanced by the fact that it was made at a time when the armies 
of Russia were compelled to evacuate the Turkish territory, without the smallest 
assistance from the forces of England and France. As the surrender of the integrity 
Nicholas  I.—Ed. 
b Abdul Mejid.— Ed. 

=====第428页=====
398 Karl Marx 
and independence of the Ottoman Empire was thus made before the expedition to 
Sevastopol, it follows that this expedition must have been intended for the purpose 
of enforcing that surrender—enforcing it upon Turkey by exhausting her 
resources, enforcing it upon England by representing it as a triumph over Russia. 
We find this last view of the matter supported by Mr. Gladstone when he pointed 
out that Russia refused the Four Points before the expedition to Sevastopol, and 
accepted them afterward. [...] 
"We cannot for a moment suppose that the English Cabinet was not aware that 
by substituting Austrian for Turkish soldiers in Wallachia and Moldavia they were 
setting free the Russian army to support Sevastopol, nor is the supposition that this 
was a concession to Austria, made for the purpose of obtaining her adherence to the 
Turkish cause, a tenable proposition in the face of the two facts that the nominal 
objects of our interference [...] were already on the one hand secured by the Turkish 
victories over the Russians, and on the other hand surrendered by the terms of peace 
already offered to Russia in the fourth and first points.3 
"The second point was the free navigation of the Danube. The interruption of 
the navigation of the Danube dates from the cession by Turkey to Russia, at the 
Treaty of Adrianople in 1829, of the delta of the Danube—a cession which was 
contrary to the Treaty of London of July 6, 1827, which bound Russia to acquire 
no Turkish territory. The acquiescence of England in this violation of public law 
was defended by her desire for peace—a pretense which is at all instances 
inconsistent with the existing state of war. The cession of the Danubian delta to 
Turkey was an indispensable demand in any real war of England against Russia. 
[...] It has, on the contrary, been made a means of injury to Austria. At the fourth 
meeting of the Vienna Conference, held March 21, 1855, Baron Prokesch, the 
Austrian Plenipotentiary, having proposed that Russia should admit the neutrality 
of the Danubian delta, the Russian Plenipotentiary said 'that they would not consent 
to an arrangement which had the appearance of an indirect expropriation'. Lord 
J. Russell did not support the very moderate proposal of Austria, and the question 
was settled on the 23d of March in favor of the continued possession by Russia of the 
Danubian delta.  [...J c 
The passage beginning with the words "We find this last view" and ending 
with the words "in the fourth and first points" does not occur in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung. The rest of the German version of this article was published in the 
next issue of the Neue Oder-Zeitung, on July 31, 1855. It was introduced by the 
following words: "With reference to the second point the Birmingham document 
goes on to  say:".—Ed. 
A. M. Gorchakov.—Ed. 
In the Neue Oder-Zeitung there follows a passage from the same document 
which was omitted in the New-York Daily Tribune: "After fully conceding this point to 
Russia, Lord John writes on the 12th April to Lord Clarendon: — 'Count Buol told us 
he had not pressed the neutrality of the islands at the mouth of the Danube, as he was 
sure if he had done so, the Russian Minister would have broken up the conference...' 
On the 16th April, Lord John Russell telegraphed to Lord Clarendon that 'Austria will 
not support any demand for cession of territory;' and having first neglected to 
support Austria in the half measure of neutrality of the Delta, having then ascertained 
that she will not support the whole measure, namely, the cession of the Delta to 
Turkey, which had been put out of court by Lord John Russell's submission to Russia 
on the 23rd March, he then proposes to Lord Clarendon to demand 'The cession to 
Turkey of the islands at the mouth of the Danube surrendered by the treaty of 
Adrianople.'  " — Ed. 

=====第429页=====
The Late Birmingham Conference 399 
"The Third Point is as follows: That the treaty of 1841 shall be revised by 
the high contracting powers in the interest of the European equilibrium, and in the 
sense of a limitation of Russian power in the Black Sea. 
"To give sincerity and reality to the Third Point, it is necessary to divide it into 
two, and then correct the false terms of the Second Point. These two Points should 
be: First,the limitation of the power of Russia; second, the restoration of the rights 
of Turkey in the Straits of the Dardanelles and of the Bosphorus. Russia has not a 
natural preponderance in the Black Sea: she is not able to descend from Sevastopol 
and take possession of Constantinople and of Turkey; had she possessed this power 
she would have used it.  [....] She must, therefore, have been withheld in the past, 
and can only continue to be withheld for the future by the impracticability of the 
undertaking. As a preparation for such an undertaking, she has robbed Turkey by 
treaty, not of her fair share of power in the Black Sea, but of the exclusive control 
of the Straits which command her capital in the Bosphorus, and which secure it at 
the Dardanelles. [...]a For the restoration of the Sultan's exclusive control of the 
Straits, no stipulation was necessary; it reverts to him on the abrogation by the fact 
of war of the treaties by which it has been temporarily placed in abeyance. This 
simple view of the case has, however, not even been suggested at the Conference of 
Vienna. If we read the dispatch of 14th June, 1853, of Lord Clarendon to the 
Austrian Government, we shall find the reason in the words: the just claims oj 
Russia. If the claims of Russia were just, and if England intended to support them, 
England should have declared war against Turkey. [...]" 
"With regard to the limitation of the power of Russia, your Committee would 
direct attention to the following memorable words of the Austrian plenipoten­
tiary, Count Buol, in his letter of 20th May, 1855: 'In our opinion the joint 
efforts of the Allies should be directed to limiting the political power of Russia to 
such a point as to render the abuse of its material resources if not impossible, at 
least in the highest degree difficult. The diminution, nay, even the total destruction 
of the Russian fleet in the Black Sea, would not of itself suffice to deprive Russia of 
the advantage which she derives from her geographical position with regard to 
Turkey.' 
"Of all the delusions attempted by the English Government upon Parliament, 
the only one which has failed has been the proposal for limiting the naval power of 
Russia in the Black Sea.[...] Had the war been intended as announced—to protect 
the integrity and independence of the Ottoman Empire—the terms of peace 
offered to Russia would have been: 1. Cession to Turkey of the Danubian Delta, 
which  de jure it still has; 2. indemnification by Russia of the expenses of the war. [...]" 
The Committee wind up their report as follows: 
"Your committee find it impossible to reconcile these facts with the innocence 
of the British Cabinet.0 It would be a want of discernment to suppose that all the 
members of the Cabinet have been thoroughly cognizant of the nature of their 
conduct. One cannot however overlook the preeminence of the four Foreign 
Ministers, Lord Clarendon, Lord Aberdeen, Lord John Russell, and above all Lord 
Palmerston, whose aid in securing the recognition of the Treaty of Adrianople, the 
The passage beginning with the words "Russia has not a natural preponder­
ance"  and ending with the words "secure it at the Dardanelles" does not occur in 
the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 
The last two sentences do not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. — Ed. 
This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第430页=====
400 Karl Marx 
payment to Russia, even in time of war, of th< Russo-Dutch loan, the Treaty of 
Unkiar-Skelessi and of the Dardanelles, and the Treaty of Balta-Liman, and whose 
perfidy toward Poland, Hungary, Sicily and Italy, no less than his treachery toward 
France, Persia, Spain, and Denmark, point him out as the implacable enemy—not 
only of Turkey, but of every nation of Europe, the willing tool of Russia, and the 
master in the English Cabinet of those whom he has reduced to the condition of 
accomplices, and compelled previously to assist in the crimes which at first they 
wanted the intellect to detect, the honesty to resist, the courage to punish. In such 
punishment dealt out by the highest tribunal in the land, and with all the solemnities 
with which the ancient law and custom surrounded those impeached of high treason, 
your committee place their only hope of rescuing the people from the conspirators 
who have betrayed them to a foreign power." 
Written on July 27 and 28, 1855 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4464, August 10, 1855 as a 
leading article; the German version was 
published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
Nos.  349 and 351, July 30 and 31, 1855, 
marked with the sign x Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第431页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE ARMIES OF EUROPE 

=====第432页=====
Written between late June and Sep- Reproduced from the journal 
tember 1855 
First published in Putnam's Monthly, Nos. 
XXXII, XXXIII and XXXVI, August, 
September and December 1855 

=====第433页=====
PUTNAM'S MONTHLY. 
% Utogajint  ot £itrtatore, Srientt,  zû %ti. 
[FIRST ARTICLE] 
[Putnam's Monthly, No. XXXII, August 1855] 
The war raging on the shores of the Black Sea for the last two 
years,  has called particular attention to the two millions of armed 
men kept in pay by Europe, even in the midst of peace, and 
destined, perhaps, to be very soon increased to twice that number; 
and if, as is all but certain, the war should continue, we may 
expect to see these four millions engaged in active operations, on a 
theater of war occupying, from sea to sea, the whole breadth of 
the European Continent. 
For this reason, an account not only of the armies hitherto 
engaged in the Eastern conflict, but of the more important 
remaining armies of Europe as well, cannot be uninteresting to 
our readers, especially as, on this side of the Atlantic, nothing has 
fortunately ever been seen approaching, in any degree, the 
magnitude of even the second-rate armies of Europe; wherefore 
the organization of such bodies is but vaguely known to the 
non-professional public among us. 
The jealousy which formerly surrounded the army of every 
power with mysterious secrecy, no longer  exists.—  Strange to say, 
even in countries the most adverse to publicity, where all 
departments of the civil administration remain, to the present day, 
enveloped in the darkness required by absolutism, the organiza­
tion of the army is perfectly known to the public. Army lists are 
published, stating, not only the subdivision of the armed force in 
corps,  divisions, brigades, regiments, battalions, and squadrons, 
but also the dislocations of these bodies, with the numbers and the 
names of the officers commanding them. Whenever great reviews 
take place, the presence of foreign officers is not only tolerated, 
but even courted, criticism is solicited, observations are exchanged, 

=====第434页=====
404 Frederick Engels 
the distinctive institutions  and  contrivances  of each army  are 
sagely discussed,  and a  publicity  is established, which  but too 
strangely contrasts with many other features  in the  same 
government.  The  actual secrets which  a European war-ministry 
can contrive  to keep  to itself, are a few  recipes  for  chemical 
compositions, such  as rockets  or fuses;  and  even these  are  found 
out very soon,  or are  superseded  by the  progress  of invention;  as, 
for instance,  the  British congreve-rocket composition,  by Mr. 
Hale's war-rockets, adopted  in the U.S.  army,  and now in the 
British army also. 
This publicity causes,  in time  of peace,  the  various  war-
ministries  of the  civilized world  to form,  as it  were,  one  large 
military committee,  for the  purpose  of discussing  the  merit  of all 
proposed innovations,  and  allowing each member  to profit  by the 
experience  of all the  remainder. Thus  it has  been brought about 
that the  arrangements, organization  and  general economy  of 
almost  all European armies  are  nearly  the  same,  and in  this sense 
it may be  said that  one  army  is about  as good  as any  other.  But 
national character, historical tradition,  and,  above  all  things, 
different degrees  of civilization, create  as many diversities,  and 
give to each army  its peculiar points  of excellence  and  weakness. 
The Frenchman  and the  Hungarian,  the  Englishman  and the 
Italian,  the  Russian  and the  German, under certain circumstances, 
may be equally good  and  efficient soldiers;  but, in  spite  of a 
uniform system  of drill, which appears  to level  all distinctions, 
every  one  will  be good  in his own way, by  virtue  of qualities 
different from those possessed  by his  rivals. 
This brings  us to a  question  but too  often mooted between  the 
military patriots  of different nationalities: Which  are the  best 
soldiers?  Of course, every people  is jealous  of its own  fame;  and, 
in the  opinion  of the  general public,  fed by  narratives which, 
whatever they  may  lack  in critical exactness,  are  amply adorned 
with high patriotic coloring,—one regiment  of its own can  "lick" 
any two or  three  of any  other nation. Military history,  as a  science 
in which  a correct appreciation  of facts  is the  only paramount 
consideration,  is but of  very recent date,  and  boasts  as yet of a 
very limited literature.  It is,  however,  an established branch  of 
science,  and  more  and  more every  day  scatters  to the  winds, like 
chaff, the  unblushing  and  stupid bluster which  too  long  has 
characterized works calling themselves historical because they 
made  a trade  of distorting every fact they recounted.  The  time  is 
past when,  in writing  the  history  of a war,  people  can  continue 
that war, so to say, on  their  own  account,  and  safely cannonade 

=====第435页=====
The Armies of Europe 405 
the late enemy with dirt, after the conclusion of peace forbids 
them from cannonading him with iron.296  And although many a 
minor point in military history remains still to be settled, yet thus 
much is certain, that there are none of the civilized nations which 
cannot boast of having, at some time or other, produced the best 
soldiers of their time. The German Landsknechte of the later 
middle ages, the Swiss soldiers of the sixteenth century, were for a 
period as invincible as the splendid Spanish soldiers, who 
succeeded them to the rank of "the first infantry of the world;" 
the French of Louis the Fourteenth, and the Austrians of Eugene 
disputed, for a while, with each other this post of honor, until the 
Prussians of Frederick the Great settled the question by defeating 
both of them; these, again, were hurled down into utter disrepute 
by a single blow at Jena, 297 and once more the French were 
universally acknowledged the first soldiers of Europe; at the same 
time,  however, they could not prevent the English, in Spain, from 
proving themselves their superiors under certain circumstances 
and in certain moments of a battle.298 No doubt, the legions which 
Napoleon led, in 1805, from the camp of Boulogne to Auster-
litz,299 were the finest troops of their time; no doubt Wellington 
knew what he said, when he called his soldiers at the conclusion of 
the Peninsular war "an army with which he could go any where, 
and do any thing;" and yet the flower of this Peninsular British 
army was defeated at New Orleans, by mere militia men and 
volunteers, without either drill or organization.300 
The experience of all past campaigns, then, leads us to the same 
result; and every sensible old soldier, unbiassed by prejudice, will 
confirm it: that military qualities, both as regards bravery and 
aptitude for the work, are, upon the whole, pretty impartially 
distributed among the different nations of the world; that it is not 
so much the degree, as the special nature of the qualification, 
which distinguishes the soldiers of different nationalities; and that 
with the publicity established now-a-days in military matters, it is 
the assiduous application of thought, improvement, invention, to 
the military institutions and resources of a State, and the 
development of the military qualities specially distinguishing a 
nation, by which alone an army can be made, for a time, to rank 
foremost among its rivals. Thus we see, at once, what an 
advantage, in a military sense, a higher development of civilization 
gives to a country over its less advanced neighbors. As an example, 
we may mention that the Russian army, though distinguished by 
many soldier-like qualities of the first order, has never been able 
to establish a superiority over any army of civilized Europe. At 

=====第436页=====
406 Frederick Engels 
even chances, the Russians would fight desperately; but up to the 
present war, at least, they were sure to be beat, whether their 
opponents were French, Prussians, Poles, or English. 
Before we consider the different armies separately, a few 
general remarks respecting them all are requisite. 
An army, especially a large one of from three hundred 
thousand to five hundred thousand and more men, with all its 
necessary subdivisions, its different arms, and its requirements in 
men, material, and organization, is itself so complicated a body 
that the highest possible simplification becomes indispensable. 
There are so many inevitable varieties, that it might be expected 
they would not be increased by factitious and unmeaning 
variegations. Nevertheless, habit and that spirit of show and 
parade which is the bane of old armies, has complicated matters in 
almost every European army to an incredible degree. 
The differences in size, strength, and temperament which are 
found, both in men and horses, in every country, necessitate a 
separation of light infantry and cavalry from heavy infantry and 
cavalry. To attempt to completely obliterate this separation, would 
be to mix up in one body individuals whose military qualifications 
are opposite by nature, and would, therefore, to a certain degree 
neutralize each other; thereby lessening the efficiency of the 
whole. Thus, either arm is naturally divided into two separate 
bodies—the one comprising the heavier and clumsier men (and 
horses respectively), destined principally for the great decisive 
charges, and the fight in closed ranks; the other forming the 
lighter, more active men, specially adapted for skirmishing, 
outpost and advanced guard duty, rapid maneuvers, and the like. 
So far, the subdivision is perfectly legitimate. But, in addition to 
this natural distribution, in almost every army, each subdivision is 
again subdivided into branches distinguished by nothing but 
fanciful distinctions of dress and by theoretical quibbles which are 
constantly contradicted by practice and experience. 
Thus,  in every European army there exists a corps called 
Guards, pretending to be the élite of the army, but which in reality 
merely consists of the biggest monsters of men that can be got 
hold of. The Russian and the English Guards are most distin­
guished in this respect; though no proof exists that they exceed in 
bravery and effectiveness the other regiments in either service. 
Napoleon's Old Guard was a far different institution; it was the 
actual élite of the army; and bodily size had nothing to do with its 
formation. But even this guard weakened the rest of the army, by 
absorbing its best elements, and consideration for such an 

=====第437页=====
The Armies of Europe 407 
unrivaled corps led Napoleon, sometimes, into mistakes — as at 
Borodino,301  where he did not bring the Guards forward at the 
decisive moment, and thereby missed the chance of preventing the 
Russian force from effecting their retreat in good order. The 
French have, beside their Imperial Guard, a sort of élite in every 
battalion, forming two companies—one of grenadiers, and the 
other of voltigeurs; thereby complicating the tactical evolutions of 
the battalion to an unnecessary degree. Other nations have similar 
corps.  All these choice troops, beside their distinctive formation 
and dress, receive higher pay. It is said that such a system spurs 
the ambition of the private soldier, especially amongst excitable 
nations like the French and Italians; but the same object would be 
obtained, and perhaps more perfectly, if the men who had earned 
such distinctive marks should remain in the ranks of their 
respective companies, and were not made use of as a pretext for 
disturbing the tactical unity and symmetry of the battalion. 
A still more striking humbug is practiced with regard to the 
cavalry. Here the distinction between light and heavy horse forms 
a pretext for subdivisions of all sorts—cuirassiers, dragoons, 
carabineers, lancers, chasseurs, hussars, and so on. All such 
subdivisions are not only useless, they are actually preposterous by 
the complications they cause. Hussars and lancers are imitated 
from the Hungarians and Poles; but in Hungary and Poland these 
arms have their sense—they were the national arms, and the dress 
of the troops carrying them was the national dress of the country. 
To imitate such peculiarities in other countries, where the national 
spirit is wanting that gave them life, is, to say the least of it, 
ridiculous; and well might, in 1814, the Hungarian hussar, when 
greeted with the title of "comrade" by a Russian hussar, reply, 
"No comrade — I hussar, you harlequin!" (Nix camerad— ich husar, 
du hanswurst!) Another such ridiculous institution, in almost all 
armies, is formed by the cuirassiers—men actually disabled, and 
disabling their horses, too, by the weight of their breast-plates (a 
French cuirass weighs twenty-two pounds), and, for all that, not 
protected by them from the effects of a rifle-ball fired at a 
hundred and fifty yards distance! The cuirass had been got rid of 
in almost all European armies, when Napoleon's love of show and 
of monarchical tradition re-introduced it among the French, and 
his example was soon followed by all the nations of Europe. 
Beside our own little army, the Sardinian is the only one, among 
civilized nations, in which cavalry consists of plain light and heavy 
horse, without any further subdivision, and where the cuirass is 
completely done away with. 

=====第438页=====
408 Frederick Engels 
In the field artillery, a great complication of different calibers is 
found in every army. The English have the greatest diversity in 
theory, carrying eight calibers and twelve different models of 
guns;  but in practice their enormous material allows them to 
reduce their artillery to great simplicity. In the Crimea, for 
instance, the nine-pounder and the twenty-four pound howitzer 
are almost the only calibers in use. The French have introduced, 
during the last few years, the greatest possible simplicity, by 
replacing their four different calibers by one, the light twelve-
pound howitzer-gun, of which we shall speak in its place. In most 
other armies, from three to four calibers are still in existence, not 
counting the varieties of carriages, tumbrils, wheels, and the like. 
The technical corps of the different armies, the engineers, and 
so on, to which we may add the  staff,  are organized in all armies 
upon a pretty similar footing, except that with the British, and to 
their great detriment, the staff does not form a separate corps at 
all. Other minor differences will be mentioned in their respective 
places. 
We begin with that army which, from the organization it 
received during the revolution and under Napoleon, has served as 
a sort of model to all European armies since the beginning of this 
century. 
I. THE FRENCH ARMY 
France had, when the present war broke out, one hundred 
regiments of infantry of the line (the 76th to 100th were, up to a 
recent date, called "light infantry," but their drill and organization 
was in no way distinguished from the line regiments). Each 
regiment counts three battalions, two field-battalions, and the third 
as a reserve. In time of war, however, the third battalion can be 
very soon organized for field duty, and a fourth battalion, formed 
by the extra dépôt company of each of the three battalions, 
undertakes the duties of the dépôt. This was done during the wars 
of Napoleon, who even formed fifth, and, in some instances, sixth 
battalions. For the present, however, we can only count three 
battalions per regiment. Each battalion has eight service-companies 
(one of grenadiers, one of voltigeurs, and six center-companies); 
and each company, on the war footing, counts three officers and 
one hundred and fifteen non-commissioned officers and soldiers. 
A French battalion of the line, therefore, amounts, on the war 
footing, to about nine hundred and sixty men, one-eighth of 
whom (the voltigeur company) are especially set apart for light 
infantry duty. 

=====第439页=====
The Armies of Europe 409 
The special corps destined for light infantry service consist of 
the chasseurs-à-pied and of the African corps. The chasseurs, 
before the war, only ten battalions, were, in 1853, raised to twenty 
battalions, so that nearly every infantry division of the army (four 
regiments) can, on its formation, receive one chasseur battalion. 
These battalions count ten companies, or nearly 1,300 men. The 
troops specially destined for African service consist of: three 
regiments, containing nine battalions of Zouaves; two regiments, 
or six battalions, of the Foreign Legion; six battalions of light 
infantry (of which, three battalions native chasseurs), together 
twenty-one battalions, or about 22,000 men. 
The cavalry is divided into four distinct portions: — 
1. Heavy or Reserve Cavalry, 12 regiments—2 of carabineers 
(cuirassier rifles), 10 of cuirassiers = 72 squadrons. 
2. Cavalry of the line, 20 regiments—12 of dragoons, 8 of lancers= 120 
squadrons. 
3. Light Cavalry, 21 regiments—12 chasseurs-à-cheval, 9 hussars= 126 
squadrons. 
4. African light cavalry, 7 regiments—4 Chasseurs d'Afrique, 3 
spahis = 42 squadrons. 
The squadrons are of 190 men for the reserve and line cavalry, 
and 200 men for the light cavalry—on the war footing. In time of 
peace, there are scarcely four squadrons of 120 men fully 
equipped, so that, on every mobilization of the army, a great 
number of men on furlough have to be called in, and the horses 
for them to be found, which, in a country as poor in horses as 
France, can never be done without a large importation from 
abroad. 
The artillery, as recently reorganized, is formed in seventeen 
regiments: five of foot-artillery, for garrison and siege duty; seven 
of the line (for service with the infantry divisions); four of 
horse-artillery, and one of pontoniers. The foot-artillery appear to 
be destined to act in the field on emergencies only. The artillery 
of the line have their gun-carriages and limbers constructed so 
that the gunners can ride on them during quick movements. The 
horse-artillery is organized as in other services. The line and 
horse-artillery count one hundred and thirty-seven batteries, of six 
guns each, to which sixty batteries of the foot-artillery may be 
added as a reserve, altogether, 1,182 guns. 
Beside the above, the artillery comprises thirteen companies of 
workmen. 

=====第440页=====
410 Frederick Engels 
The special services of the army comprise:—A general staff of 
560 officers; staffs for the fortresses, the artillery, and the 
engineers, of about 1,200 officers; three regiments of sappers and 
miners; five pack squadrons; five train squadrons; 1,187 medical 
officers, and so on. The total numbers are as follows: 
Infantry 
Line,  300 bat's and 300 dépôt comp's, 335,000 
Chasseurs, 20 battalions, 26,000 
African troops, 21 battalions, 22,000 
383,000 
Cavalry 
Reserve, 72 sq. and 12 dépôts, 16,300 
Line,  120 " 20 " 28,400 
Light, 126 " 21 " 31,300 
African, 42 " 10,000 86,000 
Artil'y and special corps 1,200 guns and 70,000 
1,200 guns and 539,000 
To these are to be added the newly formed Guard302  in the 
strength of one division of infantry (two regiments of grenadiers, 
two of voltigeurs), one brigade of cavalry (one regiment of 
cuirassiers, one of guides), one battalion of chasseurs, and four or 
five batteries of artillery; as well as 25,000 men of the gendar­
merie, 14,000 of whom are horse gendarmes. Two more 
regiments of infantry, the 101st and 102d, have recently been 
formed, and a new brigade of the foreign legion (Swiss) is in 
course of formation. Altogether, therefore, the French army, in its 
present organization, contains the cadres for about 600,000 men, 
and this will be a pretty correct estimate of its present strength. 
The army is recruited by ballot, among all young men who have 
reached their twentieth year. It is presumed that about 140,000 
men are annually available, of which number, however, in time of 
peace, from 60,000 to 80,000 only are taken for service. The 
remainder may be called in at any time during the eight years 
following their ballot. A great number of soldiers, besides, are 
dismissed on long furloughs during peace, so that the actual time 
of service, even of those called in, does not exceed from four to 

=====第441页=====
The Armies of Europe 411 
five years. This system, while it gives the troops actually serving a 
high degree of efficiency, does not prepare any drilled reserves 
for a case of emergency. A great continental war, in which France 
would have to act with two or three large armies, would force her, 
even in the second campaign, to bring into the field many raw 
levies,  and would show, in the third campaign, a very sensible 
deterioration of the army. The French are, indeed, very handy at 
learning the trade of a soldier, but, in that case, why keep up the 
long period of service, which excludes the greater portion of the 
available young men from the benefit of a school of military 
instruction? 
Wherever military service is both compulsory and of long 
duration, the necessity of European society has introduced the 
privilege, for the wealthier classes, of buying off by a money-
payment, in some shape or other, the obligation to serve 
personally. Thus, in France, the system of finding substitutes is 
legally recognized,303  and about eighty thousand of these are 
constantly serving in the French army. They are mostly recruited 
from what are called the "dangerous classes;" they are rather 
difficult to handle, but, when once broken in, form capital 
soldiers. They require a very strict discipline to keep them in good 
behavior; and their notions of order and subordination are 
sometimes rather extravagant. Wherever there are large numbers 
of them in a regiment, they are sure to cause difficulties in a 
garrison. For this reason, it is thought that the best place for them 
is before the enemy, and, thus, the light troops of Africa are 
especially recruited from them; for instance, the Zouaves, who 
almost all entered the army as "remplaçants." The Crimean 
campaign has fully shown that the Zouaves carry their African 
habits everywhere—their love of plunder, as well as their unruly 
conduct in adversity, and it is, perhaps, in this sense that a 
kindred genius, the late Marshal St. Arnaud, said, in his bulletin 
on the battle of the Alma, 304 "The Zouaves are, indeed, the first 
soldiers of the world!"3 
The equipment of the French army is, upon the whole, 
first-rate. The arms are well constructed, and, especially the 
cavalry saber, of a very good model, though, perhaps, it is a little 
too long. The infantry are accoutred according to the new system 
which was introduced, at the same time, in France and Prussia; by 
A. de Saint-Arnaud, "Au quartier général à Aima. Champ de bataille d'Alma, 
le 21 septembre 1854", Le Moniteur universel, No. 280, October 7, 1854.— Ed. 

=====第442页=====
412 Frederick Engels 
it, the cross-belts, for pouch and sword, or bayonet, are done away 
with; both are worn on a belt round the waist, supported by two 
leather braces over the shoulders, while the knapsack is loosely 
worn over the shoulders by two straps, without the old-fashioned 
connecting strap across the chest. Thus, the chest is left entirely 
free,  and the soldier becomes a different man altogether from the 
unfortunate being strapped and buckled up in the sort of leather 
cuirass in which the old system confined him. The dress is plain, 
but tasteful; it must, indeed, be admitted that, in military, as well 
as in civilian fashions, the French have showed more taste than 
any other nation. A blue tunic, or frock-coat, covering the thighs 
to the knees, with a low standing collar cut out in front, scarlet 
trowsers, moderately wide, a light képi, the most soldier-like 
headgear yet invented, shoes and gaiters, and a comfortable gray 
capote, form an outfit as simple and efficient as any known in 
European armies. In Africa, the head is protected from the rays of 
the sun by a white flannel capote, and flannel under-clothing is 
also served out to the troops. In the Crimea, heavy cloth capotes 
were worn during the last winter, covering the head, neck and 
shoulders. The chasseurs-à-pied are clothed all in gray, with green 
facings; the Zouaves have a sort of Turkish fancy costume, which 
appears well adapted to the climate and the duty they have to do. 
The Chasseurs, and some other African battalions, are armed with 
the Minié rifle, the remainder of the infantry, with plain 
percussion muskets. There appears to be, however, an intention 
to increase the proportion of the troops armed with rifled 
muskets. 
The cavalry are a fine-looking class of men, lighter in weight 
than in many other armies, but none the worse for that. In the 
peace establishment, they are, upon the whole, passably well 
horsed by animals procured abroad, or from the horse-breeding 
establishments of the government, and the districts where they 
have succeeded in improving the native breed, which, until lately, 
was very poor. But, in case of war, when the number of horses has 
to be suddenly doubled, the resources of the country are 
altogether insufficient, and thousands of horses have to be bought 
abroad, many of which are scarcely fit for cavalry service. Thus, in 
any long war, the French cavalry will soon be deteriorated, unless 
the government can lay its hands on the resources of countries 
rich in horses, as it did in 1805, '6, and '7. 
The artillery are now armed exclusively with the new light 
twelve-pound gun, the so-called invention of Louis Napoleon. But, 
as the light twelve pounder, adapted for a charge one quarter the 

=====第443页=====
The Armies of Europe 413 
weight of the ball, already existed in the English and Dutch 
armies, as the Belgians had already done away with the chamber 
in their howitzers, and as both Prussians and Austrians are in the 
habit, in certain cases, of firing shells from common twelve and 
twenty-four-pound guns, the pretended invention reduces itself to 
the adaptation of this light twelve pounder to the common French 
eight pounder carriage. However, the French artillery has 
evidently gained in simplicity and efficiency by the change; 
whether its mobility has not suffered, remains to be seen; as also, 
whether the twelve pounder will be found efficient enough for 
hollow shot. We have, at least, seen it stated that it has already 
been found necessary to forward howitzers of a heavier caliber to 
the army in the East. 
The tactical regulations of the French army are a strange 
compound of soldierly sense and old-fashioned traditions. There 
is, perhaps, no language better adapted for the short, distinct, 
dictatorial military word of command, than the French; yet the 
command is generally given with an excessive prolixity of 
words—where two or three words would be sufficient, the officer 
has to shout out a whole sentence, or even two. The maneuvers 
are complicated, and the drill contains a good deal of old-
fashioned nonsense, quite inapplicable to the present state of 
tactics. In skirmishing, that very function which appears innate to 
the Frenchman, the men are drilled with a pedantry hardly 
surpassed in Russia. The same is true in some of the cavalry and 
artillery maneuvers. But whenever the French have to go to war, 
the necessity of the case very soon dispenses with these antiquated 
and pedantic maneuvers; and new tactical methods, suited to new 
situations, are arranged and introduced by nobody so quickly as by 
the French. 
Upon the whole, light troop duty is the forte of the French. 
They are literally the lightest troops in Europe. Nowhere is the 
average bodily size of the army so low as in France. In 1836, of 
about 80,000 men in the French army, only 743 were five feet 
eight inches or above; and only seven measured six feet; while full 
38,000 measured from four feet ten and a half inches to five feet 
two inches! And yet these little men not only fight exceedingly 
well, but they also stand the heaviest fatigues, and beat, in agility, 
almost every other army. General Napier maintains that the 
British soldier is the heaviest laden fighting animal in the world; 
but he had never seen these French African campaigners carry, 
beside their arms and personal baggage, tents, firewood, provi­
sions,  heaped up on their backs to a hight far overtowering their 

=====第444页=====
414 Frederick Engels 
shakos, and thus march thirty or forty miles in a day, under a 
tropical sun. And then compare the big, clumsy British soldier, 
who,  in time of peace, measures five feet six inches, at least, with 
the puny, short-legged, tailor-like Frenchman, of four feet ten! 
And still, the little Frenchman, under all his load, remains a 
capital light-infantry-man; skirmishes, trots, gallops, lies down, 
jumps up, all the while loading, firing, advancing, retiring, 
dispersing, rallying, re-forming, and displays not only twice as 
much agility, but also twice as much intelligence as his bony 
competitor from the island of  "rosbif."  This light-infantry service 
has been brought to perfection in the twenty battalions of 
chasseurs-à-pied. These incomparable troops, incomparable for their 
peculiar service, are drilled to make every movement, when within 
range of the enemy, in a sort of easy trot, called pas gymnastique, 
in which they make between one hundred and sixty and one 
hundred and eighty paces per minute. But not only can they run, 
with short intervals, for half an hour and more, but creeping, 
jumping, climbing, swimming, every movement that can possibly be 
required, are equally familiar to them, while they are first-rate 
riflemen. Who, at even odds, can hold out, in skirmishing fights, 
against these dead shots, finding shelter behind the least inequality 
of ground? 
As to the action of the French infantry in masses, their 
passionate character gives them great advantages with great 
disadvantages. Generally, their first charge will be business-like, 
rapid, determined, if not furious. If successful, nothing can resist 
them. If defeated, they will soon rally, and be in a position to be 
again brought forward; but, in an unfortunate or even chequered 
campaign, French infantry will soon lose its solidity. Success is a 
necessary element to all armies, but especially to those of the 
Romano-Celtic race. The Teutonic race has, in this respect, a 
decided superiority over them. The French, when Napoleon had 
once put them on the track, could, for fifteen years, overthrow 
everything before them, until reverses broke them down; but a 
seven years' war,305 such as Frederick the Great carried through, a 
war where often enough he was on the brink of ruin, often 
defeated, and yet finally victorious—such a war could never be 
won with French troops. The war in Spain, 1809-14, affords a 
conclusive example on this head. 
Under Napoleon, the French cavalry were, in contrast to the 
infantry, far more renowned for their action in masses than for 
their duty as light troops. They were deemed irresistible, and even 
Napier admits their superiority over the English cavalry of that 

=====第445页=====
The Armies of Europe 415 
day.3 Wellington, to a certain degree, did the same. And strange to 
say, this irresistible cavalry consisted of such inferior horsemen, 
that all their charges were made in a trot, or, at the very outside, 
an easy canter! But they rode close together, and they were never 
launched except when the artillery, by a heavy fire, had prepared 
the way for them; and then in large masses only. Bravery and the 
flush of victory did the rest. The present French cavalry, especially 
the Algerian regiments, are very fine troops, good riders in 
general, and still better fencers; though, in horsemanship, they are 
still inferior to the British, Prussians, and, especially, the Au-
strians. But as the army, when placed on a war-footing, must 
double its cavalry, there is no doubt the quality will be 
deteriorated; it is, however, a fact, that the French possess, in a 
high degree, that essential quality of a horse-soldier which we call 
dash,  and which makes up for a great many deficiencies. On the 
other hand, no soldiers are so careless of their horses as the 
French. 
The French artillery has always ranked very high. Almost all 
improvements made in gunnery, during the last three or four 
centuries, have originated with the French. During the Napoleonic 
wars,  the French artillery were especially formidable by their great 
skill in selecting positions for their guns, an art then but 
imperfectly understood in other armies. All testimony agrees that 
none equaled the French in placing their guns so that the ground 
in front, while covering them from the enemy's fire, was favorable 
to the effect of their own. The theoretical branch of artillery has 
also been constantly a favorite science with the French; their 
mathematical turn of mind favors this; and the precision of 
language, the scientific method, the soundness of views, which 
characterize their artilleristic literature, show how much this 
branch of science is adapted to the national genius. 
Of the special corps, the engineers,  staff,  sanitary and transport 
corps,  we can merely say that they are highly efficient. The 
military schools are models of their kind. The French officer is not 
required to have that general education which is expected in 
Prussia; but the schools he has to pass through furnish him with a 
first rate professional training, including a thorough knowledge of 
the auxiliary sciences, and a certain proficiency in at least one 
living language. There is, however, another class of officers in the 
French army, viz., that selected from old non-commissioned 
officers. These latter seldom advance higher than to a captaincy, 
W. F. P. Napier, History of the War in the Peninsula,.., Vol. Ill, p. 272.— Ed. 

=====第446页=====
416 Frederick Engels 
so that the French often have young generals and old captains; 
and this system answers exceedingly well. 
Upon the whole, the French army shows, in all its features, that 
it belongs to a warlike and spirited nation, that feels a pride in its 
defenders. That the discipline and the efficiency of this army have 
overcome the seductions laid out for it by Louis Bonaparte, and 
that the Pretorians of December, 185l,a could so soon be turned 
into the heroes of the Crimea, certainly speaks highly to their 
credit. Never was an army more flattered, more courted by a 
government, more openly solicited to all sorts of excesses than the 
French in the autumn of 1851; never were they allowed such 
license as during the civil war of December; yet they have 
returned to discipline and do their duty very well. The Pretorian 
element, it is true, has, several times, risen to the surface in the 
Crimea, but Canrobert always succeeded in quelling it. 
II. THE ENGLISH ARMY306 
The British army forms a complete contrast to the French. 
There are not two points of similarity between them. Where the 
French are strong, there the British are weak, and vice versa. Like 
old England  herself,  a mass of rampant abuses, the organization of 
the English army is rotten to the core. Everything seems to be 
arranged so as to prevent all possibility of the end aimed at ever 
being attained. By an inexplicable haphazard, the boldest 
improvements—though few, indeed — take their stand in the 
midst of a heap of superannuated imbecility; and yet, whenever 
the clumsy, creaking machine is set to work, it somehow or other 
manages to do its duty. 
The organization of the British army is soon described. Of 
infantry there are three regiments of guards, eighty-five regiments 
of the line, thirteen regiments of light infantry, two regiments of 
rifles.  During the present war, the guards, the rifles, and a few 
other regiments have three battalions, the remainder have two—a 
dépôt being formed by one company in each. The recruiting, 
however, is hardly sufficient to fill up the vacancies caused by the 
war, and so the second battalions can scarcely be said to be in 
existence. The present effective total of the infantry does certainly 
not exceed 120,000 men. 
a I.e., the troops that took part in the Bonapartist coup d'état of December 2, 
1851.—  Ed. 

=====第447页=====
The Armies of Europe 417 
Beside the regular troops, the militia form part of the infantry 
as a sort of reserve or nursery for the army. Their number, 
according to act of Parliament,3 may come up to 80,000, but they 
cannot now number more than 60,000, although, in Lancashire 
alone, there are six battalions called out. As the law stands at 
present, the militia may volunteer to serve in the Colonies, but 
cannot be conducted to foreign theaters of war. They can, 
therefore, only serve to set free the line-soldiers who garrison 
Corfu, Malta and Gibraltar, or, perhaps, hereafter, some of the 
more distant settlements. 
Of cavalry there are three regiments of guards (cuirassiers), six 
of dragoon guards (heavies), four of heavy dragoons, four of light 
dragoons, five of hussars, and four of lancers. Each regiment is to 
be raised, on the war-footing, to 1,000 sabers (four squadrons of 
two hundred and fifty men, beside a dépôt). Some regiments did 
go out with this strength, but the disasters of the Crimea in winter, 
the senseless charge at Balaklava, 307 and the dearth of recruits 
have re-established, on the whole, the old peace-footing. We do 
not think that the whole of the twenty-six regiments amount, at this 
moment, to 10,000 sabers, or 400 sabers per regiment, on an 
average. 
The artillery consists of the regiment of foot-artillery (twelve 
battalions, with ninety-six batteries), and the brigade of horse 
artillery (seven batteries and one rocket-battery). Each battery has 
five guns and one howitzer; the calibers of the guns are three, six, 
nine,  twelve, and eighteen pounders, those of the howitzers four 
and two-fifth inches, four and a half inches, five and a half inches, 
and eight inches. Each battery, also, has two models of guns, of 
almost every caliber, heavy and light ones. In reality, however, the 
light nine pounder and twelve pounder, with four and a half inch 
and five and a half inch howitzer, form the field-calibers, and, 
upon the whole, the nine pounder may now be said to be the 
universally adopted gun of the British artillery, with the four and 
a half inch (twelve pounder) howitzer as an auxiliary. Beside these, 
six pounder and twelve pounder rockets are in use. 
As the English army, on its peace establishment, forms but a 
cadre for the war-footing, and as it is recruited entirely by 
voluntary enlistment, its real force, at a given moment, can never 
be precisely stated. We believe, however, we may estimate its 
present strength at about 120,000 infantry, 10,000 cavalry, and 
12,000 artillery, with about 600 guns (of which, not one-fifth part 
The 1852 act of Parliament on the militia.— Ed. 
15—3754 

=====第448页=====
418 Frederick Engels 
are horsed). Of these 142,000 men, about 32,000 are in the 
Crimea, about 50,000 in India and the Colonies, and the 
remaining 60,000 (of whom one-half are raw recruits, the other 
half drilling them) at home. To these are to be added about 
60,000 militia men. The pensioners, yeomanry cavalry, and other 
useless corps, not available for service abroad, we do not count at 
all. 
The system of recruiting by voluntary enlistment, makes it very 
difficult, in time of war, to keep up the efficiency of the army, and 
this the English are now, again, experiencing. We see again, as 
under Wellington, that 30,000 or 40,000 men is the very outside 
of what they can concentrate and keep up on a given theater of 
war; and as, now, they have not Spaniards for their allies but 
French, the "heroic little band" of Britishers almost disappears in 
the midst of the allied army. 
There is one institution in the British army which is perfectly 
sufficient to characterize the class from which the British soldier is 
recruited. It is the punishment of flogging. Corporal punishment 
does not exist in the French, the Prussian, and several of the 
minor armies. Even in Austria, where the greater part of the 
recruits consist of semi-barbarians, there is an evident desire to do 
away with it; thus the punishment of running the gauntlet has 
recently been struck out from the Austrian military code. In 
England, on the contrary, the cat-o'-nine-tails is maintained in its 
full efficiency—an instrument of torture fully equal to the Russian 
knout in its most palmy time. Strange to say, whenever a reform 
of the military code has been mooted in Parliament, the old 
« martinets have stuck up for the cat, and nobody more zealously 
than old Wellington  himself.  To them, an unflogged soldier was a 
monstrously misplaced being. Bravery, discipline, and invincibility, 
in their eyes, were the exclusive qualities of men bearing the scars 
of at least fifty lashes on their backs. 
The cat-o'-nine-tails, it must not be forgotten, is not only an 
instrument calculated to inflict pain; it leaves indelible scars, it 
marks a man for life, it brands him. Now, even in the British 
army, such corporal punishment, such branding, really amounts to 
an everlasting disgrace. The flogged man loses caste with his 
fellow soldiers. But, according to the British military code, 
punishment, before the enemy, consists almost exclusively in 
flogging; and thus, the very punishment which is said, by its 
advocates, to be the only means of keeping up discipline in cases 
of great urgency, is the means of ruining discipline by destroying 
the morale and the point d'honneur of the soldier. 

=====第449页=====
The Armies of Europe 419 
This explains two very curious facts: first, the great number of 
English deserters before Sebastopol. In winter, when the British 
soldiers had to make superhuman exertions to guard the trenches, 
those who could not keep awake for forty-eight or sixty hours 
together, were flogged! The idea of flogging such heroes as the 
British soldiers had proved themselves in the trenches before 
Sebastopol, and in winning the day of Inkermann308 in spite of 
their generals! But the articles of war left no choice. The best men 
in the army, when overpowered by fatigue, got flogged, and, 
dishonored as they were, they deserted to the Russians. Surely 
there can be no more powerful condemnation of the flogging 
system than this. In no former war have troops of any nation 
deserted in numbers to the Russians; they knew that they would 
be treated worse than at home. It was reserved to the British army 
to furnish the first strong contingent of such deserters, and, 
according to the testimony of the English themselves, it was 
flogging that made the men desert. The other fact is, the signal 
failure of the attempt to raise a foreign legion under the British 
military code. The Continentals are rather particular about their 
backs.  The prospect of getting flogged has overcome the 
temptation of the high bounty, and good pay. Up to the end of 
June,  not more than one thousand men had enlisted, where 
fifteen thousand were wanted; and this much is certain, if the 
authorities attempt to introduce flogging even among these one 
thousand reprobates, they will have to encounter a storm which 
will force them either to give way, or to dissolve the foreign legion 
at once. 
The dress and equipments of the British soldiers are a model of 
what they should not be. Up to the present time, the dress in 
common wear is the same as armies used to wear as long ago as 
1815.  No improvement has been admitted. The old swallow-tail 
coatee, disfigured by ugly facings, still distinguishes the British 
from every other soldier. The trowsers are tight, and uncomforta­
ble. The old cross-belt system for fixing bayonet-scabbard, pouch 
and knapsack, reigns supreme in almost all regiments. The cavalry 
wear a better fitting dress than the infantry, and far superior; but, 
for all that, it is much too tight and inconvenient. Besides, the 
English are the only nation who have maintained in their army the 
red coat, the "proud red coat" as Napier calls it. This coat, which 
makes their soldiers look like dressed-up monkeys, is supposed by 
its brilliancy to strike terror into the enemy. But alas, whoever has 
seen any of the brick-colored British infantry must confess that 
their coats, after four weeks' wear, inspire every looker-on with an 
15* 

=====第450页=====
420 Frederick Engels 
incontrovertible idea, not of frightfulness, but of shabbiness, and 
that any other color would be far more terror-inspiring, if it only 
could stand dust, dirt, and wet. The Danes and Hanoverians used 
to wear the red coat, but they dropped it very soon. The first 
campaign in Schleswig proved to the Danes what a capital mark to 
the enemy is offered by a red coat and white cross-belts. 
The new dress-regulation has brought forward a red coat of the 
cut of the Prussian coat. The infantry wear the Austrian shako, or 
the képi; the cavalry the Prussian helmet. The cross-belt accoutre­
ments, the red color, the tight trowsers, are more or less 
maintained. Thus, the improvement amounts to nothing; and the 
British soldier will only look as strange as ever in the midst of the 
other European armies, dressed and accoutred, as they are, a little 
more in accordance with common sense. 
Nevertheless, one improvement has been carried out in the 
British army, which far surpasses anything that has been done in 
other countries. This is, the arming of the whole of the infantry 
with the Minié rifle, as improved by Pritchett. How the old men, 
at the head of the army, men generally so obstinate in their 
prejudices, could come to so bold a resolution, it is difficult to 
imagine; but they did it, and thus doubled the efficiency of their 
infantry. At Inkermann, there is no doubt that the Minié rifle, by 
its deadly certainty of aim and great power, decided the day in 
favor of the English. Whenever an English line of infantry delivers 
its fire, the effect must be overpowering to any enemy armed with 
the common musket, for the English Minié rifle lo (ads as quickly as 
any smoothbored gun. 
The cavalry are fine men, well horsed, armed with swords of a 
very good model; and what they can do, they have shown at 
Balaklava. But, on the whole, the men are too heavy for their 
horses, and, therefore, a few months of active campaigning must 
reduce the British cavalry to nothing. The Crimea has given us a 
fresh example of this. If the standard for heavy cavalry was 
reduced to five feet six inches, and for light cavalry to five feet 
four or, even, two inches, as, we believe, it is now for the infantry, 
a body of men might be formed far more suitable for their actual 
field duties. But, as it is, the horses are too heavily loaded, and 
must break down before they can be used, with effect, against the 
enemy. 
The artillery, too, is composed of taller men than it should be. 
The natural standard of size for an artilleryman is, that he should 
be big enough to unlimber a twelve pound gun, and five feet two 
to five feet six inches are ample for this purpose, as we know from 

=====第451页=====
The Armies of Europe 421 
abundant personal experience309 and observation. In fact, men of 
about five feet five, or six, inches, if stoutly made, are, generally, 
the best handlers of guns. But the British want a crack corps, and 
their men, therefore, though tall and elegant to look at, lack that 
compactness of body which is so necessary to a really useful 
artilleryman. Their artillery material is first-rate. The guns are the 
best in Europe, the powder is acknowledged to be the strongest in 
the world, the shot and shell are of a smoothness of surface 
unknown anywhere else. But, for all that, no guns in the world 
have as much windage, and this shows by what sort of men they 
are commanded. There is hardly an artillery in Europe officered 
by men of so deficient professional education as the British. Their 
information very seldom goes beyond the mere elements of the 
science of artillery, and, in practice, the handling of field-guns is 
as much as they understand, and that but imperfectly. Two 
qualities, in both officers and men, distinguish the British artillery: 
uncommonly good eye-sight, and great calmness in action.3 
In the German version of this section, published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung of 
September 1, 1855 under the title "Dress and Equipments of the British Soldier", the 
text of the last five paragraphs is given in a condensed and altered form: "The 
dress and equipments of the British soldiers are a model of what they should not 
be. Up to the present time, the dress in common wear is the same as the army used 
to wear up to 1815, altered but superficially by a new dress-regulation which gave 
the red coat a Prussian cut, the infantry the Austrian shako, or the képi, and the 
cavalry the Prussian helmet. Britain alone has maintained in her army the red coat, 
the 'proud red coat' as Napier calls it. The Danes and Hanoverians used to wear 
the red coat. The first campaign in Schleswig proved to the Danes what a capital 
mark it offered to the enemy. 
"Nevertheless, one improvement has been carried out in the British army, 
which far surpasses anything that has been done in other countries. This is, the 
arming of the whole of the infantry with the Minié rifle, as improved by Pritchett. 
There is no doubt that at Inkerman the Minié rifle, by its deadly certainty of aim, 
decided the day in favour of the English. 
"The cavalry are fine men, well horsed, armed with swords of a very good 
model; and what they can do, they have shown at Balaklava. But, on the whole, the 
men are too heavy for their horses, and, therefore, a few months of active 
campaigning must reduce the British cavalry to nothing. As the horses are too 
heavily loaded, they must break down before they can be used, with effect, against 
the enemy. The Crimea has given us a fresh example of this. 
"The artillery, too, is composed of taller men than it should be. The artillery 
material is first-rate. The guns are the best in Europe, the powder is acknowledged 
to be the strongest in the world, the shot and shell are of a smoothness of surface 
not to be found anywhere else. The artillery material is the product of modern, 
industrial England, whereas the artillery officers are the product of old England. 
The former, therefore, is just as much above the level of the European armies as 
the latter are below it. Their education in most cases does not go beyond the mere 
elements of the science of artillery, and, in practice, the handling of field-guns is as 

=====第452页=====
422 Frederick Engels 
Upon the whole, the efficiency of the British army is sorely 
impaired, by the ignorance, both theoretical and practical, of the 
officers. The examination which they are now expected to 
undergo, is actually ridiculous—a captain examined on the first 
three books of Euclid3! But the British army is mainly instituted 
for the stowing away, in respectable situations, of the younger sons 
of the aristocracy and gentry, and the standard of education for its 
officers must, therefore, be regulated, not by the requirements of 
the service, but by what little information is commonly expected in 
an English "gentleman." As to the practical military knowledge of 
the officer, it is equally insufficient. The British officer believes he 
has only one duty to perform: to lead his men, on the day of 
battle, straight against the enemy, and to give them an example of 
bravery. Skill in handling troops, seizing favorable opportunities, 
and the like, is not expected from him; and as to looking after his 
men and their wants, why, such a thing hardly ever enters his 
head. One half of the disasters of the British in the Crimea arose 
from this universal incapacity of the officers. They have, however, 
one quality which fits them for their functions: being, most of 
them, passionate huntsmen, they possess that instinctive and rapid 
appreciation of advantages of ground, which the practice of 
hunting is sure to impart. 
The incompetence of the officers nowhere creates greater 
mischief than on the  staff.  As no regularly educated staff-corps 
exists,  every general forms his own staff from regimental officers, 
ignorant of every part of their duty.b Such a staff is worse than 
none. Reconnoitering, especially, is always done in a slovenly 
manner, as it must be, when done by men who know little of what 
is expected from them. 
The education of the other special corps is rather better, but far 
below the standard in other nations; and, in general, an English 
officer would pass as an ignoramus amongst men of his class in 
any other country. Witness the military literature of the British. 
Not a work hardly, but is full of blunders which would not be 
much as they understand, and that but imperfectly. Two qualities, in both officers 
and men, distinguish the British artillery: uncommonly good eye-sight, and great 
calmness in action." — Ed. 
The reference is to Euclid's Elements, a work in 13 books which sets forth the 
fundamentals of ancient mathematics.— Ed. 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "...every general forms his own staff from his 
relations and protégés among the regimental officers without the least regard for 
special knowledge".— Ed. 

=====第453页=====
The Armies of Europe 423 
forgiven anywhere else, to a candidate for a lieutenancy. Every 
statement of facts is given in a slovenly, unbusiness-like, and 
unsoldier-like manner, leaving out the most important points, and 
showing, at once, that the writer does not know his business.3 The 
consequence is, that the most ridiculous statements of foreign 
books are credited at once.* We must, however, not forget to state 
that there are some honorable exceptions, amongst which 
W. Napier's "Peninsular War," and Howard Douglas's "Naval 
Gunnery," rank foremost.c 
The administrative, medical, commissariat, transport, and other 
accessory departments are in a deplorable state, and have 
experienced a thorough breakdown when put to the test in the 
Crimea.0 Efforts are made to improve them, as, also, to centralize 
the administration, but little good can be expected while the civil 
administration, and, in fact, the entire governing power, remains 
altogether the same. 
With all these enormous drawbacks, the British army manages 
to hobble through every campaign, if not with success, yet without 
disgrace. There is a loss of life, a deal of mismanagement, a 
compound of blunders which astonish us when compared with the 
state of other armies under the same circumstances; yet there is no 
loss of military honor, there is seldom a repulse, almost never a 
complete defeat. It is the great personal bravery and tenacity of 
the troops, their discipline and implicit obedience, which bring this 
about. Clumsy, unintelligent, and helpless as the British soldier is 
when thrown upon his own resources, or when called upon to do 
the duty of light troops, nobody surpasses him in a pitched battle 
where he acts in masses. His forte is the action in line. An English 
line of battle will do what has scarcely ever been done by other 
infantry: receive cavalry in line, keep their muskets charged to the 
last moment, and fire a volley when the enemy is at thirty yards, 
* As an instance, we refer to the work on fire-arms by Col. Chesney, who is 
considered one of the best artillery officers in Great Britain. 
This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 
F. R. Chesney, Observations on the Past and Present State of Fire-Arms.... In the 
Neue Oder-Zeitung the words "now General" are added in brackets after 
"Col."—Erf. 
c W. F. P. Napier, History of the War in the Peninsula....; H. Douglas, A Treatise on 
Naval Gunnery....— Ed. 
Instead of this sentence the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "Earlier we repeatedly 
pointed to the lamentable state of the commissariat, transport and other accessory 
departments. They experienced a thorough breakdown during the Crimean 
campaign." — Ed. 

=====第454页=====
424 Frederick Engels 
and in almost every instance with perfect success. The fire of 
British infantry is delivered with such a coolness, even in the most 
critical position, that it surpasses, in effect, that of any other 
troops. Thus, the Highlanders, in line, repulsed the Russian 
cavalry at Balaklava. The indomitable tenacity of this infantry was 
never shown to greater advantage than at Inkermann, where the 
French, under the same circumstances, would certainly have been 
overwhelmed; but, on the other hand, the French would never 
have allowed themselves to be surprised, unguarded, in such a 
position. This solidity and tenacity in attack and defense, form the 
great redeeming quality of the British army, and have alone saved 
it from many a defeat, well-merited and all but intentionally 
prepared by the incapacity of its officers, the absurdity of its 
administration, and the clumsiness of its movements. 
III. THE AUSTRIAN ARMY 
Austria profited by the first moments of repose after her severe 
trials in 1848 and 1849, to reorganize her army upon a modern 
footing. Almost every department has been completely reformed, 
and the army is now far more efficient than ever. 
First comes the infantry. The line consists of sixty-two regi­
ments, beside which there are one regiment and twenty-five 
battalions of rifles, and fourteen regiments and one battalion of 
frontier-infantry. The latter, with the rifles, make up the light 
infantry. 
An infantry regiment of the line consists of five field and one 
dépôt battalion—together thirty-two companies—of which the 
field companies count 220 men, and the dépôt companies 130 
men. Thus, the field battalion numbers about 1,300 men, and the 
whole regiment nearly 6,000 men, or as many as a British division. 
The whole line, therefore, on the war-footing, is about 370,000 
strong. 
The frontier infantry have per regiment, two field and one 
dépôt battalion, together sixteen companies; in all, 3,850 men: the 
whole frontier infantry comprises 55,000 men. 
The chasseurs, or rifles, count in all thirty-two battalions, of 
about 1,000 men each: total, 32,000 men. 
In cavalry, the army has, of heavies: eight regiments of 
cuirassiers, and eight of dragoons; of light horse: twelve of 
hussars, and twelve of lancers (seven of which were formerly light 
dragoons, or chevau-légers, but have been, latterly, turned into 
lancers). 

=====第455页=====
The Armies of Europe 425 
The heavy regiments count six squadrons, beside one dépôt — 
the light ones eight squadrons, and one dépôt squadron. The 
heavy regiments have 1,200 men, the light ones 1,600 men. The 
whole cavalry numbers about 67,000 men, on the war-footing. 
Of artillery, there are twelve field regiments, each consisting of 
four six pounders, three twelve pounder foot batteries, six cavalry 
batteries, and one howitzer battery, on the war-footing: total, 
1,344 guns; one coast regiment, and one rocket regiment, of 
twenty batteries, with one hundred and sixty tubes. Total, 1,500 
guns and rocket tubes, and 53,000 men. 
This gives a total effective number, on the war-footing, of 
522,000 fighting men. 
To these are to be added about 16,000 sappers, miners and 
pontoniers, 20,000 gens d'armes, the transport corps, and the like, 
raising the total to about 590,000 men. 
By calling in the reserve, the army can be increased by from 
100,000 to 120,000 men; and by draining the resources of the 
military frontier310 to their utmost limit, another 100,000 to 
120,000 men may be made available. But, as these forces could not 
be collected at a given moment, they would drop in gradually, and 
thus serve mainly to fill up the vacancies in the ranks. More than 
650,000 men Austria could hardly bring together, at a time, under 
arms. 
The army is divided into two quite distinct corps, the regular 
army and the frontier troops. For the first, the time of service is of 
eight years' duration—after which the men remain two more 
years in the reserve. Long furloughs, however, are granted — as in 
France—and five years may be nearer the actual time the men are 
kept with the colors. 
The frontier troops are got together upon a quite different 
principle. They are the descendants of South-Slavonian (Croat or 
Serbian), Wallachian, and partly of German, settlers who hold 
their lands by military tenure under the crown, and were formerly 
employed to protect the frontier, from Dalmatia to Transylvania, 
against the inroads of the Turks. This service is now reduced to a 
mere formality, but the Austrian government, nevertheless, has 
shown no inclination to sacrifice this capital nursery of soldiers. It 
was the existence of the frontier organization, which in 1848 saved 
Radetzky's army in Italy, and which in 1849 made possible the 
first invasion of Hungary under Windischgrätz. Next to Russia, it 
is to the South-Slavonian frontier regiments that Francis Joseph 
owes his throne. In the long stretch of country occupied by them, 
every crown-tenant (that is almost every inhabitant), is obliged to 

=====第456页=====
426 Frederick Engels 
serve from his twentieth to his fiftieth year, when called upon. 
The younger men, of course, make up the strength of the 
regiments; the older men, generally, only take their turns at the 
frontier guard-houses, until called upon to serve in time of war. 
This explains how a population of about  1,500,000  to 2,000,000 
can furnish a contingent, in case of need, of 150,000 to 170,000 
men, or from ten to twelve per cent, of the whole number. 
The Austrian army has many points of resemblance to the 
British army. In both there are many nationalities mixed together, 
though each regiment, generally, belongs to one nation only. The 
Highland Gael, the Welshman, the Irishman, and the Englishman, 
scarcely vary more than the German, the Italian, the Croat, and 
the Magyar. In either, officers of all races, and even a great many 
foreigners, are to be found. In either, the theoretical instruction of 
the officers is extremely defective. In either, the tactical forms 
have retained a deal of the ancient line-formations, and adopted, 
in a limited degree only, the use of columns and skirmishing. In 
either, the dress is of an unusual color: with the English, red, with 
the Austrians, white. But in the efficiency of their arrangements, 
in the practical experience and competence of the officers, and in 
tactical mobility, the Austrians by far surpass the British. 
The dress of the soldier, leaving apart the absurd white color of 
the infantry coat, has been adapted in its cut to the modern 
system. A short tunic, like the Prussians' sky-blue trowsers, a gray 
capote, a light képi, similar to the French, make a very good and 
serviceable dress, excepting, always, the tight trowsers of the 
Hungarian and Croat regiments, which form part of the national 
dress,  but are, for all that, very inconvenient. The accoutrements 
are not what they should be; the cross-belt system has been 
maintained. The frontier troops and artillery are dressed in brown 
coats;  the cavalry, either white, brown or blue. The muskets are 
rather clumsy, and the rifles, with which both the chasseurs and a 
certain portion of each company are armed, are of a rather 
antiquated model, and far inferior to the Minié rifle. The common 
musket is the old flint gun changed, in an imperfect manner, into 
a percussion musket, and very often misses fire. 
The infantry, and in this respect it is similar to the English, is 
more distinguished by its action in masses, than by its agility in 
light infantry service. We must, however, except the frontier 
troops and the chasseurs. The first are,- for the most part, very 
efficient in skirmishing, especially the Serbians, whose favorite 
warfare is one of ambuscades. The chasseurs are mainly Tyrolians, 
and first-rate marksmen. But the German and Hungarian infantry 

=====第457页=====
The Armies of Europe 427 
generally impose by their solidity, and, during Napoleon's wars, 
they often snowed that in this respect they deserve to be placed 
along with the British. They, too, have more than once received 
cavalry, in line, without deigning to form square, and wherever 
they have formed squares, the enemy's cavalry could seldom break 
them up—witness Aspern.311 
The cavalry is excellent. The heavy or "German" cavalry, 
consisting of Germans and Bohemians,3  is well horsed, well armed, 
and always efficient. The light cavalry has, perhaps, lost by mixing 
up the German chevau-légers with the Polish lancers, but its 
Hungarian hussars will always remain the models of all light 
cavalry. 
The artillery, recruited mostly from the German provinces, has 
always stood high; not so much by early and judicious adoption of 
improvements, as by the practical efficiency of the men. The 
non-commissioned officers, especially, are educated with great 
care,  and are superior to those of any other army. With the 
officers, theoretical proficiency is left too much an optional matter, 
but yet Austria has produced some of the best writers on the 
subject. In Austria, study is the rule, at least with subalterns, while 
in England, an officer who studies his profession is considered a 
disgrace to his regiment. The special corps,  staff,  and engineers, 
are excellent, as is proved by the beautiful maps they have made 
from their surveys, especially of Lombardy. The British ordnance 
map,  though good, is nothing in comparison. 
The great confusion of nationalities is a serious evil. In the 
British army, every man can at least speak English, but with the 
Austrians, even the non-commissioned officers of the non-German 
regiments can scarcely speak German. This creates, of course, a 
deal of confusion, difficulty, and interpreting, even between the 
officer and the soldier. It is partly remedied by the necessity in 
which frequent change of quarters places the officers of learning 
at least something of every language spoken in Austria. But yet, 
the inconvenience is not obviated. 
The severity of the discipline, which is whacked into the men by 
frequent applications of a hazel stick to their posteriors, and the 
long time of service, prevent the outbreak of serious quarrels 
between the various nationalities of the army, at least in time of 
peace. But 1848 showed how little internal consistency this body of 
troops possesses. At Vienna, the German troops refused to fight 
the revolution. In Italy and Hungary, the national troops passed 
Czechs.— Ed. 

=====第458页=====
428 Frederick Engels 
over to the side of the insurgents, without as much as a struggle. 
Here it is that the weak point of this army lies. Nobody can tell 
how far or how long it will hold together, or how many regiments 
will leave it in any peculiar case, to fight their former comrades. 
There are six different nations, and two or three different creeds, 
represented in this one army; and, as to the sympathies pervading 
it, they must necessarily clash in a time like the present, when 
nations are panting for the free use of their forces. In a war with 
Russia, would the Greek Catholic Serbian, influenced by Panslavist 
agitation, fight the Russians, his cousins by race, and holding the 
same creed as he? In a revolutionary war, would the Italian and 
Hungarian forsake his country, to battle for an emperor foreign to 
him in language and nationality? It is not to be expected; and 
therefore, whatever the strength of the Austrian army may be, 
very particular circumstances are required to bring its full power 
into play. 

=====第459页=====
429 
[SECOND ARTICLE] 
[Putnam's Monthly, No. XXXIII, September 1855] 
I. THE PRUSSIAN ARMY 
The Prussian army deserves special notice, on account of its 
peculiar organization. While, in every other army, the peace-
footing is the groundwork of the entire establishment, and no 
cadres are provided for the new formations which a great war at 
once necessitates, in Prussia, we are told, everything, to the 
minutest detail, is prepared for the war-footing. Thus, the peace 
establishment simply forms a school, in which the population are 
instructed in arms and maneuvers. This system, including, as it 
professes to do, the whole able-bodied male population in the 
ranks of the army on the war-footing, would appear to render the 
country which adopts it safe from every attack; yet this is by no 
means the case. What is attained is, that the country is stronger by 
about 50 per cent, than under the French or Austrian system of 
recruiting; by which means it is possible for an agricultural state of 
some seventeen millions of inhabitants, on a small territory, 
without a fleet or direct maritime commerce, and with compara­
tively little manufacturing industry, to maintain, in some respects, 
the position of a great European power. 
The Prussian army consists of two great divisions: of those 
soldiers who are still being trained — the line; and of those trained 
men who may be said to have been sent home on indefinite 
furlough—the landwehr. 
The service in the line lasts five years, from the twentieth to the 
twenty-fifth year of each man's age; but three years of active 
service are thought sufficient; after which, the soldier is dismissed 
to his home, and placed for the remaining two years in what is 
called the war-reserve. During this time he continues to figure on 

=====第460页=====
430 Frederick Engels 
the reserve-lists of his battalion or squadron, and is liable to be 
called in at any time. 
After having been, for two years, in the war-reserve, he passes 
into the first levy of the landwehr (erstes Aufgebot der Landwehr), 
where he remains up to his thirty-second year. During this period 
he is liable to be called in, every other year, for the exercises of 
this corps, which generally take place upon a pretty extensive 
scale, and in connection with those of the line. The maneuvers 
generally last a month, and very often from 50,000 to 60,000 
troops are concentrated for this purpose. The landwehr of the 
first levy are destined to act in the field along with the line. They 
form separate regiments, battalions, and squadrons, the same as 
the line, and carry the same regimental numbers. The artillery, 
however, remain attached to the respective regiments of the line. 
From the thirty-second to the thirty-ninth year, inclusive, the 
soldier remains in the second levy (zweites Aufgebot) of the 
landwehr, during which time he is no longer called upon for 
active duty, unless a war breaks out, in which case the second levy 
has to do garrison duty in the fortresses, thus leaving available the 
whole of the line and first levy for field operations. After the 
fortieth year, he is free from all liability to be called out, unless, 
indeed, that mysterious body called the Landsturm, or levy en 
masse, be required to arm  itself.  The landsturm includes every 
man not comprised in the former categories, with all those too 
small or too weakly, or otherwise liberated from service, between 
the sixteenth and sixtieth year of age. But this landsturm cannot 
even be said to exist on paper, for there is not any organization 
prepared for it, no arms or accoutrements provided; and if it 
should ever have to assemble, it would not be found fit for 
anything but police duty at home, and for a tremendous 
consumption of strong drink. 
As in Prussia every citizen is, according to law, a soldier, from 
his twentieth to his fortieth year, a population of seventeen 
millions might be expected to furnish a total contingent of at least 
a million and a half of men. But, in reality, not one half of this 
number can be got together. The fact is, that the training of such 
a mass of men would presuppose, at three years' service with the 
regiments, a peace establishment of at least 300,000 men, while 
Prussia merely maintains something like 130,000. Thus various 
devices are employed to liberate a number of men otherwise liable 
to serve: men fit enough for duty are declared too weak, the 
medical inspection either selecting the best candidates only, or 
allowing itself to be moved by bribes in the selection of those 

=====第461页=====
The Armies of Europe 431 
considered fit for duty, and so on. Formerly, the reduction of the 
time of actual service, for the infantry, to two years only, was the 
means of bringing down the peace establishment to some 100,000 
or 110,000 men; but since the revolution,3 the government, having 
found out how much an additional year of service will do in 
making the men obedient to their officers, and reliable in case of 
insurrection, the three years' service has been generally introduced 
again. 
The standing army, or the line, is composed of nine army-
corps—one of guards and eight of the line. Their peculiar 
organization will be explained presently. They comprise, in all, 
thirty-six regiments of infantry (guards and line), of three 
battalions eachb ; eight regiments of reserve, of two battalions each; 
eight combined reserve battalions, and ten battalions of chasseurs 
(Jäger);  in all, 144 battalions of infantry, or 150,000 men. 
The cavalry is composed of ten cuirassier, five dragoon, ten 
lancer, and thirteen hussar regiments, of four squadrons, or 800 
men each; in all, 30,000 men. 
The artillery consists of nine regiments, each composed, when 
on the war-footing, of four six-pounder, three twelve-pounder, 
and one howitzer, foot batteries, and three batteries of horse 
artillery, with one reserve company to be turned into a twelfth 
battery; beside four garrison companies, and one company of 
workmen. But as the whole of the war reserve and landwehr of 
the first levy (of the artillery) are required to man these guns, and 
to complete the companies, the line-artillery may be described as 
consisting of nine regiments, of about 2,500 men each, with about 
thirty guns in each regiment, fully horsed and equipped. 
Thus,  the grand total of the Prussian line would amount to 
about 200,000 men; but from 60,000 to 70,000 men may safely be 
deducted for the war reserves, dismissed to their homes after 
three years' service. 
The first levy of the landwehr counts, for every regiment of the 
guards and line, one of landwehr, except for the eight reserve 
regiments; beside, it has eight reserve battalions, forming a total of 
116 battalions, and about 100,000 men. The cavalry has two 
regiments of guards, and thirty-two of the line, with eight reserve 
squadrons; in all, 136 squadrons, or about 20,000 men. The 
artillery is attached to the line regiments, as before stated. 
a The revolution of 1848-49.— Ed. 
h Not all regiments in the guards corps consisted of three battalions.— Ed. 

=====第462页=====
432 Frederick Engels 
The second levy also counts 116 battalions, 167 squadrons 
(comprising sundry reserve and dépôt squadrons, whose duties are 
assimilated to those of the second levy), and some garrison 
artillery; altogether, about 150,000 men. 
With the nine battalions of sappers, several minor corps, about 
30,000 pensioners, and an army train amounting, on the 
war-footing, to no less than 45,000 men, the whole of the Prussian 
force is stated to amount to 580,000 men; of which, 300,000 are 
for the field, 54,000 for the dépôts, 170,000 for the garrisons and 
as a reserve, with about 60,000 non-combatants. The number of 
field-guns attached to this army should be between 800 and 850, 
divided into batteries of eight guns (six cannon and two howitzers) 
each. 
For all these troops, not only the complete organization of the 
cadres, but also the arms and equipments, are provided; so that, in 
case of a mobilization of the army, nothing has to be found but the 
horses; and as Prussia is rich in horses, and as animals as well as 
men are liable to instant requisition, no great difficulty is 
presented by this necessity. So says the regulation; but how the 
matter stands, in point of fact, was shown when, in 1850, the army 
was mobilized. The first levy of the landwehr was equipped, 
though not without great difficulty; but the second levy found 
nothing provided, neither clothing, nor shoes, nor arms, and thus 
it offered the most ridiculous spectacle imaginable. Long before 
this occurred, competent judges, who had themselves served in the 
Prussian army, had predicted that such would be the case; and 
that, in point of fact, Prussia could, on an emergency, count upon 
nothing but the line and a portion of the first levy. Their opinion 
was fully borne out by the event. No doubt, the equipments for 
the second levy have since been provided; and this body, if called 
out now, would, in a month or six weeks, form a very respectable 
corps for garrison, and even field duty. But then, in time of war, 
three months' drill is considered quite sufficient to prepare a 
recruit for the field; and thus, the cumbrous organization adopted 
by Prussia does not at all insure such enormous advantages as is 
generally believed. Beside, in a couple of years, the material 
reserved for the second levy will again have disappeared in the 
same way as that which had certainly once existed, but was not to 
be found when needed in 1850. 
Prussia, when adopting the principle that each citizen was to be 
a soldier, stopped half-way, and falsified that principle, thereby 
falsifying all her military organization. Once the system of 
conscription abandoned for that of universal compulsory service, 

=====第463页=====
The Armies  of Europe  433 
the standing army,  as such, ought  to have been abolished. Mere 
cadres  of officers  and  non-commissioned officers should have 
been maintained, through whose hands  the  young  men  should 
have passed  for  instruction,  and the  period  of instruction should 
not have lasted longer than  was  necessary  for the  purpose.  If such 
had been  the  case,  the  time  of service, during peace, must have 
been brought down  to a  year,  for all the  infantry,  at least.  But  that 
would  not  suit either  the  government  or the  military martinets  of 
the old  school.  The  government wanted  a disposable  and  reliable 
army,  to be  used,  in case  of need, against disturbances  at home; 
the martinets wanted  an  army which,  in precision  of drill,  in 
general appearance,  and in  solidity, could rival  the  remaining 
armies  of Europe, composed  of comparatively older soldiers.  A 
body  of young troops, serving  no more than  a single year, would 
not do for  either purpose. Consequently,  the  middle course  of 
three years' service  was  adopted,  and  hence arise  all the  faults  and 
weaknesses  of the  Prussian army. 
As we have seen,  at least  one  half  of the  available  men are 
excluded from  the  army. They  are at  once inscribed  on the  rolls 
of the  second levy, which body, swelled thereby nominally  to 
enormous numbers,  is completely swamped,  in whatever efficiency 
it might possess,  by a  mass  of men who  never handled  a musket, 
and are no  better than  raw  recruits. This reduction  of the  actual 
military strength  of the  country  by at  least  one half, is the  first  bad 
effect produced  by the  protracted time  of service. 
But the  line  itself, and the  first levy  of the  landwehr, suffer 
under this system.  Of every regiment,  one  third  has  served less 
than three,  one  third less than  two  years,  and the  remaining third 
less than  one  year.  Now it is not to be  expected that  an army 
composed like this  can  have those military qualities, that strict 
subordination, that steadiness  in the  ranks, that esprit  de corps, 
which distinguish  the old  soldiers  of the  English, Austrian, 
Russian,  and  even  the  French armies.  The  English,  who are 
competent judges  in this matter, from  the  long period their 
soldiers serve, consider that  it takes three years completely  to 
break  in a  recruit.*  Now, as, in  time  of peace,  the Prussian army  is 
composed  of men  none  of whom have ever served three years,  the 
natural consequence  is that these military qualities  of the old 
soldier,  or at  least  the  semblance  of them, have  to be  drummed 
into the  young Prussian recruit  by an  intolerable martinetism.  The 
Prussian subaltern  and  sergeant, from  the  impossibility  of the  task 
* See Sir W.  Napier's Peninsular  War. 

=====第464页=====
434 Frederick Engels 
imposed upon them, come to treat their subordinates with a 
roughness and brutality doubly repulsive from the spirit of 
pedantry with which it is coupled; and this pedantry is the more 
ridiculous because it is in complete contrast with the plain and 
sensible system of drill prescribed, and because it constantly 
appeals to the traditions of Frederick the Great, who had to drill a 
quite different set of men in a quite different system of tactics. 
Thus,  real efficiency in the field is sacrificed to precision on the 
parade-ground, and the Prussian line, upon the whole, may be 
considered inferior to the old battalions and squadrons which, in the 
first onset, any of the great European powers can bring forward 
against it. 
This is the case, in spite of advantages of which no other army is 
possessed. The Prussian, as well as the German in general, makes 
capital stuff for a soldier. A country, composed of extensive plains 
varied by large groups of mountains, furnishes material in 
abundance for every different arm. The general bodily aptitude 
for both light infantry and line infantry duty, possessed equally by 
the majority of the Germans, is scarcely equaled by other nations. 
The country, possessing horses in plenty, furnishes numerous men 
for the cavalry, who, from their childhood, have been at home in 
the saddle. The deliberate steadiness of the Germans adapts them 
especially for the artillery service. They are, withal, among the 
most pugnacious people in the world, enjoying war for its own 
sake,  and often enough going to look for it abroad, when they 
cannot have it at home. From the Landsknechte of the middle age 
to the present foreign legions of France and England, the 
Germans have always furnished the great mass of those mer­
cenaries who fight for the sake of fighting. If the French excel 
them in agility and vivacity of onslaught, if the English are their 
superiors in toughness of resistance, the Germans certainly excel 
all other European nations in that general fitness for military duty 
which makes them good soldiers under all circumstances. 
The Prussian officers form by far the best educated body of 
their class in the world. The general educational tests to which 
they are subjected are of a far higher standard than those of any 
other army. Brigade and divisional schools are maintained to 
complete their theoretical education; higher or more special 
military knowledge is provided for by numerous establishments. 
Prussian military literature holds a very high rank; the works it 
has furnished for the last twenty-five years sufficiently prove that 
their authors not only perfectly understood their own business, 
but could challenge, for general scientific information, the officers 

=====第465页=====
The Armies of Europe 435 
of any army. In fact, there is almost too much of a smattering of 
metaphysics in some of them, and this is explained by the fact 
that, in Berlin, Breslau, or Königsberg, you may see officers taking 
their seats amongst the students at the university lectures. 
Clausewitz is as much a standard author in his line, all over the 
world, as Jomini; and the works of the engineer Aster mark a new 
epoch in the science of fortification. Yet, the name of a "Prussian 
lieutenant" is a by-word all over Germany, and, indeed, the 
caricatured esprit de corps, pedantry and impertinent manners 
inculcated by the general tone of the army, fully justify the fact; 
while nowhere are there so many old, stiff-necked martinets 
among the field-officers and generals as in Prussia—most of them, 
however, relics of 1813 and '15. After all, it must be acknowledged 
that the absurd attempt to force the Prussian line into what it can 
never be made to be—an army of old soldiers—deteriorates the 
quality of the officer as much as it does that of the soldier, and 
even more. 
The drill-regulations in the Prussian armya are, undoubtedly, 
much the best in the world. Simple, consistent, based upon a few 
common sense principles, they leave very little to be desired. They 
are owing to the genius of Scharnhorst, who was, perhaps, the 
greatest military organizer since Maurice of Nassau. The regula­
tions for handling large bodies of troops are equally good. The 
scientific manuals, however, for the artillery service, which are 
officially recommended to the officers, are old-fashioned and by 
no means up to the requirements of the present time; but this 
blame is confined to works bearing a more or less official stamp, 
and does not at all bear upon Prussian artilleristic literature in 
general. 
The engineering body enjoy, and deservedly, a very high 
character. From them proceeded Aster, the first military engineer 
since Montalembert. They have constructed a series of fortresses, 
from Königsberg and Posen to Cologne and Coblentz, which has 
obtained the admiration of Europe. 
The equipment of the Prussian army, since the changes effected 
in 1843 and '44, is not very handsome, but very convenient for the 
soldiers. The helmet is a very efficient protection against sun and 
rain, the clothing is loose and comfortable, the adiustment of the 
accoutrements still better than that adopted in France. The guards 
and light battalions (one to each regiment) are armed with the 
rifled needle-gun; the remainder of the line are having their 
[G.J.D.  von Scharnhorst,] Kriegs-Ar tike l für das Preussische Heer. —Ed. 

=====第466页=====
436 Frederick Engels 
muskets transformed, by a very simple process, into good Minié 
rifles;  as to the landwehr, they, too, will, in two or three years, 
receive the Minié gun, but as yet they carry percussion muskets. 
The saber of the cavalry is too broad and crooked — most of the 
cuts fall flat. The material of the artillery, both in cannon, 
carriages, and harness, leave much to be desired. 
On the whole, the Prussian army, that is, the line and first levy, 
forms a respectable body of men, but nothing like what Prussian 
patriotic authors boast. The line, once in the field, will very soon 
throw off the fetters of the parade-ground, and, after a few 
engagements, be equal to their opponents. The landwehr of the 
first levy, as soon as the old soldier-like spirit has been 
re-awakened, and if the war be popular, will equal the best old 
troops in Europe. What Prussia has to fear, is an active enemy 
during the first period of a war, when troops of superior 
organization, and of older standing, are brought against her; but 
in a protracted struggle she will have a greater proportion of old 
soldiers in her armies than any other European state. In the 
beginning of a campaign, the line will form the nucleus of the 
army, but the first levy will very soon push it into the shade, by 
the greater bodily strength and the higher military qualities of its 
men. They are the real old soldiers of Prussia—not the beardless 
youths of the line. Of the second levy we do not speak; it has yet to 
show what it is. 
II. THE RUSSIAN ARMY 
In Russia, too, a certain provision has been made for 
establishing cadres for the war-footing, by a scheme of reserves, 
similar, in some points, to the Prussian landwehr system. But, on 
the whole, the Russian reserve comprises such a limited number of 
men, and the difficulty of bringing them together from all the 
points of that vast empire is so great, that, as early as six months 
after the Anglo-French declaration of war,a and before a single 
shot had been fired in the Crimea, the abolition of the system and 
the formation of new bodies, followed up since by other new 
formations, at once became necessary. Thus, in Russia, we must 
distinguish between the army as it was on the breaking out of the 
war, and the army as it is now. 
Britain and France officially declared war on Russia on March 27 and 28, 
1854,  respectively.— Ed. 

=====第467页=====
The Armies of Europe 437 
The Russian army, in time of peace, is divided as follows: — 1. 
The active army—six corps of the line, Nos.  1 to 6; 2. The reserve 
army—one corps of guards, one corps of grenadiers, two corps of 
cavalry of the reserve; 3. The special corps—that of the Caucasus, 
that of Finland, that of Orenburg, that of Siberia; 4. The troops 
for inland duty—veterans, inland guards, invalids, and so forth; 5. 
The irregular troops. To these must be added the reserves, 
consisting of soldiers dismissed on furlough. 
The composition of each of the six corps of the line is as 
follows:—it includes three divisions of infantry, consisting each of 
a brigade of the line and one of light infantry, each brigade 
consisting of two regiments, each regiment of four service-
battalions; in all, six brigades or twelve regiments, comprising 
forty-eight battalions, with one battalion of rifles, and one of 
sappers; total, fifty battalions. There is also one division of light 
cavalry, containing one brigade of lancers, and one brigade of 
hussars, each of two regiments, or sixteen squadrons; total, 
thirty-two squadrons. The artillery consists of one division [of 
artillery] of three foot brigades, and one horse brigade; total, 
fourteen batteries or 112 guns; total, per corps, fifty battalions, 
thirty-two squadrons, 112 guns; grand total, 300 battalions, 192 
squadrons, 672 guns. 
The guards contain three divisions, or six brigades, comprising 
twelve regiments (nine of grenadiers, and three of carabineers, or 
light infantry); in all, thirty-six battalions, for the regiments of 
guards and grenadiers count three service-battalions only. There is 
also one battalion of rifles and one of sappers and miners, beside 
three divisions of cavalry (one cuirassiers, one lancers, one 
hussars), comprising six brigades or twelve regiments, and making 
in all seventy-two squadrons of cavalry. There is one division of 
five brigades and fifteen batteries (nine foot, five horse, one 
rockets); in all, 135 guns. The grenadier corps consists of three 
divisions or six brigades, comprising twelve regiments or thirty-six 
battalions of infantry, one battalion of rifles, and one of sappers 
and miners. This corps also counts one division of cavalry, 
including two brigades (lancers and hussars), made up of four 
regiments or thirty-two squadrons. The artillery consists of three 
foot and one horse brigade, with fourteen batteries; in all, 112 
guns. 
The reserve cavalry is organized as follows: — 1st corps: three 
divisions (two of cuirassiers, one of lancers), comprising six 
brigades or twelve regiments; in all, eighty squadrons (forty-eight 
of cuirassiers, thirty-two of lancers). There is also one division of 

=====第468页=====
438 Frederick Engels 
horse artillery, containing three brigades, with six batteries; in all, 
forty-eight  guns.—  2d corps: three divisions (one lancers, two 
dragoons) or six brigades; including twelve regiments or 112 
squadrons (thirty-two of lancers, eighty of dragoons). There are 
also two squadrons of mounted sappers and pontoniers, and six 
batteries of horse artillery, comprising forty-eight guns. 
The Caucasian corps is composed of one reserve grenadier 
brigade, containing two regiments or six battalions; three divisions 
of infantry, containing twelve regiments or forty-eight battalions; 
one battalion of rifles, one of sappers; forty-seven battalions of the 
Caucasian line (militia); total, 103 battalions. The cavalry consists 
of one regiment of dragoons, of ten squadrons. Of artillery there 
is one division, with ten common and six mountain batteries, of 
180 guns in all. 
The Finland corps consists of one division, comprising two 
brigades or twelve battalions of infantry; that of Orenburg, of one 
division, likewise of two brigades, but of only ten battalions; that 
of Siberia, of one division, comprising three brigades; making 
fifteen battalions. Finally, the grand total of the regular troops, 
actually under arms in time of peace, may be stated as follows: — 
Battal. 
6 corps of the line 300 
Guards 38 
Grenadiers 38 
Reserve cavalry — 
Caucasian corps 103 
Finland corps 12 
Orenburg do 10 
Siberia do 15 Squad. Guns. 
192 672 
72 135 
32 112 
194 96 
10 180 
Total 516 500 1,195 
The troops for inland service consist of fifty-two battalions of 
inland guards, 800 companies of veterans and invalids, eleven and 
a half squadrons of gens d'armes, and ninety-eight companies of 
artillery. These troops can hardly be counted in an estimate of the 
available force of the country. 
The irregular troops, mostly cavalry, form the following 
divisions:  — 
1. The Don Cossacks:—fifty-six regiments, each of six sotnias; in all, 336 sotnias, 
thirteen batteries. 

=====第469页=====
The Armies of Europe 439 
2. The Tshornomor (Black Sea Cossacks):—seventy-two sotnias, nine battalions, 
three batteries. 
3. The Caucasian line Cossacks (on the Kuban and Terek):—120 sotnias and 
three batteries. 
4. The Astrachan Cossacks:—eighteen sotnias, one battery. 
5. The Orenburg Cossacks:—sixty sotnias, three batteries. 
6. The Ural Cossacks:—sixty sotnias. 
7. The Bashkir levy:—eighty-five sotnias, almost all Bashkirs and Kalmyks. 
8. The Siberian Cossacks:—twenty-four battalions, eighty-four sotnias, three 
batteries, composed partly of Tungusians, Buriates, &c. 
9. The Azov Cossacks, engaged in naval service. 
10. The Danubian Cossacks in Bessarabia: twelve sotnias. 
11. The Baikal Lake Cossacks, but recently formed, of unknown organization and 
strength. 
The total would amount to 847 sotnias (squadrons of 100 men 
each, from sto, hundred), thirty-three battalions, twenty-six bat­
teries.  This would make about 90,000 men of cavalry, and 30,000 
infantry. But, for actual war purposes on the western frontier, 
perhaps 40,000 to 50,000 cavalry, a few batteries, and none of the 
infantry are available. 
Thus,  in time of peace, the Russian army (exclusive of the 
inland service troops) should consist of 360,000 infantry, 70,000 
cavalry, and 90,000 artillery; in all, 500,000 men; beside a number 
of Cossacks, varying according to circumstances. But of these 
500,000 men, the local corps of the Caucasus, of Orenburg, and 
Siberia cannot be made available for any war on the western 
frontier of the empire; so that, against western Europe, not 
more than 260,000 infantry, 70,000 cavalry, and 50,000 artillery, 
with about 1,000 guns, can be used, beside some 30,000 Cos­
sacks. 
So far for the peace establishment. For the event of a war, the 
following provisions were made: the full time of service was 
twenty, twenty-two, or twenty-five years, according to cir­
cumstances. But after either ten or fifteen years, according to 
circumstances, the soldiers were dismissed on furlough, after 
which they belonged to the reserve. The organization of this 
reserve has varied very much, but it appears, now, that the men 
on furlough belonged, during the first five years, to a reserve 
battalion (the fourth of each regiment in the guards and 
grenadiers, the fifth in the line), a reserve squadron, or a reserve 
battery, according to their respective arms. After the lapse of five 
years they passed to the dépôt (fifth or respectively sixth) battalion 
of their regiment, or to the dépôt squadron or battery. Thus, the 
calling-in of the reserve would raise the effective strength of the 
infantry and artillery about fifty per cent., of the cavalry about 

=====第470页=====
440 Frederick Engels 
twenty per cent. These reserves were to be commanded by retired 
officers, and their cadres, if not in full organization, were 
nevertheless, to a certain degree, prepared. 
But when the war broke out, all this was altered. The active 
army had to send two divisions to the Caucasus, though it was 
destined to fight on the western frontier. Before the Anglo-French 
troops embarked for the east, three corps of the active army (the 
third, fourth, and fifth) were engaged in the campaign against the 
Turks.  At that period, indeed, the reserves were concentrating, 
but it took an enormous length of time before the men could be 
brought up to their respective headquarters from all points of the 
empire. The allied armies and fleets in the Baltic and Black Seas, 
as well as the wavering policy of Austria, necessitated more 
vigorous measures; the levies were doubled and tripled, and the 
motley mass of recruits, thus got together, were formed, along 
with the reserves, into fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth 
battalions for all the infantry regiments, while a similar increase 
was made in the cavalry. Thus, the eight corps of guards, 
grenadiers, and line, instead of 376 battalions, now muster about 
800, while, for every two squadrons or batteries of the peace 
establishment, at least one of reserve has been added. All these 
figures, however, look more formidable on paper than in reality; 
for, what with the corruption of the Russian officials, the 
mal-administration of the army, and the enormous length of the 
marches from the homes of the men to the depots, from the 
depots to the points of concentration of the corps, and from 
thence to the seat of war, a great proportion of the men are lost 
or invalided before they come to meet the enemy. Besides, the 
ravages of disease, and the losses in battle, during the two last 
campaigns, have been very serious, and, altogether, we do not 
think that the 1,000 battalions, 800 squadrons, and 200 batteries 
of the Russian army, can much exceed, at present, 600,000 men. 
But the government was not satisfied with this. With a 
promptitude which shows how fully it is aware of the difficulty of 
bringing together large masses of men from the various portions 
of this vast empire, it decreed the levy of the militia as soon as the 
organization of the seventh and eighth battalions was completed. 
The militia, or opoltshenie, was to be organized in druginas 
(battalions) of 1,000 each, in proportion to the population of each 
province; twenty-three men out of every 1,000 males, or nearly 
one-quarter per cent, of the population were to serve. For the 
time being, the opoltshenie was called out in the western provinces 
only. This levy, made upon a population of 18,000,000, compris-

=====第471页=====
The Armies of Europe 441 
ing about 9,000,000 males, must have produced about 120,000 
men, and this agrees with what the reports from Russia state. 
There is no doubt that the militia will prove, in every respect, 
inferior even to the newly formed reserve, but, at all events, it is a 
valuable addition to the forces of Russia, and, if employed to do 
garrison duty in Poland, it can set free a good many regiments of 
the line. 
On the other hand, not only many Cossacks, but even 
considerable numbers of Bashkirs, Kalmyks, Kirghiz, Tungusians, 
and other Mongol levies have arrived on the western frontier. 
This shows how early they were ordered westwards, for many of 
them had above a twelve-month's march to make before they 
could arrive at St. Petersburg, or on the Vistula. 
Thus,  Russia has taxed her military resources almost to the 
utmost; and, after two years' campaigning, during which time she 
has lost no decisive battle, she cannot muster more than 600,000 
to 650,000 regular troops, with 100,000 militia, and perhaps 
50,000 irregular cavalry. We do not mean to say that she is 
exhausted; but, there is no doubt, that now, after two years' war, 
she could not do what France did after twenty years' war, and 
after the total loss of her finest army in 1812: pour forth a fresh 
body of 300,000 men and arrest, for a time, at least, the onslaught 
of the enemy. So enormous is the difference, in military strength, 
between a densely and a thinly .populated country. If France 
bordered on Russia, the 66,000,000 inhabitants of Russia would be 
weaker than the 38,000,000 French. That the 44,000,000 Germans 
are more than a match for the 66,000,000 subjects of the 
orthodox Czar, there is not the slightest doubt. 
The Russian army is recruited in various ways. The great body 
of the men is raised by the regular levy, which takes place one 
year in the western, and the next in the eastern provinces of 
Russia in Europe. The general percentage is four or five men 
levied out of every 1,000 (male) "souls;" for in the Russian census 
the males only are counted, as, according to the orthodox belief of 
the east, the women do not constitute "souls." Those from the 
western half of the empire serve twenty, those from the eastern 
half twenty-five years. The guards serve twenty-two years; young 
men from the military colonies twenty years. Beside these levies, 
the soldiers' sons are a fertile source of recruits. Every son born to 
a soldier while in service is obliged to serve; and this principle is 
carried so far that children borne by soldiers' wives are claimed by 
the state, though the husband may have been at the other end of 
the empire for five or ten years. These soldiers' children are called 

=====第472页=====
442 Frederick Engels 
cantonists, and most of them are educated at the expense of the 
government; from them most of the non-commissioned officers 
are taken. Finally, criminals, vagabonds, and other good-for-
nothing individuals, are sentenced, by the courts of law, to serve in 
the army. A nobleman has the right of sending a  serf,  if otherwise 
able-bodied, into the army; and every father, when dissatisfied 
with his son, can do the same. "S'bogom idi pod Krasnuyu shapkoo." 
Begone, then, with God, and put the red cap on—that is to say, 
go into the army—is a common saying of the Russian peasant to a 
disobedient son. 
The non-commissioned officers, as we have said, are mostly 
recruited from the soldiers' sons, educated in government 
establishments. From early boyhood subject to military discipline, 
these lads have nothing whatever in common with the men whom 
they are, subsequently, to instruct and direct. They form a class 
separate from the people. They belong to the state—they cannot 
exist without it: once thrown upon their own resources, they are 
fit for nothing. To get on, then, under the government, is their 
only object. What the lower class of employés, recruited from the 
sons of employés, are in the Russian civil service, these men are in 
the army: a set of cunning, low-minded, narrowly-egotistical 
subordinates, endowed with a smattering of elementary education, 
which almost renders them more despicable; ambitious from 
vanity and love of gain; sold, life and soul, to the state, and yet 
trying, daily and hourly, to sell the state, in detail, whenever they 
can make a profit by it. A fine specimen of this class is the 
feldjäger or courier who accompanied M. de Custine during his 
travels in Russia, and who is admirably portrayed in that 
gentleman's account of Russia. 3 It is this class of men, both in the 
civil and military branches, which principally foments the immense 
corruption pervading all branches of the public service in that 
country. But as it is, there is no doubt that, if this system of total 
appropriation of the children, by the state, were done away 
with, Russia would not be able to find a sufficient number 
of civil subaltern employés and military non-commissioned 
officers. 
With the class of officers it is, perhaps, still worse. The 
education given to a future corporal or sergeant-major is a 
comparatively cheap article; but to educate officers for an army of 
one million (and that is the number for which the Russian cadres, 
officially speaking, should be prepared) is a costly affair. Private 
a A. de Custine, La Russie en 1839, T. IV, pp. 283-85.—Ed. 

=====第473页=====
The Armies of Europe 443 
establishments do nothing or little for the purpose. The state, 
again, must do everything. But it evidently cannot educate such a 
mass of young men as are required for this use. Consequently, the 
sons of the nobility are, by a direct moral compulsion, induced to 
serve for at least five or ten years in the army or the civil service; 
for every family in which three consecutive generations have not 
"served," loses its privilege of nobility, and especially the right to 
own serfs—a right without which, in Russia, extensive landed 
property is worse than valueless. Thus, vast numbers of young 
men are brought into the army with the rank of ensign or 
lieutenant, whose entire education consists, at the best, in a certain 
fluency in French conversation on the most ordinary topics, and 
some little smattering of elementary mathematics, geography and 
history—the whole drummed into them for mere show. To them, 
to serve is an ugly necessity, to be gone through, like a prolonged 
medical treatment, with unfeigned disgust; and as soon as the 
prescribed time of service has elapsed, or the grade of major is 
attained, they retire, and are inscribed on the rolls of the dépôt 
battalions. As to the pupils of the military schools, they, too, have 
almost all been crammed so as to pass the examinations; and they 
are, even in mere professional knowledge, far behind the young 
men from the Austrian, the Prussian, or French military schools. 
On the other hand, young men of talent, application, and passion 
for their special branch, are so rare in Russia that they are seized 
upon wherever they show themselves, be they foreigners or 
natives. With the greatest liberality, the state provides them with 
all the means for completing their studies, and gives them rapid 
promotion. Such men are used to show off Russian civilization 
before Europe. If they are inclined to literary pursuits, they meet 
with every encouragement so long as they do not overstep the 
bounds of Russian government requirements, and it is they who. 
have furnished what little there is of value in Russian military 
literature. But up to the present time, the Russians of all classes 
are too fundamentally barbarous to find any enjoyment in 
scientific pursuits or head-work of any kind (except intrigues), 
and, therefore, almost all their distinguished men in the military 
service are either foreigners, or, what nearly amounts to the same, 
"ostze'iski," Germans from the Baltic provinces. So was the last 
and most distinguished specimen of this class, General Todtleben, 
the chief engineer at Sebastopol, who died in July from the effects 
of a wound. 312 He was certainly the cleverest man at his trade in 
the whole siege, either in the Russian or the Allied camp; but he 
was a Baltic German, of Prussian extraction. 

=====第474页=====
444 Frederick Engels 
In this manner the Russian army has among its officers the very 
best and the very worst men, only that the former are present in 
an infinitesimally small proportion. What the Russian government 
thinks of its officers it has plainly and unmistakably shown in its 
own tactical regulations. These regulations do not merely prescribe 
a general mode of placing a brigade, division, or army-corps in 
action, a so-called "normal disposition," which the commander is 
expected to vary according to the ground and other circumstances, 
but they prescribe different normal dispositions for all the 
different cases possible, leaving the general no choice whatever, 
and tying him down in a manner which, as much as possible, takes 
all responsibility from his shoulders. An army-corps, for instance, 
can be arranged, in battle, in five different ways, according to the 
regulations; and, at the Alma, the Russians were actually arrayed 
according to one of them—the third disposition—and, of course, 
they were beaten. This mania of prescribing abstract rules for all 
possible cases, leaves so little liberty of action to the commander, 
and even forbids him to use advantages of ground to such an 
extent, that a Prussian general in criticising it says: 
"Such a system of regulations can be tolerated in an army, only, the majority of 
whose generals are so imbecile, that the government cannot safely intrust them 
with an unconditional command, or leave them to their own judgment." 
The Russian soldier is one of the bravest men in Europe. His 
tenacity almost equals that of the English and of certain Austrian 
battalions. As John Bull boasts of  himself,  he does not know when 
he is beaten. Russian squares of infantry have resisted, and fought 
hand to hand, a long while after the cavalry had broken them; 
and it has always been found easier to shoot them down than to 
drive them back. Sir George Cathcart, who saw them in 1813 and 
'14,a as allies, and in 1854 in the Crimea, as enemies, gives them 
the honorable testimonial that they are "incapable of panic." Beside 
this, the Russian soldier is well made, healthy, a good marcher, a 
man of few wants, who can eat and drink almost anything, 
and more obedient to his officers than any other soldier in the 
world. And yet the Russian army is not much to boast of. Never, 
since Russia was Russia, have the Russians won a single battle 
against either Germans, French, Poles, or English, without being 
vastly superior in numbers. At even odds, they have always been 
beaten by any army, except Turks or Prussians; and at Citate 
G. Cathcart, Commentaries on the War in Russia and Germany in 1812 and 
1813.—Ed. 

=====第475页=====
The Armies of Europe 445 
and Silistria,313 the Turks, though inferior in numbers, defeated 
them. 
The Russians are, above all things, the clumsiest soldiers in the 
world. They are not fit either for light infantry or for light cavalry 
duty. The Cossacks, capital light cavalry as they are in some 
respects, are so unreliable generally, that before the enemy a 
second line of out-posts is always placed in the rear of the line of 
Cossack out-posts. Beside, the Cossacks are totally unfit for a 
charge. As to the regular troops, infantry and cavalry, they are not 
fit to act in skirmishing order. The Russian, imitator as he is in 
everything, will do anything if ordered or compelled, but will do 
nothing if he has to act upon his own responsibility; in fact, this 
term can hardly be applied to a being who never knew what 
responsibility was, and who will go to be shot at with the same 
passive obedience as if he were ordered to pump water, or to whip 
a comrade. To expect from the Russian soldier, when acting on 
out-post duty or in skirmishing order, the rapid glance of the 
Frenchman, or the plain common sense of the German, would be 
an insult to him. What he requires is command—clear, distinct 
command—and if he does not get it, he will perhaps not go 
backwards, but he will certainly not go forwards, nor use his own 
senses. 
The cavalry, though a deal of expense and care has been 
bestowed upon it, has never been excellent. Neither in the wars 
against the French, nor in that against Poland, did the cavalry 
distinguish  itself.  The passive, patient, enduring obedience of the 
Russians is not what is wanted in cavalry. The first quality of the 
horseman is just what the Russian lacks most: "dash." Thus, when 
the 600 English dragoons, with all the daring and pluck of real 
horsemen, dashed at the numerically far superior Russians at 
Balaklava, they rode down before them Russian artillery, Cossacks, 
hussars, lancers, until they came to the solid columns of the 
infantry; then they had to turn back; yet, in that cavalry action, it 
is still doubtful who deserves to be called the victor. If such a 
senseless charge had been made against any other army, not a 
man would have returned; the enemy would have taken them in 
flank and rear, and cut them down singly. But the Russian 
horsemen actually awaited them standing, and were ridden down 
before they thought of moving their horses! Surely, if anything 
should condemn the Russian regular cavalry, it is such a fact as 
this. 
The artillery is provided with a material of unequal quality, but 
where it has good guns, it will do its duty well. It will display great 

=====第476页=====
446 Frederick Engels 
bravery in the field, but it will always be found wanting in 
intelligence. A Russian battery which has lost its officers is good for 
nothing; and while the officers live, it can only take the positions, 
often absurd, prescribed by the regulations. When besieged in a 
fortress where patient endurance and constant exposure to danger 
are required, the Russian artillery will distinguish  itself,  not so 
much by precision of aim, as by devotion to duty and steadiness 
under fire. The whole of the siege of Sebastopol proves this. 
In the artillery and engineers, however, are to be found those 
well-educated officers whom Russia shows off before Europe, and 
who are really encouraged to use their talents freely. While in 
Prussia, for instance, the best men, when subalterns, have usually 
been so thwarted by their superiors, and while all their proposed 
improvements have been snubbed as presumptuous attempts at 
innovation, so that many of them have had to seek employment in 
Turkey, where they have made the regular artillery one of the 
best in Europe — in Russia, all such men are encouraged, and, if 
they distinguish themselves, make a rapid and brilliant career. 
Diebitsch and Paskiewitsch were generals at twenty-nine and 
thirty years of age, and Todtleben, at Sebastopol, in less 
than eight months was advanced from a captain to a major-
general. 
The great boast of the Russians is their infantry. It is of very 
great solidity, and, used in line or column, or behind breastworks, 
will always be awkward to deal with. But here its good qualities 
end. Almost totally unfit for light infantry duty (the so-called 
chasseurs are light infantry in name only, and the eight battalions 
of rifles attached to the line corps are the only real light infantry 
in the service), usually bad marksmen, good but slow marchers, 
their columns are generally so badly placed that it will always be 
possible to pound them well with artillery before they are charged. 
The "normal dispositions," from which the generals dare not 
deviate, contribute a great deal toward this. At the Alma, for 
instance, the British artillery made terrible havoc amongst the 
Russian columns long before the equally clumsy British line had 
formed, defiled across the river and re-formed for the charge. But 
even the boast of solid tenacity must be taken with a considerable 
grain of salt, since at Inkermann  8,000  British infantry, surprised 
in a position but incompletely and slovenly occupied, resisted, in 
hand to hand fight, the 15,000 Russians brought against them for 
more than four hours, and actually repelled every renewed attack. 
This battle must have shown the Russians that, upon their own 
favorite ground, they had found their masters. It was the bravery 

=====第477页=====
The Armies of Europe 447 
of the  British soldiers  and the  intelligence  and  presence  of mind 
of both non-commissioned officers  and  soldiers which defeated  all 
the attempts  of the  Russians;  and  from this battle  we  must 
consider  as justified,  the  claim  of the  British  to the  title of the  first 
infantry  of the  line in the  world. 
The clothing  of the  Russian army  is a  pretty close imitation  of 
that of the  Prussians. Their accoutrements  are  very badly 
adjusted;  not  only  the  belts  for  bayonets  and  cartridge pouch  are 
crossed over  the  chest,  but  also  the  straps which hold  the 
knapsack. There  are,  however, some alterations being made just 
now,  but  whether they affect this point,  we do not  know.  The 
small arms  are  very clumsy,  and  have only been lately provided 
with percussion caps;  a Russian musket  is the  heaviest  and  most 
unwieldy thing  of its  kind.  The  cavalry swords  are of a bad  model 
and badly tempered.  Of the  guns,  the new  ones taken  in the 
Crimea,  are  described  as very good  and of  excellent workmanship; 
but whether that  is uniformly  the  case  is very doubtful. 
Finally,  the  Russian army still bears  the  stamp  of an  institution 
in advance  of the  general state  of civilization  of the  country,  and 
has all the  disadvantages  and  drawbacks  of such hot-house 
creations.  In petty warfare,  the  Cossacks  are the  only troops  to be 
feared, from their activity  and  indefatigability;  but  their love  of 
drink  and  plunder makes them very unreliable  for  their comman­
der. In grand  war, the  slowness with which  the  Russians move will 
make their strategic maneuvers little  to be  feared, unless they have 
to deal with such negligent opponents  as the  English were last 
autumn.  In a  pitched battle, they will  be obstinate opponents  to 
the soldiers,  but not  very troublesome  to the  generals  who  attack 
them. Their dispositions  are  generally very simple, founded upon 
their prescribed normal rules,  and  easy  to be  guessed  at; while  the 
want  of intelligence  in both general  and  field officers,  and the 
clumsiness  of the  troops, make  it a  matter  of great risk  for them  to 
undertake important maneuvers  on a  battle field. 
III. THE  SMALLER ARMIES  OF  GERMANY 
Bavaria  has two  army-corps,  of two  divisions each. Each division 
contains  two  brigades  of infantry (four regiments  of infantry  and 
one battalion  of rifles),  one  brigade  of cavalry, containing  two 
regiments,  and  three foot  and one  horse batteries. Each army-
corps  has,  beside,  a general reserve  of artillery,  of six  foot 
batteries,  and a  detachment  of sappers  and  miners. Thus,  the 

=====第478页=====
448 Frederick Engels 
whole army forms sixteen regiments of three battalions each, with 
six battalions of rifles, in all, fifty-four battalions; two regiments of 
cuirassiers, and six.of light dragoons, in all, forty-eight squadrons; 
two regiments of foot artillery (of six six-pounder and six 
twelve-pounder batteries each), and one of horse artillery (four 
six-pounder batteries), in all, twenty-eight batteries of eight guns 
each, making 224 guns, beside six companies of garrison artillery, 
and twelve train companies; there are also one regiment of 
engineers, of eight companies, and two sanitary companies. The 
whole strength, on the war-footing, is 72,000 men, beside a 
reserve and landwehr, the cadres of which, however, do not 
exist. 
Of the army of the Germanic Confederation,314  Austria fur­
nishes the 1st, 2d, and 3d corps; Prussia the 4th, 5th, and 6th; 
Bavaria the 7th. The 8th corps is furnished by Württemberg, 
Baden, and Hesse-Darmstadt. 
Württemberg has eight regiments (sixteen battalions) of infan­
try, four of cavalry (sixteen squadrons), one regiment of artillery 
(four foot and three horse-batteries, with forty-eight guns). Total, 
about 19,000 men on the war-footing. 
Baden keeps four regiments (eight battalions), two fusileer 
battalions, one rifle battalion; in all, ten battalions of infantry, with 
three regiments, or twelve squadrons of cavalry, and four foot and 
five horse-batteries, containing together forty guns. Total, on the 
war-footing, 15,000 men. 
Hesse-Darmstadt has four regiments or eight battalions of 
infantry, one regiment or six squadrons of light horse, and three 
batteries of artillery (one mounted) of eighteen guns. Total, 
10,000 men. 
The only peculiarity of the 7th and 8th army-corps is, that they 
have adopted the French gun-carriage for the artillery. The 9th 
federal army corps is formed by the kingdom of Saxony, which 
furnishes one division, and Electoral Hesse and Nassau, which 
furnish the second. 
The quota of Saxony is four brigades of infantry, of four 
battalions each, and one of rifles, of four battalions; beside four 
battalions of the line, and one battalion of rifles as a reserve, still 
unorganized; four regiments of light horse, of five squadrons 
each; one artillery regiment, six foot and two horse-batteries. 
Total, twenty battalions of infantry, twenty squadrons and fifty 
guns;  or 24,500 men on the war-footing. In Electoral Hesse there 
are four regiments or eight battalions, with one battalion of 
fusileers and one of rifles; two squadrons of cuirassiers, seven 

=====第479页=====
The Armies of Europe 449 
squadrons of hussars; three batteries, of which one of horse 
artillery. Total, ten battalions, nine squadrons, nineteen guns, and 
12,000 men on the war-footing. Nassau affords seven battalions, 2 
batteries, or 7,000 men, and twelve guns, on the war-footing. 
The 10th army-corps consists of Hanover and Brunswick, which 
maintain the first division; and of Mecklenburg, Holstein, Olden­
burg, and the Hanse towns, a which furnish the second division. 
Hanover furnishes eight regiments or sixteen battalions, and four 
battalions of light infantry; six regiments or twenty-four squadrons 
of cavalry, and four foot and two horse-batteries. Total, 22,000 
men, and thirty-six guns. The artillery is on the English model. 
Brunswick furnishes five battalions, four squadrons, and twelve 
guns,  in all,  5,300  men. The small States of the second division are 
not worth mentioning. 
Finally, the smallest of the small fry of German States form a 
reserve division, with which the entire army of the German 
Confederation, on the war-footing, may be summed up in a table, 
as follows: — 
I. CONTINGENTS. II. RESERVE CONTINGENTS. 
Inf. Cav. G'ns Total. Inf. Cav. G'ns Total. 
Austria, 73,501 13,546 192 94,822 36,750 6,773 96 47,411 
Prussia, 61,629 11,355 160 79,484 30,834  5,660  80 39,74? 
Bavaria, 27,566  5,086  72 35,600 13,793 2,543 36 17,800 
Eighth Corps, 23,369 4,308 60 30,150 11,685 2,154 32 15,075 
Ninth Corps, 19,294 2,887 50 24,254 9,702 1,446 25 12,136 
Tenth Corps, 22,246 3,572 58 28,067 11,107 1,788 29 14,019 
Reserve 
Division, 11,116 11,116  5,584 5,584 
Total, 238,721 40,754 592 303,493 119,455 20,364 298 151,767 
This of course does not represent the real armed force of the 
Confederation, as, in case of need, Prussia, Austria, and Bavaria 
would furnish far more than the above contingents. The troops of 
the 10th corps and reserve division, perhaps, also, those of the 9th 
corps,  would form the garrisons, so as not to interfere, by their 
The free cities of Bremen, Hamburg and Lübeck. — Ed. 
16—3754 

=====第480页=====
450 Frederick Engels 
multifarious organizations and peculiarities, with the rapidity of 
field operations. The military qualities of these armies are more or 
less the same as those of the Austrian and Prussian soldiers; but, 
of course, these small bodies furnish no occasion for developing 
military talents, and many old-fashioned arrangements exist 
among them. 
In a third and concluding article, we shall consider the Spanish, 
Sardinian, Turkish and other armies of Europe. 

=====第481页=====
451 
[THIRD ARTICLE] 
[Putnam's Monthly, No. XXXVI, December 1855] 
I. THE TURKISH ARMY 
The Turkish army, at the beginning of the present war, was in a 
higher state of efficiency than it had ever reached before. The 
various attempts at reorganization and reform made since the 
accession of Mahmud, since the massacre of the Janissaries, and 
especially since the peace of Adrianople, had been consolidated 
and systematized. 315 The first and greatest obstacle—the indepen­
dent position of the pashas in command of distant provinces—had 
been removed, to a great extent, and, upon the whole, the pashas 
were reduced to a discipline somewhat approaching that of 
European district commanders. But their ignorance, insolence, 
and rapacity remained in as full vigor as in the best days of Asiatic 
satrap rule; and if, for the last twenty years, we had heard little of 
revolts of pashas, we have heard enough of provinces in revolt 
against their greedy governors, who, originally the lowest domestic 
slaves and "men of all work," profited by their new position to 
heap up fortunes by exactions, bribes, and wholesale embezzle­
ment of the public money. That, under such a state of things, the 
organization of the army must, to a great extent, exist on paper 
only, is evident. 
The Turkish army consists of the regular active army (Nizam), 
the reserve (Redif), the irregular troops, and the auxiliary corps of 
the vassal states. 
The Nizam is composed of six corps (Orders), each of which is 
raised in the district it occupies, similar to the army-corps in 
Prussia, each of which is located in the province from which it 
recruits  itself.  Altogether the organization of the Turkish Nizam 
16* 

=====第482页=====
452 Frederick Engels 
and Redif is, as we shall see, copied from the Prussian model. The 
six Orders have their head-quarters in Constantinople, Shumla, 
Toli-Monatzir, Erzeroum, Bagdad, and Aleppo. Each of them 
should be commanded by a Mushir (field marshal), and should 
consist of two divisions or six brigades, formed by six regiments of 
infantry, four of cavalry, and one of artillery. 
The infantry and cavalry are organized upon the French, the 
artillery upon the Prussian system. 
A regiment of infantry is composed of four battalions of eight 
companies each, and should count, when on its full comple­
ment, 3,250 men, inclusive of officers and  staff,  or 800 men 
per battalion; the general strength, however, before the war, 
seldom exceeded 700 men, and in Asia was almos*t always much 
less. 
A cavalry regiment consists of four squadrons of lancers, and 
two squadrons of chasseurs, each squadron to contain 151 men; in 
general, the effective strength was here even more below the 
standard than in the infantry. 
Each artillery regiment consists of six horse and nine foot 
batteries, of four guns each, thus representing a total of sixty 
guns. 
Every order was thus expected to number 19,500 infantry, 3,700 
cavalry, and sixty guns. In reality, however, from 20,000 to 21,000 
men in all is the utmost ever reached. 
Beside the six Orders, there are four artillery regiments (one of 
reserve, and three of garrison artillery), two regiments of sappers 
and miners, and three special detachments of infantry sent to 
Candia, to Tunis, and Tripoli, of a total strength of 16,000 men. 
The total strength of the Nizam, or regular standing army, 
before the war, should, therefore, have been as follows: 
36 reg. of infant, averaging 2,500—90,000 
24 " cavalry" 660-670—16,000 
7 " field artillery 9,000 
3 " garrison" 3,400 
2 " sappers and miners 1,600 
Detached corps 16,000 
136,000 
The soldiers, after having served five years in the Nizam, are 
dismissed to their homes, and form, for the seven following years, 

=====第483页=====
The Armies of Europe 453 
part of the Redif or reserve. This reserve counts as many orders, 
divisions, brigades, regiments, etc., as the standing army; in fact, it 
is to the Nizam what in Prussia the first levy of the landwehr is to 
the line, with the sole exception, that in Prussia, in larger masses 
than brigades, line and landwehr are always mixed, while in the 
Turkish organization they are to be kept separate. The officers 
and non-commissioned officers of the Redif are constantly 
assembled at the dépôts, and once a year the Redif are called in 
for exercise, during which time, they receive the same pay and 
rations as the line. But such an organization, presupposing a 
well-regulated civil administration, and a civilized state of society, 
far from having been reached in Turkey, must in a great degree exist 
on paper only, and if we count, therefore, the Redif as equal in 
numbers to the Nizam, we shall certainly put it down at its highest 
possible figure. 
The auxiliary contingents consist of troops from: 
1. The Danubian Principalities, 6,000 men. 
2. Servia 20,000 " 
3. Bosnia and Herzegovina 30,000 " 
4. Upper Albania, 10,000 " 
5. Egypt, 40,000 " 
6. Tunis and Tripoli, 10,000 " 
Total, about 116,000 
To these troops must be added the volunteer Bashi Bazouks, 
whom Asia Minor, Kurdistan, and Syria can furnish in great 
numbers. They are the last remnant of that host of irregular 
troops which, in past centuries, flooded Hungary, and twice 
appeared before Vienna.316 Mostly cavalry, their inferiority, even 
to the worst-equipped European horseman, has been proved by 
two centuries of all but constant defeats. Their self-confidence has 
disappeared, and now they serve no other purpose than to swarm 
around the army, eating up and wasting the resources upon which 
the regular body should subsist. Their love of plunder and 
unreliable temper make them even unfit for that active outpost 
duty which the Russians expect from their Cossacks; for the Bashi 
Bazouks, when most wanted, are least to be found. In this present 
war, it has, therefore, been found desirable to keep their numbers 

=====第484页=====
454 Frederick Engels 
down, and we do not think that there were ever collected more 
than 50,000 of them. 
Thus the numerical strength of the Turkish army, at the 
beginning of the war, may be estimated as follows: 
Nizam, 136,000 
Redif,  136,000 
Auxiliaries, regulars from Egypt and 
Tunis,  50,000 
Do. irregulars, Bosnia and Albania, 40,000 
Bashi Bazouks, 50,000 
Total, 412,000 
But again, from this sum total several deductions have to be 
made. That the Orders stationed in Europe were in pretty good 
condition, and as near their full complement as can be expected in 
Turkey, seems pretty certain; but in Asia, in the distant provinces 
where the Mussulman population predominates, the men might be 
ready, while neither arms, nor equipments, nor stores of 
ammunition were forthcoming. The Danubian army was formed 
from the three European Orders principally. They were the 
nucleus around which the European Redifs, the Order of Syria, 
or, at least, a good part of it, and a number of Arnauts,3  Bosnians, 
and Bashi Bazouks were collected. Yet the excessive caution of 
Omer Pasha—his constant unwillingness up to the present time to 
expose his troops in the field—is the best proof that he has but a 
limited confidence in the capabilities of this, the only good regular 
army Turkey ever possessed. But in Asia, where the old Turkish 
system of embezzlement and laziness was still in full blossom, the 
two Orders of the Nizam, the whole of the Redifs, and the mass of 
the irregulars were unable to withstand a Russian army vastly 
inferior in numbers; in every battle they were beaten, and, at the 
end of the campaign of 1854, the Asiatic army of Turkey had all 
but ceased to exist. There, then, it is clear that not only the details 
of the organization, but a great proportion of the troops 
themselves had no real existence. The want of arms, equipments, 
ammunition, and provisions, was the constant complaint of the 
foreign officers and newspaper correspondents in Kars and 
Erzeroum; and they plainly stated that nothing but the indolence, 
incapacity, and rapacity of the Pashas was the cause of it. The 
money was duly sent to them, but they always appropriated it to 
their own uses. 
Turkish name for Albanians.— Ed. 

=====第485页=====
The Armies of Europe 455 
The equipment of the Turkish regular soldier is on the whole 
imitated from the western armies, the only distinction being the 
red fez or skull-cap, which is about the worst head-gear possible in 
that climate, where, during the heats of summer, it causes 
frequent sun-strokes. The quality of the articles furnished is bad, 
and the clothing has to stand longer than can be expected, in 
consequence of the officers generally pocketing the money 
destined for its renewal. The arms are of an inferior description, 
both for the infantry and cavalry; the artillery alone has very good 
field-guns, cast at Constantinople, under the direction of Euro­
pean officers and civil engineers. 
The Turk, in  himself,  is not a bad soldier. He is naturally brave, 
extremely hardy and patient, and, under certain circumstances, 
docile. European officers who have once gained his confidence, 
can rely upon him, as witness Grach and Butler at Silistria, and 
Iskender Bey (Ilinski) in Wallachia. But these are exceptions. On 
the whole, the innate hatred of the Turk for the "Giaour" is so 
indelible, and his habits and ideas are so different from those of a 
European, that, so long as his remains the ruling race in the 
country, he will not submit to men whom he inwardly despises as 
incommensurably his inferiors. This repugnance is extended to 
the very organization of the army, ever since it has been put upon 
a European footing. The common Turk hates Giaour institutions 
as much as the Giaours themselves. Then the strict discipline, the 
regulated activity, the constant attention required in a modern 
army are things utterly hateful to the lazy, contemplative, fatalist 
Turk. The officers, even, will rather allow the army to be beaten 
than exert themselves, and use their own senses. This is one of the 
worst features in the Turkish army, and alone would suffice to 
make it unfit for any offensive campaign. 
The private and non-commissioned soldiers are recruited by 
volunteers and the ballot; the lower grades of officers are 
sometimes filled by men promoted from the ranks, but generally 
by the camp-followers and domestic servants, the tshibukdjis and 
kafeidjis of the higher officers. The military schools at Constan­
tinople not very good in themselves, cannot furnish young men 
enough for the vacancies. As to the higher ranks, a system of 
favoritism exists, of which the western nations have no idea. Most 
of the generals were originally Circassian slaves, the mignons of 
some great man in the days of their youth. Utter ignorance, 
incapacity, and self-sufficiency rule supreme, and court-intrigue is 
the principal means of advancement. Even the few European 
generals (renegades) in the service would not have been accepted, 

=====第486页=====
456 Frederick Engels 
if they had not been absolutely necessary to prevent the whole 
machine from falling to pieces. As it is, they have been 
indiscriminately taken, both from men of real merit and mere 
adventurers. 
At present, after three campaigns, no Turkish army can be said 
to exist, except the 80,000 men of Omer Pasha's original army, 
part of which is stationed on the Danube, and part in the Crimea. 
The Asiatic army consists of about 25,000 rabble, unfit for the 
field, and demoralized by defeat. The remainder of the 400,000 
men are gone nobody knows where; killed in the field or by 
sickness, invalided, disbanded, or turned into robbers. Very likely 
this will be the last Turkish army of all; for, to recover from the 
shock received by her alliance with England and France, is more 
than can be expected from Turkey. 
The time is gone by when the contests of Oltenitza317 and Citate 
created an exaggerated enthusiasm for Turkish bravery. The 
stubborn inactivity of Omer Pasha sufficed to raise doubts as to 
their other military qualifications, which not even the brilliant 
defense of Silistria could entirely dispel; the defeats in Asia, the 
flight of Balaklava, the strictly defensive attitude of the Turks in 
Eupatoria, and their complete inactivity in the camp before 
Sebastopol have reduced the general estimate of their military 
capabilities to a proper level. The Turkish army was so constituted 
that a judgment on its general value was hitherto completely 
impossible. There were, no doubt, some very brave and well-
managed regiments, capable of any duty, but they were greatly in 
the minority. The great mass of the infantry lacked cohesion, and 
was, therefore, unfit for field-duty, though good behind intrench-
ments. The regular cavalry was decidedly inferior to that of any 
European power. The artillery was by far the best portion of the 
service, and the field-regiments in a high state of efficiency; the 
men were as if born for their work, though no doubt the officers 
left much to desire. The Redifs appear to have suffered from a 
general want of organization, though the men no doubt were 
willing to do their best. Of the irregulars, the Arnauts and 
Bosnians were capital guerrillas, but nothing more, best used in 
defending fortifications; while the Bashi Bazouks were all but 
worthless, and even worse than that. The Egyptian contingent 
appears to have been about on a level with the Turkish Nizam, the 
Tunisian nearly unfit for anything. With such a motley army, so 
badly officered and subject to such maladministration, no wonder 
it is all but ruined in three campaigns. 

=====第487页=====
The Armies of Europe 457 
II. THE SARDINIAN ARMY 
This army is composed of ten brigades of infantry, ten 
battalions of rifles, four brigades of cavalry, three regiments of 
artillery, one regiment of sappers and miners, a corps of 
carabineers (police troops), and the light horse in the island of 
Sardinia. 
The ten brigades of infantry consist of one brigade of guards, 
four battalions of grenadiers, two battalions of chasseurs, and nine 
brigades of the line, equal to eighteen regiments of three 
battalions each. To these are added ten battalions of rifles 
(bersaglieri), one for every brigade, thus constituting a proportion 
of light infantry, actually trained, far stronger than in any other 
army. 
There is, besides, a dépôt battalion for every regiment. 
Since 1849, the strength of the battalions has been very much 
reduced, from financial motives. On the war-footing, a battalion 
should number about  1,000,  but on the peace-footing there are 
no more than about 400 men. The remainder have been dismissed 
on indefinite furlough. 
The cavalry counts four regiments of heavy, and five of light 
cavalry. Every regiment has four field and one dépôt-squadron. 
On the war-footing, a regiment should count about 800 men in 
the four field-squadrons, but on the peace-footing there are 
scarcely 600. 
The three regiments of artillery consist of one regiment of 
workmen and artificers, one of garrison artillery (twelve com­
panies), and one of field-artillery (six foot, two horse, two heavy 
batteries of eight guns each). The light batteries have eight lb. 
guns and twenty-four lb. howitzers, the heavy batteries sixteen lb. 
guns;  in all eighty guns. 
The regiment of sappers and miners has ten companies, or 
about 1,100 men. The carbineers (horse and foot) are very 
numerous for such a small kingdom, and number about 3,200 
men. The light horse, doing duty as police troops in the island of 
Sardinia, figure about 1,100 strong. 
The Sardinian army, in the first campaign against Austria, in 
1848,  certainly reached the strength of 70,000 men. In 1849, it 
was very near 130,000.318 Afterwards it was reduced to about 
45,000 men. What it is now it is impossible to say, but there is no 
doubt that, since the conclusion of the treaty with England and 
France,319 it has been again increased. 
This great elasticity of the Piedmontese army, which allows it to 

=====第488页=====
458 Frederick Engels 
increase or diminish the numbers present under arms at any time, 
arises from a system of recruiting very nearly akin to that of 
Prussia; and, indeed, Sardinia may be called, in many respects, the 
Prussia of Italy. There is in the Sardinian states a similar 
obligation for every citizen to serve in the army, though, unlike 
Prussia, substitutes are allowed; and the time over which this 
obligation extends, consists, as in Prussia, of a period of actual 
service and another period, during which the soldier dismissed 
from the ranks remains in the reserve, and is liable to be called in 
again in time of war. The system is something between the 
Prussian method and that of Belgium and the minor German 
states.  Thus, by calling in the reserves, the infantry, from about 
30,000 men, may be raised to 80,000, and even more. The cavalry 
and field artillery would undergo but a small augmentation, as in 
these arms the soldiers generally have to remain with the 
regiments during the whole period of their service. 
The Piedmontese army is as fine and soldier-like a body of men 
as any in Europe. Like the French, they are small in size, especially 
the infantry; their guards do not average even five feet four 
inches; but what with their tasteful dress, military bearing, 
well-knit but agile frames, and fine Italian features, they look 
better than many a body of bigger men. The dress and 
equipments are, with the infantry of the line and guards, upon the 
French principle, with a few details adopted from the Austrians. 
The bersaglieri have a costume of their own, a little sailor's hat 
with a long hanging plume of cock-feathers and a brown tunic. 
The cavalry wear short brown jackets, just covering the hip-bone. 
The percussion-musket is the general arm of the infantry; the 
bersaglieri have short Tyrolese rifles, good and useful weapons, 
but inferior to the Minié in every respect. The first rank of the 
cavalry used to be armed with lances; whether this is still the case 
with the light-horse we cannot say. The eight lb. calibre for the 
horse and light-foot batteries gave them the same advantage over 
the other continental armies which the French had while they 
preserved this calibre; but their heavy batteries, carrying sixteen 
pounders, rendered them the heaviest field artillery of the 
continent. That these guns, when once in position, can do 
excellent service, they have shown on the Chernaya, 320 where their 
accurate firing contributed a great deal to the success of the Allies, 
and was universally admired. 
Of all the Italian states, Piedmont is the best situated for 
creating a good army. The plains of the Po and its tributaries 
produce capital horses, and a fine, tall race of men, the tallest of 

=====第489页=====
The Armies of Europe 459 
all Italians, exceedingly well-adapted for cavalry and heavy 
artillery service. The mountains, which surround these plains on 
three sides, north, west, and south, are inhabited by a hardy 
people, less in size, but strong and active, industrious and 
sharp-witted, like all mountaineers. It is these that form the staple 
of the infantry, and especially of the bersaglieri, a body of troops 
nearly equaling the Chasseurs de Vincennes in training, but 
certainly surpassing them in bodily strength and endurance. 
The military institutions of Piedmont are, upon the whole, very 
good, and, in consequence, the officers bear a high character. So 
late as 1846, however, the influence of the aristocracy and the 
clergy had a great deal to do with their appointment. Up to that 
period, Charles Albert knew but two means of governing—the 
clergy and the army; in fact, it was a general saying in other parts 
of Italy, that in Piedmont, out of three men you met in the street, 
one was a soldier, the second a monk, and only every third man a 
civilian. At present, of course, this has been done away with; the 
priests have less than no influence, and, though the nobility 
preserve many officers' commissions, the wars of 1848 and '49 
have stamped a certain democratic character upon the army which 
it will not be easy to destroy. Some British Crimean newspaper 
correspondents have stated that the Piedmontese officers were 
almost all "gentlemen by birth," but so far from this being the 
case,  we know, personally, more than one Piedmontese officer who 
rose from the ranks, and can safely assert that the mass of the 
captains and lieutenants are now composed of men who either 
gained their epaulettes by bravery against the Austrians, or who at 
least are not connected with the aristocracy. 
We think that the greatest compliment that can be paid to the 
Piedmontese army is contained in the opinion expressed by one of 
its late opponents, General Schönhals, quarter-master-general of 
the Austrian army in 1848 and '49. In his "Recollections of the 
Italian Campaigns", this general, one of the best officers of the 
Austrian army, and a man violently opposed in every way to 
anything smacking of Italian independence, treats the Piedmon­
tese army throughout with the highest respect. 
"Their artillery [...]," he says, "consists of picked men, under good and 
well-informed officers; the matériel is good, and the calibre is superior to ours [...]." 
"The cavalry is no contemptible arm; the first rank carry lances, but as a very adroit 
rider only can well manage this arm, we should not like to say that this innovation was 
exactly an improvement. Their school of equitation, however, [...] is very good." "At 
Santa Lucia, both parties fought with astonishing bravery. The Piedmontese attacked 
with great vivacity and impetuosity—both Piedmontese and Austrians performed 

=====第490页=====
460 Frederick Engels 
many feats of great personal valor." "The Piedmontese sn'ny [...] has a right to 
mention the day of Novara without a blush,"—and so on.a 
In the same way, the Prussian General Willisen, who assisted in 
part in the campaign of 1848, and who is no friend of Italian 
independence, speaks highly of the Piedmontese army.b 
Ever since 1848, a certain party in Italy has looked upon the 
king of Sardinia as the future chief of the whole peninsula. 
Though far from participating in that opinion, we still believe that 
whenever Italy shall reconquer her freedom, the Piedmontese 
forces will be the principal military instrument in attaining that 
object, and will, at the same time, form the nucleus of the future 
Italian army. It may undergo, before that happens, more than one 
revolution in its own bosom, but the excellent military elements it 
contains will survive all this and will even gain by being merged in 
a really national army. 
III. THE SMALLER ITALIAN ARMIES 
The papal army hardly exists except on paper. The battalions 
and squadrons are never complete, and form but a weak division. 
There is, besides, a regiment of Swiss guards, the only body on 
which the government can place any reliance. The Tuscan, 
Parmesan and Modenese armies are too insignificant to be 
mentioned here; suffice it to say that they are organized, upon the 
whole, on the Austrian model. There is, besides, the Neapolitan 
army, of which, too, the least said the sooner mended. It has never 
shone conspicuously before the enemy, and, whether fighting for 
the king, as in 1799, or for a constitution, as in 1821, it always 
distinguished itself by running away.321 Even in 1848 and J 49, the 
native Neapolitan army was everywhere beaten by the insurgents, 
and, had it not been for the Swiss, King Bomba c would not now 
be on his throne. During the siege of Rome, Garibaldi advanced 
with a handful of men against the Neapolitan division and beat it 
twice. 322 The army of Naples, on the peace-footing, is estimated at 
26,000 or 27,000 men, but in 1848 it is stated to have num­
bered nearly 49,000 men, and the full footing should raise it to 
64,000. Of all these troops, the Swiss are alone worth mentioning. 
Engels is quoting from the anonymously published book by C. Schönhals, 
Erinnerungen eines  österreichischen  Veteranen aus dem italienischen Kriege der Jahre 1848 
und 1849, Bd. I, S. 166, 167 and 223; Bd. II, S. 239.— Ed. 
A reference to W. Willisen's book Der Italienische Feldzug  des Jahres 1848.— Ed. 
Ferdinand II. He was nicknamed King Bomba after the bombardment of 
Messina by Neapolitan troops in 1848.— Ed. 

=====第491页=====
The Armies of Europe 461 
They consist of four regiments, of two battalions each, and 
should number, when complete, 600 men per battalion, or 4,800 
men. But the cadres are now overfilled, so that each battalion is 
about 1,000 strong (the fourth, or Bernese regiment, alone 
mustering 2,150), and the whole number may be estimated at 
nearly 9,000. These are really first-rate troops, commanded by offic­
ers of their own country, and independent, in their internal organ­
ization and administration, from the government of Naples. They 
were first taken into pay in 1824 or '25, when the king,a no longer 
trusting the army that so shortly before had revolted, found it neces­
sary to surround himself with a strong body-guard. The treaties 
or "capitulations," as they were called, were concluded with the 
different cantons for thirty years; the Swiss articles of war and the 
Swiss military organization were secured to the troops; the pay was 
three-fold that of the native Neapolitan soldiers; the troops were 
recruited by volunteers from each canton, where recruiting offices 
were established. Pensions were secured to retiring officers, 
veterans, and the wounded. If, at the expiration of the thirty 
years,  the capitulation was not renewed, the regiments were to be 
broken up. The present Swiss constitution323  forbids recruiting for 
foreign service, and the capitulations, therefore, were canceled 
after 1848; recruiting was stopped, at least ostensibly, in Switzer­
land, but at Chiasso and other points of Lombardy, dépôts were 
established, and many a recruiting agent secretly continued his 
business on Swiss soil. So eager was the Neapolitan government 
for recruits, that it did not refuse to accept the refuse of the 
political refugees then in Switzerland. The King of Naples, under 
these circumstances, confirmed the privileges granted to the Swiss 
soldiers by the capitulations, and in August last, when the thirty 
years had elapsed, by a special decree again prolonged these 
privileges for so long a time as the Swiss should remain in his 
service. 
IV. THE SWISS ARMY 
In Switzerland no national standing army exists. Every Swiss is 
compelled to serve in the militia, if able-bodied; and this mass is 
divided into three levies (Auszug-, erstes and zweites Aufgebot), 
according to age. The young men, during the first years of 
service, are called out separately for drill, and collected from time 
Ferdinand I.— Ed. 
Men under arms, first levy and second levy.— Ed. 

=====第492页=====
462 Frederick Engels 
to time in camps; but whoever has seen the awkward gait and 
uncomfortable appearance of a Swiss squad, or heard the jokes 
they crack with the drill-sergeant while under drill, must at once 
see that the military qualities of the men are but very poorly 
developed. Of the soldierly capabilities of this militia we can only 
judge by the one example of the Sonderbund war, in 1847, 324 
which campaign is distinguished by the extremely small number of 
casualties in proportion to the forces engaged. The organization of 
the militia is almost entirely in the hands of the various cantonal 
governments; and, though its general form is fixed by federal 
laws,  and a federal staff is at the head of the whole, this system 
cannot fail to create confusion and want of uniformity, while it 
must almost necessarily prevent a proper accumulation of stores, 
the introduction of improvements, and the permanent fortification 
of important points, especially on the side where Switzerland is 
weak, toward Germany. 
The Swiss, like all mountaineers, make capital soldiers when 
drilled; and, wherever they have served as regular troops under 
foreign banners, they have fought exceedingly well. But being 
rather slow-headed, they need drilling much more, indeed, than 
either French or North Germans, to give them confidence in 
themselves^ and cohesion. It is possible that national feeling might 
possibly replace this in the case of a foreign attack upon 
Switzerland, but even this is very doubtful. An army of 80,000 
regular troops, and less, would certainly be a match for all the 
160,000 and more men which the Swiss say they can congregate. 
In 1798, the French finished the business with a few regiments.325 
The Swiss boast a great deal of the rifles of their sharp-shooters. 
There are, certainly, in Switzerland, comparatively more good 
shots than in any other European country, the Austrian Alpine 
possessions excepted. But when one sees how these dead shots, 
when called in, are almost all armed with clumsy common 
percussion muskets, the respect for the Swiss sharp-shooters is 
considerably lessened. The few battalions of rifles may be good 
shots,  but their short, heavy pieces (Stutzen) are antiquated and 
worthless compared with the Minié, and their awkward, slow 
method of loading, with loose powder from a horn, would give 
them but a poor chance when opposed to troops armed with less 
superannuated weapons. 
Altogether, arms, accoutrements, organization, drill, everything 
is old-fashioned with the Swiss, and very likely will remain so as 
long as the cantonal governments have anything to say on the 
subject. 

=====第493页=====
The Armies of Europe 463 
V. THE  SCANDINAVIAN ARMIES 
The Swedish  and  Norwegian armies, though united under  one 
crown,  are as  separate  as the  two countries  to which they belong.326 
In contrast  to Switzerland, both give  us the  example  of an  Alpine 
country with  a standing army;  but the  Scandinavian peninsula  is 
altogether,  by the  nature  of the  soil,  and the  consequent poverty, 
and thin population  of the  country,  so much akin  to Switzerland, 
that even  in the  military organization  of both,  one  system,  and  that 
the militia system, predominates. 
Sweden  has  three sorts  of troops,—regiments raised  by volun­
tary enlistment (Värfvade truppar), provincial regiments (Indelta 
truppar),  and  Reserve troops.  The  Värfvade consist  of three 
regiments  of infantry, containing  six battalions,  two of  cavalry  and 
three  of artillery, with thirteen foot  and  four horse batteries, 
altogether  96 six  lb., 24 twelve  lb., and 16  twenty-four  lb.  guns. 
This makes  a total  of 7,700  men, and 136  guns. These troops 
contain  all the  artillery  for the  whole army. 
The Indelta form twenty provincial regiments  of two  battalions, 
with five separate battalions  of infantry,  and six  regiments  of a 
strength varying from  one to  eight squadrons. They  are  estimated 
at 33,000  men. 
The Reserve troops form  the  mass  of the  army. When called  in 
they are  expected  to reach 95,000  men. 
There  is, besides,  in the  province  of Götaland,  a sort  of militia 
constantly under arms, numbering 7,850  men, in  twenty-one 
companies  and  sixteen guns. Altogether, therefore,  the  Swedish 
army comprises about 140,000  men  with  150  field guns. 
The volunteers  for the  enlisted regiments  are  generally engaged 
for fourteen years,  but the law  allows engagements  of three years. 
The Indelta  are a  sort  of militia, living, when once trained,  in 
farms apportioned  to them  and  their families,  and  called  in only 
once  a year  for  four weeks' drill. They have  the  revenues  of their 
farms  for pay, but  when assembled they receive  a special 
compensation.  The  officers also receive crown-lands  on tenure  in 
their respective districts.  The  Reserve consists  of all  able-bodied 
Swedes from twenty  to twenty-five years  of age; they  are  drilled  a 
short time,  and  afterwards called  in a  fortnight  in every year. 
Thus,  with  the  exception  of the few  Värfvade  and the  Gothland 
troops,  the  great body  of the  army—Indelta  and  Reserve—are,  to 
all intents  and  purposes, militia. 
The Swedes play  a part  in military history which  is beyond  all 
proportion  to the  scanty population which furnished their 

=====第494页=====
464 Frederick Engels 
renowned armies. Gustavus Adolphus, in the thirty years' war,327 
marked a new era in tactics by his improvements; and Charles 
XII, with his adventurous foolhardiness which spoiled his great 
military talent, actually made them do wonders—such as to take 
entrenchments with cavalry. In the later wars against Russia, they 
behaved very well; in 1813, Bernadotte kept them as much as 
possible out of harm's way, and they were scarcely under fire, 
unless by mistake, except at Leipsic,328  where they formed but an 
infinitesimal part of the allies. The Värfvade, and even the 
Indelta, will, no doubt, always sustain the character of the Swedish 
name; but the Reserve, unless assembled and drilled a long time 
before brought into action, can only figure as an army of recruits. 
Norway has five brigades of infantry containing twenty-two 
battalions and 12,000 men; one brigade of cavalry, of three 
divisions of chasseurs, containing 1,070 men; and one regiment of 
artillery of about 1,300 men; beside a reserve of militia, of 9,000 
men; altogether about 24,000 men. The character of this army 
does not vary much from that of Sweden; its only distinguishing 
feature is a few companies of chasseurs, provided with flat 
snow-shoes, on which, with the assistance of a long pole, they run, 
Lapland fashion, very rapidly over the snow. 
The Danish army is composed of twenty-three battalions of 
infantry (one of guards, twelve line, five light, five chasseurs) in 
four brigades, each battalion numbering about 700 men on the 
peace-footing; three brigades of cavalry (three squadrons of 
guards, six regiments of dragoons, of four squadrons each, the 
squadron containing 140 men in time of peace), and one brigade 
of artillery (two regiments and twelve batteries with 80 six lb. and 
16 twelve lb. guns), and three companies of sappers. Total, 16,630 
infantry, 2,900 cavalry, 2,900 artillery and sappers with ninety-six 
guns. 
For the war-footing, each company is raised to 200, or the 
battalion to 800 men, and each squadron to 180 men, raising the 
line in all to 25,500 men. Besides, thirty-two battalions, twenty-
four squadrons, and six batteries of the reserve can be called in, 
representing a force of 31,500 men and raising the total of the 
force to about 56,000 or 57,000 men. Even these, however, can be 
increased in case of need, as during the late war Denmark proper 
alone, without either Holstein or Schleswig, could muster from 
50,000 to 60,000 men, 329 and the Duchies are now again subject to 
the Danish conscription. 
The army is recruited by ballot, out of the young men of from 
twenty-two years and upwards. The time of service is eight years, 

=====第495页=====
The Armies of Europe 465 
but actually the artillery remain six years, the line four years only 
with the regiments, while for the remainder of the time they 
belong to the reserve. From the thirtieth to the thirty-eighth year 
the men remain in the first, and then up to the forty-fifth year in 
the second levy of the militia. This is all very nicely arranged, but, 
in any war against Germany, nearly one-half of the troops—those 
from the Duchies—would disband and take up arms against their 
present comrades. It is this strong admixture of Schleswig-
Holsteiners which forms the great weakness of the Danish army, 
and, in reality, almost nullifies it in any complications with its most 
powerful neighbor. 
The Danish army, since its reorganization in 1848-'49, has been 
well equipped, well armed, and brought altogether to a very 
respectable footing. The Dane, from Denmark proper, is a good 
soldier and behaved very well in almost every action of the three 
years'  war; but the Schleswig-Holsteiner proved himself decidedly 
his superior. The corps of officers is good upon the whole, but 
there is too much aristocracy and too little scientific education in 
it. Their reports are slovenly made, and similar to those of the 
British, to which army the Danish troops likewise appear related in 
their want of mobility; but they have not shown of late that they 
possess such immovable steadiness as the victors of Inkermann. 
The Schleswig-Holsteiners are, without any dispute, among the 
best soldiers in Europe. They are excellent artillery men, and as 
cool in action as the English, their cousins. Though inhabitants of 
a level country, they make very good light infantry; their first 
rifle-battalion in 1850 might have vied with any troop of its class. 
VI. THE ARMY OF HOLLAND 
The Dutch army numbers thirty-six battalions of infantry in 
nine regiments, containing 44,000 men in all; four regiments of 
dragoons composed of twenty squadrons; two squadrons of 
mounted chasseurs; and two squadrons of gens d'armes; in all, 
twenty-four squadrons, comprising 4,400 cavalry, with two regi­
ments of field artillery (five six lb. and six twelve lb. foot, two six 
lb. and two twelve lb. horse batteries, of 120 guns in all), and one 
battalion of sappers, making a total of 58,000 men, beside several 
regiments in the colonies. But this army does not always exist in 
time of peace. There is a nucleus remaining under arms, 
consisting of officers, subalterns, and a few voluntarily enlisted 
men. The great mass, though obliged to serve for five years, are 
drilled during a couple of months, and then dismissed so as to be 

=====第496页=====
466 Frederick Engels 
called in for a few weeks in each year only. Besides, there is a sort 
of reserve in three levies, comprising all the able-bodied men from 
twenty to thirty-five years of age. The first levy forms about 
fifty-three, and the second twenty-nine battalions of infantry and 
artillery. But this body is not at all organized, and can hardly be 
accounted even as militia. 
VII. THE BELGIAN ARMY 
The Belgian army has sixteen regiments of infantry, containing 
forty-nine battalions, beside a reserve battalion for each regiment; 
comprising in all 46,000 men. The cavalry consists of two 
regiments of chasseurs, two of lancers, one of guides, two of 
cuirassiers, making thirty-eight squadrons, beside seven reserve 
squadrons, in all  5,800  men. There are four regiments of artillery 
(four horse, fifteen foot batteries, four dépôt batteries, twenty-four 
garrison companies), with 152 guns, six and twelve pounders; and 
one regiment of sappers and miners, numbering 1,700 men. The 
total, without the reserve, is 62,000 men; with the reserve, 
according to a late levy, it may be raised to 100,000. The army is 
recruited by ballot, and the term of service is eight years, but 
about one half of that time is passed on furlough. On the 
peace-establishment, therefore, the actual force will scarcely reach 
30,000 men. 
VIII. THE PORTUGUESE ARMY 
The Portuguese army consisted, in 1850, of the following 
troops: — 
Peace War 
footing. footing. 
Infantry, , 18,738 40,401 
Cavalry, 3,508 4,676 
Artillery, 2,707 4,098 
Engineers and Staff 495 
25,681 49,670 
The artillery consists of one field-regiment, of one horse and 
seven foot batteries; three regiments of position and garrison 
artillery, and three detached battalions in the islands. The calibre 
is six and twelve pounds. 

=====第497页=====
The Armies of Europe 467 
IX. THE SPANISH ARMY 
Of all European armies, that of Spain is, from peculiar 
circumstances, most a matter of interest to the United States. We 
give,  therefore, in concluding this survey of the military establish­
ments of Europe, a more detailed account of this army than its 
importance, compared with that of its neighbors on the other side 
of the Atlantic, might seem to warrant. 
The Spanish military force consists of the army of the interior, 
and of the colonial armies. 
That of the interior counts one regiment of grenadiers, 
forty-five regiments of the line, of three battalions each, two 
regiments of two battalions each in Ceuta, and eighteen battalions 
of cazadores or rifles. The whole of these 160 battalions formed, 
in 1852, an effective force of 72,670 men, costing the state 
82,692,651 reals, or $10,336,581, a year. The cavalry comprises 
sixteen regiments of carabineers, or dragoons and lancers, of four 
squadrons each, with eleven squadrons of cazadores, or light 
horse, in 1851; in all 12,000 men, costing 17,549,562 reals, or 
$2,193,695. 
The artillery numbers five regiments of foot artillery, of three 
brigades each, one for each division of the monarchy; beside five 
brigades of heavy, three of horse, and three of mountain artillery, 
making a total of twenty-six brigades, or, as they are now called, 
battalions. The battalion has in the horse artillery two, in the 
mountain and foot artillery four batteries; in all ninety-two foot 
and six horse batteries, or 588 field guns. 
The sappers and miners form one regiment of 1,240 men. 
The reserve consists of one battalion (No. 4) for every infantry 
regiment, and a dépôt-squadron for each cavalry regiment. 
The total force—on paper—in 1851 was 103,000 men; in 1843, 
when Espartero was upset, it amounted to 50,000 only; but at one 
time Narvâez raised it to above 100,000. On an average 90,000 
men under arms will be the utmost. 
The colonial armies are as follows: 
1. The army of Cuba; sixteen regiments of veteran infantry, 
four companies of volunteers, two regiments of cavalry, two 
battalions of four batteries foot, and one battalion of four batteries 
of mountain artillery, one battalion of horse artillery with two 
batteries, and one battalion of sappers and miners. Beside these 
troops of the line, there is a milicia disciplinada* of four battalions 
and four squadrons, and a milicia urbana of eight squadrons, 
a Disciplined militia.— Ed. 

=====第498页=====
468 Frederick Engels 
making a total of thirty-seven battalions, twenty squadrons and 
eighty-four guns. During the last few years this standing Cuban 
army has been reinforced by numerous troops from Spain; and if 
we take its original strength at 16,000 or 18,000 men, there will 
now be, perhaps, 25,000 or 28,000 men in Cuba. But this is a 
mere approximation. 
2. The army of Porto Rico; three battalions of veteran infantry, 
seven battalions of disciplined militia, two battalions of native 
volunteers, one squadron of the same, and four batteries of foot 
artillery. The neglected state of most of the Spanish colonies does 
not allow any estimate of the strength of this corps. 
3. The Philippine Islands have five regiments of infantry, of 
eight companies each; one regiment of chasseurs of Luzon; nine 
foot, one horse, one mountain battery. Nine corps of five 
battalions of native infantry, and otlv.r provincial corps, previously 
existing, were dissolved in 1851. 
The army is recruited by ballot, and substitutes are allowed. 
Every year a contingent of 25,000 men is levied; but, in 1848, 
three contingents, or 75,000 men, were called out. 
The Spanish army owe? its present organization principally to 
Narvâez, though the regulations of Charles III, of 1768, a still form 
the groundwork of it. Narvâez had actually to take away from the 
regiments their old provincial colors, different in each, and to 
introduce the Spanish flag into the army! In the same manner he 
had to destroy the old provincial organization, and to centralize 
and restore unity. Too well aware, by experience, that money was 
the principal moving lever in an army which had almost never 
been paid and seldom even clad or fed, he also tried to introduce 
a greater regularity in the payments and the financial administra­
tion of the army. Whether he succeeded to the full extent of his 
wishes, is unknown; but any amelioration introduced by him, in 
this respect, speedily disappeared during the administration of 
Sartorius and his successors. The normal state of "no pay, no 
food, no clothing," was reestablished in its full glory; and while 
the superior and general officers strut about in coats resplendent 
with gold and silver lace, or even don fancy uniforms, unknown to 
any regulations, the soldiers are ragged and without shoes. What 
the state of this army was ten or twelve years ago, an English 
author thus describes: — 
"The appearance of the Spanish troops is, to the last degree, unsoldierly. The 
sentry strolls to and fro [...] on his beat, his shako almost falling off the back of his 
Ordenanzas de S. M. para el regimen, disciplina, subordination, y servico de sus 
ejercitos, T. I-II. — Ed. 

=====第499页=====
The Armies of Europe 469 
head, his gun slouched on his shoulders, singing outright [...] a lively seguidilla with 
the most sans façon air in the world. He is, not unfrequently, destitute of portions of 
his uniform; or his regimental coat and lower continuations are in such hopeless rags, 
that, even in the sultry summer, the slate-colored great-coat is worn as a slut-cover [...]; 
the shoes [...], in one case out of three, are broken to pieces, disclosing the naked toes 
of the men — such in Spain are the glories of the vida militar."* 
A regulation, issued by Serrano, on Sept. 9, 1843, prescribes 
that: — 
"All officers and chiefs of the army have in future to present themselves in 
public in the uniform of their regiment, and with the regulation sword, whenever 
thev do not appear in plain clothes; and all officers are also to wear the exact 
distinctive marks of their rank, and no other, as prescribed, without displaying any 
more of those arbitrary ornaments and ridiculous trimmings by which some of 
them have thought proper to distinguish themselves." 
So much for the officers. Now for the  soldiers:  — 
"Brigadier General Cordoba has opened a subscription in Cadiz, heading it with 
his name, in order to procure funds for presenting one pair of cloth trousers to 
each of the valiant soldiers of the regiment of Asturias!" 
This financial disorder explains how it has been possible for the 
Spanish army to continue, ever since 1808, in a state of almost 
uninterrupted rebellion. But the real causes lie deeper. The long 
continued war with Napoleon, in which the different armies and 
their chiefs gained real political influence, first gave it a pretorian 
turn. Many energetic men, from the revolutionary times, remained 
in the army; the incorporation of the guerrillas in the regular 
force even increased this element. Thus, while the chiefs retained 
their pretorian pretensions, the soldiers and lower ranks al­
together remained inspired with revolutionary traditions. In this 
way the insurrection of 1819-23 was regularly prepared, and later 
on, in 1833-43,330 the civil war again thrust the army and its chiefs 
into the foreground. Having been used by all parties as an 
instrument, no wonder that the Spanish army should, for a time, 
take the government into its own hands. 
"The Spaniards are a warlike but not a soldier-like people," said 
the Abbé de Pradt. b They certainly have, of all European nations, 
the greatest antipathy to military discipline. Nevertheless, it is 
possible that the nation, which for more than a hundred years was 
celebrated for its infantry, may yet again have an army of which it 
can be proud. But, to attain this end, not only the military system, 
but civil life, still more, requires to be reformed. 
Here and below Engels quotes from the anonymously published book by 
T. M. Hughes, Revelations of Spain in 1845, Vol. I, pp. 326 and 329.— Ed. 
Dominique de Pradt, Mémoires historiques sur la révolution d'Espagne, 
p. 189.—  Ed. 

=====第500页=====
470 
Karl Marx 
GENERAL SIMPSON'S RESIGNATION. 
— FROM PARLIAMENT 
London, August 3. The day before yesterday The Morning Post, 
in obviously embarrassed phraseology, informed the British public 
that General Simpson will soon resign his command under the 
pretext of weakened health and will have no successor. 3 In other 
words: the English army is to be placed under French general command. 
In this way the Government would shift the responsibility for the 
conduct of the war from itself onto "our great and glorious ally". 
Parliament forfeits the last semblance of control. At the same time 
an infallible means for transforming the alliance between England 
and France into the most acrimonious dissension between the two 
nations has been discovered. We see the same master hand at 
work in whose all too robust grasp the Entente Cordiale 331 broke 
into pieces in 1839. 
Parliament concludes its present session in a fitting manner— 
with scandals.b First scandal: the withdrawal of the Bill for limited 
liability in private (not joint-stock) commercial companies at the 
bidding of the big capitalists before whose frowns even the 
Olympian Palmerston trembles. Second scandal: the adjournment in 
infinitum of the Bills regulating lease-hold tenure in Ireland, 
which have been moving to and fro in both Houses of Parliament 
for 4 years—a cowardly compromise in which the House of 
Commons has consented to take back its own work, the Cabinet to 
break its word and the Irish Brigade332 to hold the question open 
"The Command of the Army in the East", The Morning Post, No. 25455, 
August 2,  1855.—  Ed. 
The reference is to the sittings of the House of Commons of July 24, July 30 
and August 2. The Times, No. 22115, July 25; No. 22120, July 31 and No. 22123, 
August 3, 1855.—Ed. 

=====第501页=====
General Simpson's Resignation 471 
for exploitation on the hustings.3 Final scandal: Major Reed's 
motion obliging the Cabinet to recall Parliament in the event of 
peace being concluded during the recess. Reed is a buffoon, 
notoriously in Palmerston's pay. His aim was to deceive the House 
into passing a vote of confidence as a result of his "distrustful 
motion". But the House laughed his motion down, laughed 
Palmerston down and laughed itself down. It has reached the 
stage where "laughter" remains the last recourse for depravity to 
repudiate  itself. 
Written on August 3, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 361, August 6, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time 
Marked with the sign x 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第502页=====
472 
Karl Marx 
COMMENTARY ON THE PARLIAMENTARY 
PROCEEDINGS 
London, August 8. The financial report on the British Empire in 
Asia presented by Vernon Smith (at present Great Mogul and 
Manu in one person) and Bright's motion to bring this important 
subject before the Commons at a "debatable" time in the future 
prompted yesterday's Commons debate on India, 3 which we shall 
leave to one side for the time being since we intend to provide a 
detailed sketch of conditions in India333 during the parliamentary 
recess. 
Lord John Russell will hardly allow the impending conclusion of 
this Parliamentary session to pass off without an attempt to make 
political capital out of his awkward situation. He is no longer in the 
Government, and not yet a member of the opposition—this 
constitutes his awkward situation. The position of leader in the 
Tory opposition is already occupied, and Russell has nothing to 
gain from this side. In the liberal opposition Gladstone is pressing 
to the fore. In his latest and, from his point of view, exemplary 
speech—on the occasion of the Turkish loan — Gladstone skilfully 
advocated peace with Russia, by showing the war to be a war at 
the expense of Turkey and the fighting nationalities, especially 
Italy.b Russell senses that dreadful misfortunes will occur during 
The speeches of Smith, Bright, Russell and Palmerston in the House of 
Commons on August 7, 1855, were published in The Times, No. 22127, August 8, 
1855.—Erf. 
Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on July 20, 1855. The Times, 
No. 22112, July 21, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第503页=====
Commentary on the Parliamentary Proceedings 473 
the recess, implying a great clamour for peace when Parliament 
reassembles. He senses that this peace must be demanded on 
liberal pretexts, all the more so since the Tories have run 
themselves into the position of the war party par excellence. 
Italy—the pretext for making peace with Russia! Russell envies 
Gladstone this brainwave and since he is unable to anticipate him 
with this plausible position, he has decided to absorb him by 
translating Gladstone's speech from the sublime style into the 
trivial. The circumstance that he is no longer in the Government 
as Palmerston is, and not yet, like Gladstone, in the opposition, 
promises to make the plagiarism profitable. Thus Russell rose 
yesterday evening and began by assuring the House that he did 
"not wish either to diminish or to aggravate the responsibility [...] 
of the Government". This responsibility was great, however. This 
year alone £49,000,000 had been voted for war expenses, and it 
would soon be time to account for this enormous sum. In the 
Baltic the fleet had done nothing and would probably do still less. 
The prospects in the Black Sea were no more promising. Austria's 
change of policy permitted Russia to send its armies from Poland, 
etc., to the Crimea. On the Asiatic coast catastrophes were 
impending for the Turkish army. The prospect of sending a 
foreign legion of twenty to thirty thousand men there as a 
replacement had disappeared. He regretted that his Viennese 
despatches had not been laid before Parliament. The Turkish 
ambassador3 had completely agreed with him concerning the 
acceptability of a peace on the basis of the latest Austrian 
proposals. Should the war be pursued any further against the will 
of Turkey then in future it would no longer be a question of 
underwriting loans but of subsidies. Piedmont had joined the 
Western Powers, but for this it was demanding, and rightly so, a 
change in the conditions of Italy. Rome was occupied by the 
French, the Papal States by the Austrians, an occupation which 
maintained despotism there and in the two Sicilies and prevented 
the people of Italy from following the example of Spain. Russia's 
occupation of the Danubian principalities was the excuse for the 
present war. How to square with this the Franco-Austrian 
occupation of Italy? The independence of the Popeb and thus the 
balance of Europe was endangered. Could an understanding not 
be reached with Austria and France concerning changes in the 
Papal form of government which would permit the evacuation of 
a Arif Bey.— Ed. 
b Pius IX.—Ed. 

=====第504页=====
474 Karl Marx 
the Papal States? Finally the hackneyed advice: the Ministers 
should not conclude a dishonourable peace, but should also let no 
opportunity for peace negotiations slip through their hands. 
Palmerston replied that "he was not like other people who took 
upon themselves the responsibility of declaring a war and then 
shrank back before the responsibility of conducting it. He was not 
such a man as that". (He indeed knows what "responsibility" 
involves.) Conditions for peace depended upon the results of war, 
and the results of war depended upon all sorts of circumstances, 
i.e., upon chance. (Thus chance is responsible for the results of 
war and the results of war are responsible for the conditions of 
peace.) As far as he (Palmerston) knew, Turkey was in complete 
agreement with the views of France and England. Even if this 
were not so, Turkey was merely a means, not an end in the struggle 
against Russia. The "enlightened" Western Powers must know 
better what was advantageous than the decaying Eastern Power. 
(This is a splendid commentary on the declaration of war against 
Russia, in which the war is described as a purely "defensive war" 
on Turkey's  behalf;  on the notorious Vienna Note which the 
"enlightened" Western Powers wished to force upon Turkey, etc.) 
As for Italy, that was a ticklish question. A dreadful state of affairs 
reigned in Naples, but why? Because it was the ally of Russia, a 
despotic state. As for the condition of Italy occupied by Austria and 
France (not despotic states?), "the governments there are not, to 
be sure, in accordance with the feelings of the people", but the 
occupation was necessary to maintain "order". Besides, France 
had reduced the number of troops in Rome and Austria had 
evacuated Tuscany completely. Finally Palrrferston congratulated 
England upon the alliance with France, which was now so intimate 
that actually only "one Cabinet" was governing on both sides of the 
Channel. And he had just been denouncing Naples for its alliance 
with a despotic state! And now he congratulated England on the 
same thing! The point of Palmerston's speech was that he used 
military tirades to conclude a session he had been able to keep so 
free of military deeds. 
Using Italy as a false pretext for peace, in the same way as he 
had used Poland and Hungary as a false pretext for war after his 
return from Vienna, was naturally a matter of no consequence to 
Russell. It did not embarrass him to forget that as premier in 
1847-1852 he had allowed Palmerston, first to help stir up Italy 
with false promises, only to abandon it later on to Bonaparte and 
King Ferdinand, to the Pope and the Emperor.3334 That did not 
Francis Joseph I.— Ed. 

=====第505页=====
Commentary on the Parliamentary Proceedings 475 
matter to him. What mattered to him was snatching the "Italian 
pretext" from Gladstone and making it his own. 
Written on August 8, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 371, August 11, 1855 
Marked with the sign X Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第506页=====
476 
Karl Marx 
THE MILITARY FORCES AGAINST RUSSIA 
London, August 11. At the moment the armies mustered by the 
allies against Russia are limited, apart from their own troops, to: 
1. a small Piedmontese auxiliary corps of 15,000 men—a corps 
extorted from Piedmont by the concerted threats of England, 
France and Austria. This bloodletting of Piedmont was one of the 
conditions Austria made for selling its adhesion to the "Treaty of 
2 December"33,1; 
2. the Foreign Legion, amounting to a few thousand troops—an 
olla podrida3 of occidental mercenaries enticed bit by bit surrepti­
tiously and illegally away from their respective countries; 
3. an Italian Legion of 4,000 to  5,000  men, still in the process of 
formation; 
4. a Polish Legion, existing in the form of a project; 
5. finally, in the distant future, a Spanish auxiliary corps, to 
represent "dire financial necessity". 
This motley sample card of volunteer corps and diminutive 
armies provides a map of the Europe England and France have in 
their retinue at this moment. Can one conceive of a more 
consummate caricature of the army of nations which the first 
Napoleon rolled into motion against Russia? 
Written on August 11, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 375, August 14, 1855 
Marked with the sign x Printed according to .the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
Hotchpotch (literally: rotten stew).— Ed. 

=====第507页=====
477 
Karl Marx 
THE POLAND MEETING 
London, August 13. The repeated angry sallies of the Govern­
ment newspapers against the great Poland meeting which took 
place last Wednesday in St. Martin's Hall 3 necessitate some 
marginal notes. The initiative for the meeting evidently originated 
with the Government  itself.  The "Literary Association of the 
Friends of Poland",337 an association composed of Czartoryski's 
supporters on the one hand and English aristocrats with a friendly 
disposition towards Poland on the other, was pushed forward as a 
front. From its inception this association has been a blind tool in 
the hands of Palmerston, who manipulated and controlled it 
through the mediation of the recently deceased Lord Dudley 
Stuart. The addresses concerning Poland and deputations which it 
sent to Palmerston each year were one of the most significant aids 
he had in keeping his "anti-Russian" reputation alive. For their 
part Czartoryski's supporters gained important advantages from 
this connection: they figured as the only respectable, so to say 
"official" representatives of the Polish emigration, they could keep 
down the democratic party among the emigrants and they had the 
association's significant material means of relief at their disposal as 
recruiting funds for their own party. The controversy between the 
Literary Association and the "Centralisation"338  of the Democratic 
Polish Association has been fierce and long-lived. In 1839 the 
latter held a great public meeting in London, exposing the 
intrigues of the "Literary" Association, unfurling the past history 
of the Czartoryskis (this was done by Ostrowski, the author of a 
The meeting was held on August 8, 1855. Reports on it were published in The 
Times, No. 22128, August 9, 1855, and in The People's Paper, No 70, August 11, 
1855.—  Ed. 

=====第508页=====
478 Karl Marx 
history of Poland written in English3) and openly declaring its 
opposition to the diplomatic-aristocratic "restorers" of Poland. 
From this moment the position which the "Literary" Association 
had usurped was undermined. In passing, it should be noted that 
the events of 1846 and of 1848-49339 added a third element to 
the Polish emigration, a socialist group, but this, together with the 
democrats, opposes the Czartoryski party. 
The purpose of the meeting held at the instigation of the 
Government was threefold: to form a Polish legion and thus get 
rid of part of the "Polish foreigners" by sending them to the 
Crimea; to refurbish Palmerston's popularity; and finally to deliver 
any potential Polish movement into his own hands and those of 
Bonaparte. The government press claims that a deeply laid 
conspiracy inspired by Russian agents thwarted the purpose of the 
meeting. Nothing could be more ridiculous than this assertion. 
The majority of the audience in St. Martin's Hall was made up of 
London Chartists. The anti-Government amendment* was moved 
by an Urquhartist and seconded by an Urquhartist—Collet and 
Hart. Leaflets distributed in the hall said that 
"the meeting had been called by English aristocrats simply trying to maintain the 
old British system of government, etc.". "Poland, which condemned every alliance 
with the present rulers of Europe, did not wish to be restored by any of the existing 
governments, nor sink to being a tool of diplomatic intrigue, etc." 
These leaflets were signed by the president and the secretary of 
the "Polish Democratic Committee". Now considering that in 
London all three factions, Chartists, Urquhartists and the really 
"democratic" Polish emigration are on anything but friendly 
terms with one another, every suspicion of a "conspiracy" 
vanishes. The noisy interruptions of the meeting were provoked 
exclusively by the unparliamentary refusal by the chairman, Lord 
Harrington, to read out Collet's amendment and put it to the 
vote.  They were aggravated by the secretary of the "Literary 
* The following is the wording of Collet's amendment, which was adopted by 
the meeting: "That this meeting, cordially desiring the restoration of Polish 
nationality, cannot forget that the destruction of that nationality was mainly owing 
to the perfidious conduct of Lord Palmerston from 1830 to 1846; that so long as 
Lord Palmerston is a servant of the Crown, no proposal for the restoration of 
Poland can be anything but a sham and a delusion, and that the truth of this 
proposition is shown by the fact that Lord Palmerston has carried on the war in 
such a way as to avoid, as far as possible, injuring Russia, while he has proposed 
terms of peace which utterly destroy the integrity and independence of Turkey." 
J. B. Ostrowski, The History of  Poland,  Vols. I-II.— Ed. 

=====第509页=====
The Poland Meeting 479 
Association of the Friends of Poland" Colonel Szulszewski's notion 
of shouting for a constable to have Collet arrested. The tumult 
naturally reached its climax when Lord Harrington, Sir Robert 
Peel and their friends fled the platform and quit the premises. 
With the appointment of George Thompson as president in place 
of Harrington tranquillity was instantly restored. 
The specimens of England's ruling class prominent at this 
Poland meeting were by no means calculated to instil any special 
respect for the patriciate. The Earl of Harrington may perhaps be 
a very good man, but he is indubitably a very bad speaker. It 
would be impossible to witness a more embarrassing performance. 
Only by means of supreme exertion could his lordship stammer 
forth two connected words. To this moment he failed to 
conclude a single sentence of his speech. In the meantime this 
was done for him—by the stenographers. His lordship is a 
military man and undoubtedly brave, but judging from the way he 
conducted the Poland meeting, he is better fitted for any other 
vocation than for that of being a leader. As a speaker Lord 
Ebrington, the midwife of the Sunday Bill, is only a little better 
than the Earl of Harrington. His physiognomy betrays obstinacy, 
his skull has the form of a battering ram. He has one undeniable 
merit. Arguments cannot defeat him. Napoleon once declared that 
Englishmen did not know when they were beaten. In this respect 
Ebrington is a model Englishman. 
After the lords came the baronets. Lord Ebrington proposed the 
government motion on the restoration of Poland; Sir Robert Peel 
followed him and spoke as his seconder. In many respects no 
greater contrast can be imagined than exists between the "Member 
for Tamworth" (Peel) and the "Member for Marylebone" 
(Ebrington). The former is a roguish and natural humbug, the 
latter an affected and puritanical chicken heart. The one amuses, 
the other disgusts. Sir Robert Peel gives the impression of a 
traveller in wines who has been raised to the nobility, Lord 
Ebrington of an inquisitor converted to Protestantism. Tony 
Lumpkin and Beau Brummell rolled into one would, more or less, 
produce the incongruity exhibiting itself in Peel's person, dress 
and manner. An extraordinary mixture of clown and dandy. 
Palmerston is extremely partial to this oddity from Tamworth. He 
finds it serviceable. Whenever he wants to know which way the 
popular wind is blowing, he hoists aloft Sir Robert Peel to act as 
his weather-vane. When he desired to know if public opinion in 
England would sanction the expulsion of Victor Hugo, etc., he let 
Sir Robert Peel deliver a denunciation of the refugees and an 

=====第510页=====
480 Karl Marx 
apology for Bonaparte.340 So once again in relation to Poland. He 
exploits him as a "feeler". Peel is extraordinarily fitted for this not 
particularly dignified role. He is what the English call "a chartered 
libertine",3 a dashing madcap, a privileged eccentric, for whose 
impulses and outbursts, erratic manoeuvrings, words and deeds no 
Government is held responsible, nor any party. Sir Robert came to 
the Poland meeting padded out and, it is said, made up in the 
artistic fashion. He appeared to be girdled, wore a crimson rose in 
his buttonhole, was as perfumed as a milliner and in his right 
hand he flourished a huge umbrella with which he beat time as he 
spoke. By a highly ironic coincidence the ex-vicepresident of the 
Association for Administrative Reform,341 Mr. Tite, followed hard 
on the heels of the lords and the baronets. Since the influence of 
this association gained him the designation of the Solon of Bath he 
has begun his parliamentary career, as is well known, by voting 
against Scully's motion for a piece of administrative reform and 
for Palmerston's Turkish loan, while abstaining:, with great 
moderation, from voting on Roebuck's motion.b The lords and the 
baronets seemed to be pointing at him and snickering: There you 
have our substitute! It is unnecessary to describe Mr. Tite in 
detail. Shakespeare did so when he invented the immortal Shallow, 
compared by Falstaff to one of the little men made out of 
cheese-parings after supper.0 
In contrast to all these gentlemen the very first words of an 
unknown young plebeian named Hart gave the impression that he 
was a man able to inspire and to govern great masses. Now we can 
understand the Government's vexation at the Poland meeting. It 
was not only a defeat for Palmerston, but even more so for the 
class he represents. 
Written on August 13, 1855 Printed according to the news-
... . paper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 379, August 16, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 
Shakespeare, Henry V, Act I, Scene 1, quoted by Marx in English.— Ed. 
b Scully submitted his motion to the Commons on July 10, 1855; Palmerston's 
motion on the Turkish loan was submitted on July 20; for Roebuck's motion, 
submitted on July 17, see this volume, pp. 337-38, 355-57 and  363.—  Ed. 
Shakespeare, Henry IV, Second Part, Act III, Scene 2.— Ed. 

=====第511页=====
481 
Karl Marx 
ON THE CRITIQUE OF AUSTRIAN POLICY 
IN THE CRIMEAN CAMPAIGN342 
London, August 15. Bratiano recently addressed a letter to The 
Daily News in which he depicts the suffering of the inhabitants of 
the Danubian principalities under the Austrian army of occupa­
tion, alludes to the equivocal attitude of the French and English 
consuls and then puts this question: 
"Is Austria acting as an ally or even as a neutral party when she maintains an army 
of 80,000 in the principalities thereby, as the official despatches prove, preventing the 
Turks entering Bessarabia and also the formation of a Romanian army which could 
have taken an active part in the war, while withdrawing 200,000 men from Galicia thus 
enabling Russia to send a similar number to the Crimea?" 
Austria's ambiguous position arose the moment when neither 
neutral nor an ally, she set herself up as a mediator. The following 
extract from a despatch of Lord Clarendon to the Viennese 
Cabinet, dated June 14, 1853, seems to prove that England in part 
forced her into this role: 
"If the Russian army proceeded beyond the Principalities, and other provinces of 
Turkey were invaded, a general rising of the Christian population would ensue, not in 
favour of Russia, nor in support of the Sultan,3 but for their own independence; and it 
would be needless to add that such a revolt would not be long in extending itself to the 
Danubian Provinces of Austria but it would be for the Austrian Government to judge 
of the effect it might produce in Hungary and in Italy, and the encouragement it must 
give to the promoters of disorder throughout Europe whom Austria has reason to 
fear, and who even now would appear to think that the moment is at hand for the 
realisation of their projects. It was these considerations, I said, that rendered Her 
Majesty's Government most anxious to unite with Austria for an object so essential to 
the best interests of society, and to endeavour with her to discover some mode by 
which the just claims of Russia may be reconciled with the sovereign rights of the 
Sultan." 
a Abdul Mejid.— Ed. 
Queen Victoria's.— Ed. 
17—3754 

=====第512页=====
482 Karl Marx 
Another question concerning Austrian policy remains as unan­
swered at the conclusion of the parliamentary session as at the 
start. What was Austria's position with regard to the Crimean 
expedition? On July 23 this year Disraeli asked Lord John Russell 
on what authority he had declared that "one of the principal causes 
of the Crimean expedition was the refusal of Austria to cross the river 
Pruth". 3 
Lord John Russell could not remember—i.e., he said "his 
authority was a vague recollection, a general recollection". Disraeli 
then addressed the same question to Palmerston, who said 
"he would not answer questions taken piecemeal from a long course of 
negotiations between Her Majesty's Government and the Government of one of the 
Sovereigns who was to a certain degree in alliance with Her Majesty." 
With this apparently evasive answer Palmerston was evidently 
only indirectly confirming Russell's claim, pleading delicacy with 
regard to the "ally to a certain degree". Let us now move from 
the House of Commons to the House of Lords. On June 26 this 
year Lord Lyndhurst delivered his philippic against Austria: 
"Early in June" (1854) "Austria resolved on making a demand upon Russia to 
evacuate the principalities. That demand was made in very strong terms with 
something like an intimation that if it were not complied with Austria would resort 
to forcible means to secure this object." 
After some historical remarks Lyndhurst continues: 
"Well, did Austria then immediately carry into effect any attack upon Russia? 
Did she attempt to enter the principalities? Far from it. She abstained from doing 
anything for a period of several weeks, and it was only when the siege of Silistria 
had been raised and the Russian army was in retreat, and when Russia herself had 
served a notice that she would within a certain time leave the principalities and 
retire behind the Pruth [...] — that Austria again remembered her engagements."c 
In reply to this speech Lord Clarendon declared: 
"When Austria entered into these successive engagements with England and 
France and when she made those extensive and costly preparations for war, when, 
moreover she urgently proposed that military commissioners should be sent by 
France and England to the head-quarters of General Hess, I have no doubt she 
intended and expected war. But she also expected that long before the season for 
military operations began the allied armies would have obtained decisive victories in 
the Crimea, that they would be free, and would be able to undertake other 
Disraeli's questions and the replies by Russell and Palmerston were published in 
The Times, No. 22114, July 24, 1855. Disraeli quotes from Russell's speech in the 
House of Commons on July 19,  1855.—  Ed. 
Presumably Francis Joseph.— Ed. 
The speeches of Lyndhurst and others who took part in the debate in the House 
of Lords on June 26, 1855, were published in The Times, No.  22091,  June 27, 
1855.—  Ed. 

=====第513页=====
On the Critique of Austrian Policy in the Crimean Campaign 483 
operations in concert with her own forces. That, unfortunately, was not the case; 
and if Austria had at our invitation declared war, she would in all probability have 
had to wage that war single-handed." 
Still more astonishing is Ellenborough's later statement in the 
House of Lords, which to this moment has not been challenged by 
any minister: 
"Before the expedition to the Crimea was despatched, Austria proposed to 
communicate with the allied Powers on the subject of future military operations; 
acting, however, upon preconceived opinions, the allies sent that expedition, and 
then Austria at once said that she could not meet the Russians single-handed, and 
that the expedition to the Crimea rendered it  necessary  for her to adopt a different  course  of 
action. At a subsequent period, just at the commencement of the conference at 
Vienna, when it was of the greatest possible importance that Austria should act 
with us—at that time, still looking to nothing but the success of your operations in 
the Crimea, you withdrew from the immediate vicinity of Austria 50,000 good 
Turkish troops, thus depriving Austria of the only assistance on which she could 
rely in the event of a military expedition against Russia. It is clear, therefore, my 
lords,  and also from the recent statements of the noble earl, Clarendon, that it is our 
ill-advised expedition to the Crimea which has paralysed the policy of Austria, and 
which has reduced her to her present difficult position. Before that expedition sailed 
to the Crimea I warned the Government. [...] I warned them of the effect which that 
expedition would produce upon the policy of Austria." 
Here then we have a direct contradiction between the statement 
of Clarendon, the Foreign Secretary, between his statement and 
the statement of Lord John Russell and the statement of Lord 
Ellenborough. Russell says: the Crimean expedition sailed because 
Austria refused to cross the Pruth, i.e., to take sides against Russia 
with arms in hand. No, says Clarendon. Austria could not take 
sides against Russia because the Crimean expedition did not have 
the desired result. Finally, Lord Ellenborough: the Crimean 
expedition was undertaken against the will of Austria, and forced 
her to abstain from the war with Russia. These contradictions— 
however one may interpret them — prove in any case that the 
ambiguity was not merely to be found on the side of the Austrians. 
Written on August 15, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 383, August 18, 1855 
Marked with the sign X 
An enlarged English version was pub­
lished as a leading article in the New-York 
Daily Tribune, No.  4493,  September 13, 
1855 and reprinted in the New-York 
Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1075, Sep­
tember 14, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper 
This version is published in En­
glish for the first time 

=====第514页=====
484 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
THE ANGLO-FRENCH WAR AGAINST RUSSIA 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 385, August 20, 1855] 
London, August 17. The Anglo-French war against Russia will 
undoubtedly always figure in military history as "the incomprehensi­
ble war". Big talk combined with" minimal action, vast preparations 
and insignificant results, caution bordering on timidity, followed 
by the foolhardiness that is born of ignorance, generals who are 
more than mediocre coupled with troops who are more than 
brave, almost deliberate reverses on the heels of victories won 
through mistakes, armies ruined by negligence, then saved by the 
strangest of accidents—a grand ensemble of contradictions and 
inconsistencies. And this is nearly as much the distinguishing mark 
of the Russians as of their enemies. If the British have destroyed 
an exemplary army through the maladministration of the civil 
servants and the slothful incompetence of the officers; if the 
French have had to run useless risks and suffer enormous losses 
simply because Louis Napoleon affected to run the war from 
Paris,  the Russians for their part have suffered similar losses as a 
result of maladministration and foolish but peremptory orders 
from Petersburg. Ever since the Turkish wars of 1828-29 Tsar 
Nicholas's military talents have been "passed over in silence" even 
by his most servile eulogists. If the Russians have Todtleben, who 
is not a Russian, they have on the other hand Gorchakov and 
[other]...  ovs who in no respect yield to the S[ain]t-Arnauds and 
Raglans in the matter of incompetence. 
One would have supposed that now, at any rate, when so many 
minds are occupied in drawing up plausible plans for attack and 
defence, and given this ever increasing mass of men and material, 
some breath-taking idea must needs be born. Not a bit of it, 
however. The war drags on and its prolongation serves only to 

=====第515页=====
The Anglo-French War against Russia 485 
enlarge the area over which it is being fought. The greater the 
proliferation of new theatres of war, the less the activity in each of 
them. We now have six: the White Sea, the Baltic, the Danube, the 
Crimea, the Caucasus and Armenia. What has been happening 
throughout this stupendous area can be told in the space of one 
column. 
Of the White Sea, the Anglo-French wisely say nothing at all. 
Here they have only two practicable military aims: to prevent the 
coastal and other trade of the Russians in these waters and, if 
possible, to capture Archangel. The former has been attempted, 
but only up to a point; this year as well as last the Allied 
squadrons always arrived too late and sailed away too soon. The 
second object, the seizure of Archangel, has never been embarked 
upon. Instead of carrying out this, its real task, the blockading 
squadron has scattered to carry out slovenly attacks on Russian 
and Lapp villages and the destruction of what little the needy 
fishermen possess. The excuse proffered by English correspon­
dents for these ignominious goings-on is the morose irritability of 
a squadron that feels itself incapable of getting down to serious 
work! Some defence! 
On the Danube nothing is happening. The delta of this river is 
not even being cleared of the brigands who infest it. Austria holds 
the key to the door that leads into Russia from this side and seems 
determined to hang on to it. 
In the Caucasus all is quiet. The formidable Circassians, like all 
barbarian and independent mountain-dwellers, seem to be perfect­
ly content with the withdrawal of the Russian mobile column from 
their valleys and to have no desire to descend into the plain save 
on looting forays. They know how to fight only on their own 
territory and seem, furthermore, far from delighted at the 
prospect of annexation by Turkey. 
In Asia Turkey may be seen as she reall is—her army there 
fully reflects the decayed state of the empire. It was deemed 
necessary to call on the Frankish giaour for assistance; but the 
Franks3  could do nothing there save throw up field-works. All 
their attempts at making the troops adopt civilised methods of 
warfare failed utterly. The Russians have invested Kars and are 
apparently prepared to attack it systematically. It is difficult to see 
how the town can be relieved, unless Omer Pasha lands at Batum 
with 20,000 men and attacks the Russians in the flank. It is 
incomprehensible, and by no means a feather in the Russians' cap, 
d A name frequently applied to West Europeans in the Middle East.— Ed. 

=====第516页=====
486 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
that they should have acted so cautiously and hesitantly in the face 
of such an ill-disciplined adversary, when they had 20,000-30,000 
good troops at their disposal. Whatever successes they may score in 
this theatre of war, the most they can achieve is the capture of 
Kars and Erzerum, for a march on Constantinople through Asia 
Minor is quite out of the question. For the time being, therefore, 
the war in Asia is of no more than local interest and, since it is 
hardly possible, given the inaccuracy of existing maps, to express 
from afar an accurate tactical and strategical opinion, we shall not 
pursue the matter further. There remain the two principal 
theatres of war, the Crimea and the Baltic. 
[Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 387, August 21, 1855] 
London, August 18. In the Crimea the siege drags on lethargical­
ly.3 The French and British were at work throughout the whole 
month of July on the new approaches to the Redan and the 
Malakhov and, though we were repeatedly given to understand 
that they had moved "quite close" to the Russians, we now learn 
that on August 4 the head of the sap was no closer than 115 
metres to the Russian main ditch, and perhaps not even as close as 
that. It is certainly satisfactory to see Hotspur Pélissier b brought 
down to the acknowledgement that his "system of assault" has 
failed, and that regular siege works must pave the way for his 
columns; but for all that, to leave 200,000 men quiet in their tents 
to wait for the completion of these trenches, and to die in the 
Instead of this sentence the New-York Daily Tribune has: "Our files of English, 
French and German journals, received yesterday morning by the mail of the 
Canada, shed no additional light on the battle of August 16, on the Chernaya, 
where Liprandi was repulsed by the Allied forces and a number of Russian 
prisoners taken. With regard to this affair, we must wait for the next steamer 
before we can receive any satisfactory details. It is rather suspicious, however, that 
so little was known about it at Paris and London previous to the sailing of the 
Canada. Had it been really as decisive as the English journals represent, something 
more than the very incomplete statements now in our possession would naturally 
have been made public. 
"It appears that the assault on the  Malakoff,  which was expected to have taken 
place on the 15th, had to be postponed, and that the preliminary bombardment 
did not commence till the 17th. Indeed, there is reason to suspect that the siege 
works are not in so forward a state as the journals of Paris and London have 
reported." — Ed. 
Pélissier is ironically compared to Sir Henry Percy (1364-1403) called Hotspur, 
the eldest son of the first earl of Northumberland, as portrayed in Shakespeare's 
Henry IV, Part  I.—Ed. 

=====第517页=====
The Anglo-French War against Russia 487 
meantime of cholera and fever, is singular management. If—as 
the Paris papers maintain—the Chernaya cannot be crossed in 
view of the impregnable Russian position on the far side, 
something useful might at least be achieved by a sea-borne 
expedition to Eupatoria and an attempt to force the Russians on 
this side into the open field and to find out their real strength and 
the state of their resources. As matters now stand the Turkish, 
Sardinian and half the French and British armies have been 
reduced to the role of passive onlookers. Hence a large part of 
them could be used for diversions. But the only diversions we 
have heard of are those created every evening at Astley's 
Amphitheatre, in Surrey Gardens and Cremorne Gardens where, 
amidst a storm of applause from the patriotic cockneys,3 the 
Russians suffer frightful defeats. 
The Russians must by now have received all their reinforce­
ments and will be at maximum strength during the period that lies 
immediately ahead. The British are sending out a few more 
regiments, the French have despatched 10,000-15,000 men with 
more to follow and all in all 50,000-60,000 fresh troops are to be 
added to the allied forces in the Crimea. On top of that the 
French Government has registered or bought a large number of 
river steamers (variously put at between 50 and 100), all of which 
are to be used for an expedition in the Black Sea. Whether they 
are intended for the Sea of Azov or the entry to the Dnieper and 
the Bug, where Ochakov, Kinburn, Kherson and Nikolayev would 
constitute objects of attack, remains to be seen. We mentioned on 
a previous occasion that some bloody affrays might be expected 
towards the middle of August, for at that time the Russians, after 
receiving reinforcements, would again seize the initiative!* Under 
General Liprandi they have in fact carried out a sortie directed 
against the French and Sardinians on the Chernaya and been 
beaten off with heavy loss.344 Allied losses have not been stated and 
must therefore have been very considerable. Something more than 
telegraphic reports will be needed if this affair is to be discussed in 
greater detail.0 
a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
See this volume, pp. 363-64.— Ed. 
Instead of this paragraph and the greater part of the preceding one, 
beginning with the words "If—as the Paris papers maintain—the Chernaya 
cannot be crossed", the New-York Daily Tribune has: "It must be confessed that 
from first to last, this has been a war of incapacities on both sides. Todtleben is the 
only man in either camp who has shown a spark of genius." — Ed. 

=====第518页=====
488 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Finally, in the Baltic, "a great blow has been struck"3! Vide the 
English press. Bombardment of Sweaborg345! Destruction of 
Sweaborg! Earthworks and all other installations lie in ruins! 
Sweaborg has actually ceased to exist! Glorious triumph for the 
Allies! The Navy is in an indescribable state of enthusiasm! And 
now let us consider the facts as they are.b The Allied fleets, six 
liners,  four or five large frigates (blockshipsc ), and about thirty 
mortar-vessels and gunboats, crossed over from the Revel to 
Sweaborg on August 7. On the 8th they took up their positions. 
The vessels of light drafi passed through the shoals and rocks west 
of the fortress, where no large ship can pass, and apparently drew 
up at long range from the islands on which Sweaborg is situated. 
The large vessels remained outside, and as far as we can judge out 
of range of the forts. Then the gunboats and mortar-vessels 
opened fire. No direct firing appears to have been attempted. It 
was all shelling from mortars or shell guns at the highest elevation 
practicable. The bombardment lasted forty-five hours. As to the 
amount of damage inflicted it is not possible to estimate without 
detailed accounts from both parties. The arsenal and various 
magazines of powder (apparently small ones) were destroyed. The 
"town" of Sweaborg (so far as we know, only a few houses 
inhabited by people connected with the fleet or the works) was 
burnt. As to the fortifications themselves, the damage done to 
them cannot but- be insignificant, for the fleets, as both Admirals 
state,  had not a man  killed,  only a few wounded, and no loss 
whatever in matériel? No better proof could be given that they 
kept out of harm's way. In that case they might bombard, but 
could not act by direct fire, by which alone fortifications can be 
destroyed. Dundas, who is far more honest and collected in his 
report than the French Admiral, according to the Moniteur's 
rendering of the text which may have been coloured in Paris, 
avers that the damage inflicted was confined to the three islands 
(out of the seven constituting Sweaborg) which are situated west of 
the main entrance to the bay of Helsingfors. An attack on the 
The words in quotation marks are given both in German and in English in the 
original.— Ed. 
Instead of the preceding part of this paragraph the Vew-York Daily Tribune has: 
"With regard to the attack on Sweaborg, we are also still without full official reports or 
newspaper correspondence. The facts, however, appear on a careful examination of 
all the information at hand to be as follows." — Ed. 
Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
The reference is to the report of Admiral Dundas, which was published in 
The Times, No. 22134, August 16, 1855, and that of the French Admiral Penaud, 
published in Le Moniteur universel, No. 227, August 15, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第519页=====
The Anglo-French War against Russia 489 
main entrance does not even seem to have been attempted. It 
seems that the large vessels looked on and did nothing, and the 
decisive act in such an attack—the landing of troops to possess 
themselves of the works and destroy them—was entirely out of 
the question. Thus the damage inflicted falls upon stores and 
storehouses exclusively—that is, upon matters easily replaced; and 
if the Russians avail themselves of their time and means, Sweaborg 
may in three weeks be in as good a condition as ever. Militarily 
speaking, it has not suffered at all; the material results of the 
whole affair are hardly worth its cost; and it seems to have been 
undertaken merely because the Baltic fleet must do something 
before it comes home for the season, partly because Palmerston 
wanted to conclude the parliamentary session with a firework. 
Unfortunately the event occurred 24 hours too late for this 
purpose. Such was the glorious destruction of Sweaborg by the 
Allied fleets. We shall revert to the matter as soon as detailed 
reports are to hand.a 
Written on August 17 and 18, 1855 Printed according to the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
Nos.  385 and 387, August 20 and 21, Published in English in full for the 
1855 first time 
Marked with the sign X 
An abridged English version of the sec­
ond part of the article was published as a 
leading article in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No.  4483,  September 1, 1855, 
and reprinted in the New-York Semi-
Weekly Tribune, No. 1072, September 4, 
1855 
a The end of this paragraph from the words "partly because Palmerston 
wanted..." is omitted in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 

=====第520页=====
490 
Karl Marx 
EVENTS AT THE THEATRES OF WAR 
London, August 22. The reports of Admirals Penaud and 
Dundas 3 confirm the assessment which we have made of the 
"glorious destruction of Sweaborg, the Gibraltar of the North" 
(Times terminology). Thus we read today in one of the London 
newspapers: 
"The great bombardment of Sweaborg was such that one can only say that it has 
perhaps inflicted considerable damage on the enemy owing to the spread of fire. We 
do not, however, seem to have gained much by it. The success was neither brilliant nor 
substantial. As much remains undone in the Baltic as before." 
Of course The Times, needing fair weather and good tidings 
during the Queen's trip to France,346  having painted nothing but 
couleur de rose for the last few days and pretending to be suffering 
from a fit of optimism— The Times stubbornly insists on dreaming 
of the destruction of the "town" of Sweaborg. 
As far as the Chernaya affair347 is concerned, further reports, 
above all, are required for its proper evaluation. For everything 
depends on how far the battle was centred on the narrow passes 
of the Chernaya and to what extent the depth of the water made 
the river a real obstacle. If the battle took place in front of the 
French lines without such an obstacle then this would cast great 
discredit on the Russians. If, on the other hand, it was a case of 
forcing narrow passes which could not be circumvented, this 
would explain the large Russian losses, and both sides may have 
The report of Penaud was published in Le Moniteur universel, No. 230, August 
18, 1855, and that of Dundas in The Times, No. 22138, August 21,  1855.—  Ed. 
In a report from Paris of August 15 published in The Times, No. 22135, 
August 17, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第521页=====
Events at the Theatres of War 491 
acquitted themselves honourably. But in any case it is not clear 
why the Russians failed to attempt a detour through the Baidar 
Valley. It is, however, certain that if the allies do not voluntarily 
move out, the Russians have now proved their inability to expel 
them from the plateau and the Chernaya line. And so the old 
dilemma has cropped up again. 
The storming of Malakhov may be expected any day now. If it 
fails,  the Allies are in a difficult position. If it succeeds, which is 
after all possible, though only with tremendous losses, this still 
does not mean that the south side is lost, unless evacuation should 
be necessary due to lack of provisions. But at any rate the Allies 
would have achieved the prospect of driving out the Russians 
before winter. The reports about the state of health of the English 
army in the Crimea are contradictory. According to one account 
every month 1,000 English soldiers in the trenches become unfit 
for duty. It is certain that out of a single regiment, the 10th 
Hussars, with a force of 676 men, 161 are sick. Dr. Sutherland, 
head of the health commission despatched to the Crimea by the 
government, writes in a letter to Lord Shaftesbury inter alia: 
"Week ending July 7. Strength of the British army 41,593, total deaths 150, deaths 
from cholera 71, deaths from fever 17, deaths from diarrhoea 19, deaths from 
dysentery 2. Week ending July 14. Strength of the army 42,513, total deaths 123, 
deaths from cholera 55, deaths from fever 18, deaths from diarrhoea 10, deaths from 
dysentery 5. The deaths from wounds for these two weeks were 44 and 30, making a 
total of 74." a 
The ratio of deaths due to disease to deaths due to injuries 
during the first two weeks of July is thus almost 4:1. Dr. 
Sutherland makes the following contrast between the Army's state 
of health last winter and this summer: 
"The winter mortality was a far different thing from the summer mortality. 
Hardly any of the causes—namely, bad food, want of rest, overwork, want of clothing 
and shelter, and exposure to the elements, which caused scorbutis over the whole 
army—exist now. [...] All the cases then were scorbutic, and hence the awful mortality 
in the hospitals at Scutari; it was exactly like the Irish famine fever" (1847); "now we 
have [...] fever and cholera, the intensity of which in our camp has been, no doubt, 
most materially lessened by the great care bestowed on the men." 
The besieged army's state of health is at present indisputably 
worse than that of the besiegers. Dr. Sutherland's letter can, 
however, by no means command full confidence since, as a recent 
a The letter was printed in The Times, No. 22139, August 22, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第522页=====
492 Karl Marx 
incident has shown, criticism within the English camp is punished. 
Approximately six weeks ago The Times published an anonymous 
letter denouncing the unforgivable treatment of the wounded 
after the bloody carnage of June 18.a  The War Office demanded 
the name of the correspondent from The Times. The demand was 
rejected, unless Mr. Frederick Peel expressly promised that the 
correspondent would not suffer any reprisals because of his 
revelations. Peel would not accept this condition but denounced 
the refusal of The Times in Parliament. Mr. Bakewell (assistant 
surgeon b), the author of the letter in question, had in the 
meantime been sent on sick-leave to Scutari. This occurred in the 
middle of July. The authorities in the camp discovered somehow 
or other that he had written the letter. Behind his back, and 
during his absence, a court of inquiry was set up consisting of 
superior medical officials, for the most part personally comprom­
ised by Bakewell's letter. This court condemned him, without 
giving him the chance to defend himself or submit evidence to 
substantiate his charges. On August 3 his dismissal0  was an­
nounced in the general ordre du jour of the army. One should 
gauge the credibility of the official or semi-official English reports 
on the state of health of the army, care of the injured, etc., with 
this incident in mind. 
Written on August 22, 1855 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 395, August 25, 1855 Published in English for the first 
ii-ii • time 
Marked with the sign x 
[R. H. Bakewell,] "The Wounded before Sebastopol. To the Editor of The 
Times", The Times, No. 22098, July 5, 1855.— Ed. 
Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
c The Times, No. 22139, August 22,  1855.—  Ed. 

=====第523页=====
493 
Karl Marx 
NAPIER'S LETTER 
London, August 24. Today's newspapers have published a letter 
from Sir Charles Napier, in which our view of the Sweaborg affair 3 
is substantially confirmed. We give the following excerpt from it. 
"It will be seen by what I have written and by Admiral Dundas's despatch, had 
my plan been followed up to the letter, Sweaborg would have been annihilated. It 
appears that the allies had only 43 gun and mortar boats, and many mortars have 
been disabled; they ought at least to have had 100—Sir James Graham in a letter 
to me" (1854) "said 200. Had that number been there the bombardment would 
have been continued by means of reliefs, as men are relieved in the trenches. The 
mortars would have had time to cool, and the bombardment continued till not one 
stone was left on another, and an opening made for the ships to go in and finish 
the work. Instead of that, the Admiralty do not seem to have foreseen that mortars 
could not stand for ever, though they must have had reports from Sebastopol; and 
thus an operation which appears to have been managed with great judgment has 
only met with partial success, for Admiral Dundas, in his report, admits the sea 
defences were little injured. [...] Had Admiral Dundas's means been greater he might 
have continued the bombardment as long as the weather remained fine, and the fleets, 
instead of returning to Nargen, might have been at anchor in Sweaborg. 
"The first year there might have been some excuse for the Admiralty not 
having means, but none the second. [...] Instead of building gun and mortar boats 
they built a parcel of iron floating batteries which could hardly swim and, if they 
could, they would have been useless, for, had they been placed within 400 yards of 
Sweaborg they would have been annihilated, and at 400 yardsc they would have 
done no harm. 
"The first experiment on iron cost the country a million, and where are they? 
The second experiment not much less than half a million, and they have not yet 
left our ports, and probably never will. This is because incapable men are at the head. 
See this volume, pp. 485-87. Napier's letter was published in The Times, No. 
22141,  August 24, 1855.— Ed. 
b Published in The Times, No. 22138, August 21, 1855.—Ed. 
In The Times: "at 800 yards".— Ed. 

=====第524页=====
494 Karl Marx 
The Ministers have been driven to reform the War Department—when will they think 
of reforming the Admiralty? TiJl they do the people's money will be thrown away. The 
Admiralty do not seem to have contemplated the effect of a bombardment, though I 
told them upwards of a year ago what would happen and if they had read history they 
would have known that Martinique was taken by mortars; there were not casemates 
for all the garrison, nor were there at Sweaborg. Admiral Dundas says it formed no 
part of his plan to attempt a general attack by the ships on the defences, and his 
operations were confined to such destruction of the fortress and arsenals as could be 
accomplished by mortars. 
"Had Admiral Dundas been furnished with sufficient means he would have 
contemplated an attack on the defences, and assembled the  • whole of his fleet, 
ready to take advantage of the terror and confusion occasioned by the gun and 
mortar boats. The heat of the conflagration alone would have kept the garrison 
from the guns, and the fleet would have been in Sweaborg, and the whole of the 
fortifications, islands, and all blown to the Devil; instead of that, the wooden 
buildings and magazines are destroyed, and the work will have to be begun again 
next year." 
Napier concludes his letter thus: 
"Sir James Graham was one of the Ministers who sent a British army to 
Sebastopol in the middle of last September, without means of moving, without 
food, proper tents, or clothing, and without hospitals, to pass a dreary winter and 
perish; and he was the Minister who wanted me to take a British fleet, in the end 
of October, to perish among the rocks of Sweaborg, and, to their shame, got two 
naval officers to put their names to the insulting letter he wrote me; and these men 
still remain in the Admiralty, and that is the way the navy of this country is 
managed. The two summers in the Baltic will be a lesson to them. They are in 
possession of my plans of attacking Kronstadt, and I dare say are in possession of 
Admiral Dundas's; and Sir James Graham and his two coadjutors had better go 
next summer and carry them into execution." 
Written on August 24, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. 
No. 397, August 27, 1855 Published in English for the first 
• time. 
Marked with the sign x 

=====第525页=====
495 
Karl Marx 
AUSTRIA AND THE WAR 
We communicate to our readers on another page an account by 
an Austrian officer of a tour of inspection of the Galician Army 
recently made by the Emperor Francis Joseph. The writer, in 
narrating the events of this tour, and in stating the dislocation of 
the Imperial forces, confirms thé opinion we have on former 
occasions taken care to explain, that in the preparations she last 
year made for war Austria was by no means engaged in a comedy 
for the delusion of the Western Powers. Certainly she could never 
have made such sacrifices merely to throw dust in the eyes of the 
world. 
It is true that the utmost necessity alone induced her to arm 
against Russia; and indeed, as long as it was possible to 
procrastinate, Austria clung to the cobweb thread of a prospective 
peace which Russian diplomacy held out for a bait. At last, 
however, her patience was exhausted, and St. Petersburg learned 
with surprise, not unmingled with terror, that the Austrian 
columns were drawn up along the Galician frontier. This was 
before the bare possibility of such an armament had been 
admitted; and to concentrate an army of equal strength on the 
Russian side, within an equally short time, was altogether out of 
the question. The arts of diplomacy had therefore again to be 
resorted to. In what manner, and with what success this was done, 
need not be repeated. The whole of the immense army lately 
gathered on the Galician frontiers was dissolved at once, and the 
apprehensions of Russia in that quarter were partly allayed.349 We 
say partly, because two important elements have risen with that 

=====第526页=====
496 Karl Marx 
army which are not dissolved along with it. These are the 
fortifications and railways erected, renewed, or completed, during 
the stay of the army in Galicia. 
While in all other parts of the Empire the Government was 
guided by the principle of abandoning railway enterprise to 
private speculators, while the Western Railway, intended to 
connect Vienna with Munich, was even strikingly neglected, Baron 
Hess,  the commander-in-chief in Galicia, was employing thousands 
of soldiers in the construction of a line of which however great the 
strategical value the commercial advantages are questionable, at least 
for the present—a line, too, which otherwise might have remained 
in the desks of private engineers for thirty years to 
come. To Russia nothing could have been more disagreeable than 
the construction of these railways, by which Austria is now able to 
reconcentrate the army just dissolved within less than a fifth part 
of the time required by Russia to bring up a similar army. 
Whoever will take the pains to inquire into the statistics of 
Austrian railway enterprise, and compare what has been done in 
the east to meet purely political views with the little attention paid 
to the interests of commerce in the west, he cannot fail to 
disbelieve that these Galician railways were thus hurried into 
premature existence for the mere deception of the world. Indeed, 
it is plain that such a purpose would have been much better 
answered by the speedy completion of the western lines connect­
ing Austria with Bavaria. 
Our opinion is also confirmed in a still higher degree by the 
recent extensive improvements and additions in the fortifications 
of the eastern provinces of Austria. If railways may or may not be 
constructed from strategical considerations, the erection and 
completion of a system of fortifications, and the unproductive 
outlay occasioned by such works, certainly admit of no explanation 
beyond the immediate necessities of the case. What we have said 
about the comparative extent of railway-works in the east and west 
of Austria applies with much greater force to these fortifications. 
Of the thirty-six fortresses of the Austrian Empire seven belong 
directly, and nine indirectly, to the eastern line of defense, most of 
them having only recently been raised to a high perfection—as for 
instance Cracow, Przemysl and Zaleszczyki. The two former, 
together with Lemberg, which on account of its situation cannot be 
made of great strength, command the road to Warsaw; the latter 
is at the easternmost extremity of Galicia, opposite the important 
Russian fortress of Chotin. Cracow has been made a fortress of 
the first order, and all the works of this, as well as of the other 

=====第527页=====
Austria and the War 497 
Galician fortifications, have been put in complete readiness for 
war. It was once the custom in the Austrian army to give the 
command of fortresses to old worn-out generals, as a sort of 
honorable retirement; and such places were looked upon as a sort 
of exile for officers in disgrace at the Court; but we now find in 
the whole east and north-east really efficient men, generals of 
merit and distinguished staff-officers in command of fortresses. 
Cracow is commanded by Field-Marshal Wolter; Przemysl by 
Major-General Ebner; Zaleszczyki by Major-General Gläser; 
Carlsburg, in Transylvania, by Field-Marshal Sedlmayer; and 
Olmütz, on the north-western flank, by General von Böhm. At the 
same time the state of things in the west is the very reverse—men 
and things all but ruins tranquilly made over to further decay. 
How different would be the aspect there if the Western Powers 
could even pretend to call Austria's policy ambiguous! How the 
Austrian authorities would hasten to restore Linz with its forty 
Maximilian towers, now scarcely treated as a fortress—and 
Salzburg, once a stronghold of the first order! Instead of this, 
what do we behold?—dead quiet and perfect absence of all 
military preparations. The very soldiers returning from the East, 
where they expected to reap their laurels, are invalided as fast as 
they approach the Bavarian frontier. 
These being facts which speak for themselves, there remains 
only one question to be settled: namely, through whose fault was 
the policy of Austria baffled and that country saddled with an 
enormous additional debt, without any immediate advantage 
either to itself or to its ostensible allies? We know it to be an 
opinion current at Vienna and reechoed throughout Germany, 
that Austria shrank back for fear of creating a second adversary in 
Prussia, and because a war undertaken without the aid of 
Germany, offered no guaranty of as speedy a termination as the 
exceptional position of the empire requires. We must however 
insist upon the contrary view. It is our judgment that if Austria 
had boldly attacked the Russian army, Prussia and the rest of 
Germany would have been compelled to follow, more or less 
slowly and reluctantly, in her track. 
Who,  then, is to be held responsible for the present Austrian 
policy?—England, under the guidance of that brilliant boggier 
and loquacious humbug, Lord Paimerston. To prove this proposi­
tion it is necessary to leave the military camp and to enter the 
diplomatic labyrinth. On the 23d of July Mr. Disraeli asked Lord 
John Russell the authority for his statement that "one of the 
principal causes of the expedition to the Crimea was the refusal of 

=====第528页=====
498 Karl Marx 
Austria to cross the River Pruth."a Lord John could not 
recollect—that is he said his "authority was his general recollec­
tion." Mr. Disraeli then put the question to Lord Palmerston, who 
"would not answer questions like these, picked out piecemeal from a long 
course of negotiations between her Majesty's Government and the Government of 
one of the Sovereigns in alliance to a certain degree with her Majesty. All he 
could say with regard to himself was, that he had always thought the Crimea was 
the place where the most effective blow could be struck at the preponderance of 
Russia in the Black Sea; and if there had been no other reason [...] that would, in 
his mind, be amply sufficient for the expedition." "My opinion," he declared, "was 
that the expedition to the Crimea was the best step to take." 
Thus we learn from Lord Palmerston that the Crimean 
campaign originated not with Austria, not with Bonaparte, but 
with himself.  On June 26 Lord Lyndhurst, making a fierce 
onslaught on Austria, stated that 
"early in June [1854] she resolved on making a demand upon Russia to 
evacuate the Principalities. That demand was made in very strong terms, with 
something like an intimation that if it were not complied with Austria would resort 
to forcible means to secure this object." 
After some historical observations, the learned lord went on to 
say: 
"Did Austria then immediately carry into effect any attack upon Russia? Did she 
attempt to enter the Principalities? — Far from it. She abstained from doing 
anything for a period of several weeks, till the moment when the siege of Silistria 
had been raised and the Russian army was in retreat, and when Russia herself had 
served a notice that she would within a certain time leave the Principalities and 
retire behind the Pruth."c 
Lord Lyndhurst thus reproaches Austria for saying one thing 
and doing another. He was followed in the debate by Lord 
Clarendon, and from him we may get some idea of the genius 
which transformed the Austria of May and June into the Austria 
of July and August. He says that 
"when Austria entered into those successive engagements with England and 
France, and when she made those extensive and costly preparations for 
The House of Commons debate (Disraeli's questions and the replies by Russell 
and Palmerston) was reported in The Times, No. 22114, July 24, 1855. Russell's 
statement quoted by Disraeli is from the former's speech in the House of Commons 
on July 19, 1855.— Ed. 
Presumably Francis Joseph.— Ed. 
The House of Lords debate of June 26, 1855 was reported in The Times, 
No. 22091,  June 27,  1855.—  Ed. 

=====第529页=====
Austria and the War 499 
war—when, moreover, she urgently proposed that military commissions should be 
sent by France and England to the headquarters of Gen. Hess, I have no doubt she 
intended and expected war. But she also expected that long before the season for 
military operations began the allied armies would have obtained decisive victories in 
the Crimea—that they would be free, and would be able to undertake other 
operations in concert with her own forces. That unfortunately was not the case; 
and if Austria had at our invitation declared war, she would in all probability have 
had to wage that war single-handed." 
The explanation of Lord John Russell is thus in direct 
opposition to the statement of Lord Clarendon. Lord John stated 
that the Crimean expedition sailed because Austria refused to 
cross the Pruth—that is, to take part against Russia. Lord 
Clarendon tells us that Austria could not take part against Russia 
because of the expedition to the Crimea. 
Next, we may consult with profit an uncontradicted statement of 
Lord Ellenborough: 
"Before the expedition to the Crimea was dispatched, Austria proposed to 
communicate with the allied Powers on the subject of future military operations; 
acting, however, upon preconceived opinions, the Allies sent that expedition, and 
then Austria at once said that she could not meet the Russians single-handed, and 
that the expedition to the Crimea rendered it necessary for her to adopt a different 
course of action. At a subsequent period, just at the commencement of the 
Conferences at Vienna, when it was of the greatest possible importance that Austria 
should act with us—at that time, still looking to nothing but the success of your 
operations in the Crimea, you withdrew from the immediate vicinity of Austria 
50,000 good Turkish troops, thus depriving Austria of the only assistance on which 
she could rely in the event of a military expedition against Russia. It is clear, 
therefore, my lords, and also from the statements of the noble earl [Clarendon], 
that it is our ill-advised expedition to the Crimea which has paralyzed the policy of 
Austria, and which has reduced her to a position of such difficulty as to prevent 
her at once adopting a course which is essential for her honor, her dignity, and her 
interest. Before that expedition sailed to the Crimea I ventured to counsel the 
Government as to what the necessary consequences of it would be. I counseled 
them as to the effect which that expedition would produce upon the policy of 
Austria." 
The advice of Lord Ellenborough was not heeded. Palmerston 
sent off the Sevastopol expedition at the very moment when its 
sailing was best calculated to prevent and avert Austrian hostilities 
against Russia. It almost looks as if he had meant to render aid to 
the great enemy of England, and as if he had purposely 
entrapped Austria into her present ambiguous position in the 
Principalities, delivered her over to Russian diplomacy, and 
crowded her still nearer to the brink of that abyss into which she 
must ultimately sink. In this matter, as in so many others during 
his long and inglorious career, Palmerston has brilliantly sue-

=====第530页=====
500 Karl Marx 
ceeded, whatever may have been 
interest of Russia alone. 
Written in the second half of August 
1855 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No.  4493,  September 13, 1855, 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 4502, September 14, 1855 as 
a leading article; the German version of 
the second half of this article was pub­
lished in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 383, 
August 18, 1855, marked with the sign x his real purpose, in serving the 
Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第531页=====
501 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
THE PUNISHMENT OF THE RANKS 3 
London, August 28. A single institution of the British army is 
sufficient to characterise the class the British soldier is recruited 
from. We refer to the punishment of flogging. Corporal punishment 
no longer exists in the French, the Prussian or several smaller 
armies. Even in Austria, where the recruits for the most part are 
semi-barbarians, its abolition is evidently being striven for; for 
instance, the punishment of running the gauntlet was recently 
expunged from the military law of Austria. In England, on the 
other hand, the "cat-o'-nine-tails"a has remained in full opera­
tion—an instrument of torture quite on a par with the Russian 
knout. Whenever a reform of military legislation has been mooted 
in Parliament all the old plumed hats have waxed passionate on 
behalf of the "cat", and none more zealously than old Wellington. 
For these men an unflogged soldier was an incomprehensible 
creature. In their eyes bravery, discipline and invincibility were the 
exclusive attributes of men bearing the scars of at least 50 lashes 
on their backsides like liegemen of old bearing a coat of arms. 
The only reform has been the limitation of the number of 
strokes of the lash to 50. The efficacy of this reform may be 
judged from the fact that in Aldershot about a week ago a private 
expired shortly after receiving 30 strokes of the lash. On this 
occasion the favourite method of soaking the "cat-o'-nine-tails" in 
urine was employed. The application of urine on raw and 
bleeding flesh is an infallible recipe for tormenting the patient 
beyond the bounds of sanity. The nine-tailed cat is not only an 
instrument of torture, it leaves behind ineradicable scars, it brands 
a Here and below Marx and Engels use the English term.— Ed. 

=====第532页=====
502 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
a man for life. Even in the English army such a branding entails a 
constant oppressive burden of shame. The flogged soldier falls 
below the level of his comrades! But under the British military 
code punishment before the enemy consists almost exclusively of 
flogging, and thus the punishment lauded by its defenders as the 
only means of maintaining discipline in decisive moments becomes 
the surest means of destroying discipline, by breaking the moral 
composure and the point d'honneur of the soldier. This explains 
two strange facts. Firstly: the great number of British deserters before 
Sevastopol. During the winter when the British soldiers had to 
make superhuman efforts in guarding the trenches, those unable 
to keep awake for 48-60 hours at a stretch were flogged. Just 
imagine it! Floggings for heroes like the British soldiers, who had 
proved themselves in the trenches before Sevastopol and in the 
open before Inkerman 351! But the articles of war left no choice. 
Floggings were meted out to the best men in the army if they were 
overcome by fatigue, and dishonoured as they were they deserted 
to the Russians. It is impossible to conceive of a better motivated 
condemnation of this system than is provided by these facts. In no 
previous war have the troops of any nation deserted to the 
Russians in any numbers worth mentioning. They knew they 
would receive worse treatment than in their own national ranks. It 
was left to the British army to provide the first strong contingent 
of such deserters, and according to the evidence of the English­
men themselves it was the "cat-o'-nine-tails" which recruited these 
deserters to Russia. 
The second fact is the difficulty England encounters in all its 
attempts at forming foreign legions. As early as the anti-Jacobin 
war, even though the British articles of war nominally apply to the 
foreign corps, corporal punishment had to be abandoned in fact. 
At the beginning of this century some heterodox British generals, 
Sir Robert Wilson among others, published pamphlets criticising 
the corporal punishment of soldiers. For more than ten years Sir 
Francis Burdett thundered against the "cat-o'-nine-tails" in Parlia­
ment and called the British "a flogged nation".3 In the Commons 
he found energetic seconds in Lord Folkestone and the famous 
Lord Cochrane (now Admiral Earl of Dundonald). In the press 
Cobbett conducted a strenuous campaign against the "cat", 
atoning for it with two years' imprisonment. At one point, during 
the last years of war against Napoleon, exasperation in the nation 
The English phrase is used in the original and the German translation is given 
in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第533页=====
The Punishment of the Ranks 503 
and in the army reached such heights that the Duke of York, 
equally notorious for his bigoted attachment to square-bashing, 
his bolting from the French and his amours with Madame Clarke, 
was forced to issue an order of the day in which all officers 
received notice that were flogging a frequent occurrence in their 
respective commands it would hinder their promotion. 
How then can we explain the fact that the "cat-o'-nine-tails" has 
victoriously survived' all these storms of half-a-century? Very 
simply. It is the instrument by which the aristocratic character of 
the British army is preserved, by which all higher positions, 
starting with ensign, remain secure as the apanage of the younger 
sons of the aristocracy and the gentry. With the disappearance of 
the "cat-o'-nine-tails" the extraordinary distance between the 
soldiers and the officers, which splits the army into two virtually 
separate races, would also disappear. At the same time the army's 
ranks would be opened to sections of the population higher than 
those from which they have hitherto been recruited. And that would 
seal the fate of the old constitution of the British army. It would 
be revolutionised through and through. The nine-tailed cat is the 
Cerberus guarding the treasure of the aristocracy. 
Written on August 28, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 405, August 31, 1855 This version is published in En­
glish for the first time Marked with the sign X 

=====第534页=====
504 
Frederick Engels 
THE BATTLE OF THE CHERNAYA 
Contrary to our expectation the mail of the Africa, which we 
received late on Wednesday night, failed to bring the report of 
Prince Gorchakoff concerning the battle of the Chernaya, fought 
on the 16th ult. However, the French and English accounts which 
we printed yesterday afford sufficient information for a tolerably 
correct judgment of the affair.3  In the French report one is struck 
by the absence of that tendency to bluster which but too often is 
innate in a French sabreur, and which was so prominent in 
Pélissier's first Bulletins. The old General is now uncommonly 
clear, business-like, and to the point* 5; he even gives the Russians 
full credit for the bravery they displayed on that occasion; and his 
report very favorably contrasts with General Simpson's amusing 
calculations as to the numbers engaged, by which it would appear 
that without any great effort some 15,000 French and Sardinians 
defeated 60,000 Russians. The facts of the case appear to have 
been as follows: 
On the morning of Aug. 16, before daybreak, the Russians 
descended from the Mackenzie hights and took up a position on 
Instead of these two sentences the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune and 
New-York Weekly Tribune have: "At last we have received the reports of the several 
commanding Generals in the Crimea concerning the battle of the Chernaya, fought 
on the 16th ult." — Ed. 
In the Neue Oder-Zeitung of September 3, 1855 the beginning of the article 
reads as follows: "Although we still have no detailed Russian report on the battle of 
the Chernaya (fought on August 16), the French and English reports this time 
allow a fairly accurate judgment of the affair. The defeat of June 18 seems to a 
certain degree to have held in check the tendency to bluster which was so 
prominent in Pélissier's first Bulletins. His report on the Chernaya affair is 
uncommonly clear, business-like, and to the point." — Ed. 

=====第535页=====
/.y 
crrr»  ,***,-«**• 
Chart of the Battle of the Chernaya 
(August 16, 1855) made by Engels 

=====第536页=====

=====第537页=====
The Battle of the Chernaya 507 
the edge of the hills descending toward the Chernaya. They were 
commanded by Prince Gorchakoff in person, under whom Gen. 
Read commanded the right wing (7th and 12th divisions), while 
Liprandi with the 5th division appears to have occupied the 
center, while the 17th division formed the Russian left. Portions of 
the 4th and 6th divisions were also present, and seem to have 
acted as reserves. The 5th division, along with the troops 
belonging to the 4th and 6th, form part of the second (Paniutin's) 
corps,  which had but just arrived in the Crimea; the remainder 
were old Crimean troops, and must have figured with effective 
numbers very much reduced. 
The ground on the opposite side of the Chernaya is mostly 
level, a continuation of the plain of Balaklava toward the river; but 
close to its banks this plain is interrupted by two groups of 
hillocks, rising gradually from the Balaklava side, but falling off 
toward the Chernaya, thus offering a good defensible position 
against an enemy crossing the river. Between these two groups of 
hillocks lies the valley into which the British Light Cavalry charged 
in the battle of Balaklava.353 The eastern group of hillocks, 
forming the right wing of the position, was occupied by La 
Marmora with his two Sardinian divisions; the other, toward the 
northwest, by three French divisions, which thus formed the 
center and left of the position. The French were commanded by 
General d'Herbillon, who had disposed Camou's division to the 
left, his own in the center, and Faucheux's division to the right, 
where it joined the Sardinian division of Trotti. The position 
gained additional strength from the two obstacles in its immediate 
front: first, the Chernaya, which river at the time was certainly 
fordable, but still obliged the Russians to cross at certain places 
only, and with a small front; and secondly, the aqueduct, cut in 
most places into the rock, and thus offering, even after its passage, 
a steep wall of scarped rock to be climbed. On the brink of the 
hills the French and Piedmontese had thrown up some light 
breast-works just sufficient to shelter their cannon. The two 
groups of hillocks formed, so to speak, several bastions flanking 
each other with their artillery. Beyond the Chernaya, which was 
crossed by bridges at Chorgun, on the Sardinian extreme right, 
and at an inn (in Russian Traktir) in front of the French center, 
the Piedmontese had two companies as outposts, while the bridge 
of Traktir was covered by a slight bridge-head occupied by the 
French. The French outposts were still beyond this. 
On the morning of the 16th the Russians having got their 
artillery in position on the hights east of the Chernaya, sent their 

=====第538页=====
508 Frederick Engels 
advanced troops down into the valley. Day had not yet broken and 
a dense fog facilitated a surprise, as at Inkerman. The allied 
outposts were driven in in a moment, and by daybreak the 
bridge-head and the whole eastern side of the river were in their 
hands,  while they were fighting for the passage of the bridges with 
two French regiments. Then the 7th and 12th Russian divisions, 
placed exactly opposite the French divisions of Camou and 
d'Herbillon, descended in two close columns into the valley; and 
here they formed their columns of attack and advanced in two 
distinct masses—the 7th division, passing river and aqueduct, 
partly by fords, partly by flying-bridges constructed in all haste, 
against Camou; while the 12th division, part of which remained in 
reserve, advanced against d'Herbillon by the bridge of Traktir, the 
defenders of which were in an instant thrown back by the 
overwhelming masses of the Russians. They advanced with greater 
rapidity and spirit than were ever shown by Russians through the 
aqueduct and up the hill-side. The 7th Russian division came up 
nearly to the brink of the hill, when Camou's troops, deployed in 
line,  gave them a volley and charged them in flank and rear with 
such vehemence that the Russians instantly turned, recrossed the 
river under a murderous fire, and, if we may believe Pélissier, that 
7th division never showed itself again during the battle. In the 
center, the 12th division succeeded in scaling the hights and 
driving in several French regiments. The fate of the battle 
appeared uncertain for a moment, when d'Herbillon ordered a 
brigade from Faucheux's division to attack the left flank of the 
Russian columns, and after a short struggle, the Russians were 
driven down the declivity, followed by the French, who for a 
moment retook the bridge. 
Gorchakoff, however, had prepared a fresh attack. The 
remainder of the 12th division and the 5th division had descended 
into the valley, where they sheltered the fugitives who re-formed; 
and now the whole of the 12th and 5th divisions moved forward 
for a second charge. They passed by the bridge, and close to the 
right and left of it, and advanced with great vivacity against the 
allied center (d'Herbillon's and Faucheux's divisions). But by this 
time the French had got all their artillery into position; it fired in 
front against the Russian columns, while the Sardinian artillery 
took them in flank. In spite of this murderous fire they advanced 
steadily and rapidly, and again reached the hights. There they 
found the French collected, deployed in line a little behind the 
edge of the hill. As soon as the heads of the columns were fairly 
on the edge, the French gave them a volley, and charged them 

=====第539页=====
The Battle of the Chernaya 509 
with the bayonet in front and flank. The struggle was as short as 
before. The Russians gave way and fled in disorder across the 
river, pursued by the musketry and artillery-fire of the Allies. This 
second defeat of the Russians virtually decided the battle. They 
had three-fifths of their infantry engaged, and could not hope to 
see any fresh reenforcements arrive on the field; the Allies, too, 
had three divisions out of five engaged, but fresh troops were 
hurrying to support them from the camp before Sevastopol. 
Pélissier had sent for two more divisions of the line and one of the 
Guards, and they were coming up. It was now about 8 o'clock in 
the morning. 
Gorchakoff, in spite of these odds, resolved upon another 
attack. The 17th division now had to come forward and to form a 
nucleus for such part of the beaten troops as were still fit to be 
brought against the enemy. The line of attack was again shifted to 
the left; it was Faucheux's division upon which the Russians fell 
this time. But in vain. The cross-fire of the French and Sardinian 
artillery decimated them before they could reach the summit of 
the hills, and again the French lines broke their columns and 
drove them back to the other side of the river, while the 
Piedmontese (Trotti's division) took them in flank and completed 
the victory. There remained but the troops of the 4th and 6th 
divisions intact, amounting to the effective strength of about one 
division. To launch these would have served no purpose whatever. 
The defeat was unmistakable; and accordingly the Russians, 
bringing forward their artillery, commenced the retreat. Their 
own position was so strong that Pélissier deemed an attack upon it 
out of the question; and therefore they were molested by the 
artillery and rifles only. 3 The loss of the Russians in this affair was 
enormous in comparison with that of the Allies. The former lost 
about  5,000  in killed, wounded and prisoners; the latter about 
1,500 only. The reason of this was, that the Russians had to make 
all their charges under the most effective fire of the allied 
artillery, especially the Piedmontese, whose 16-pounders, though 
slow to move, are of the highest effect when once in position. 
The Russian attack was here made exclusively in front. To turn 
the French left by Inkerman, appeared impossible from the 
command exercised by the French batteries on the spur of the 
Instead of the last two sentences the Neue Oder-Zeitung of September 4, 1855, 
where the end of this article is published, has: "Yesterday we described the mere 
progress of the battle of the Chernaya. For an accurate assessment of the number 
of troops engaged on both sides we shall have to wait for the Russian 
reports." — Ed. 

=====第540页=====
510 Frederick Engels 
ridge opposite that place. To turn the Allies by their right would 
have necessitated that the main body of the Russians should 
descend into the valley of Baidar, where the ground is evidently 
too intricate for such clumsy troops. Thus the front attack was 
chosen, and very properly a surprise attempted. The surprise 
partially succeeded, but was not carried out with the necessary 
energy. When the Russians were once masters of the passages of 
the Chernaya, they should have pushed forward their masses just 
as they happened to be at hand, in order to follow up their 
advantage before the French could recover from the first blow.3 
Instead of that, they allowed their opponents the time necessary to 
bring their troops and artillery into position, and the effect of the 
surprise which might have brought into their hands the hights 
occupied by the French ceased almost as soon as the Russians had 
reached the Ghernaya. This is another proof of the difficulty of 
moving Russian troops under circumstances where they should be 
expected to act rapidly and where inferior commanders must use 
their own judgment. 
The French have always been notorious for a certain contempt 
of outpost duty. Even in their best estate an active enemy could 
any night surprise their outposts and alarm their camps without 
any great risk. On this occasion they showed that even the 
slowly-moving Russians might do it. Their main position was so 
close on the Chernaya that their advanced troops should have 
been either pushed much further forward, or, if the ground did 
not allow this, that they should have been reenforced so strongly 
as to be able to hold out until the camp could be got under arms. 
As it was, the French were encamped without any proportionate 
advanced guard, and in consequence the Russians were able to 
advance on their main position before they had time to bring their 
full powers of resistance into play. More active opponents than the 
Russians would have brought forward superior numbers so rapidly 
that the hights occupied by the French must have been carried 
before any regular and systematic resistance could have been 
made.b But the Russians themselves were afraid of risking a 
This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 
Instead of the passage beginning with the words "On this occasion they 
showed..." the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "That omission was all the more striking this 
time as Pélissier had repeatedly been informed of the plans of the Russians, even 
on the eve of the battle, by Russian deserters. As it was, the French were encamped 
on the hills without any proportionate advanced guard, so that the enemy could 
have advanced before they had had time to bring their full powers of resistance 
into play. This could have decided the outcome had the French been confronted by an 
active opponent."—Ed. 

=====第541页=====
The Battle of the Chernaya 511 
division or two of their troops in twilight-fighting, and thus they 
lost every advantage the surprise had gained for them. 
The decisive and easily-bought successes of the French in 
repelling the Russian columns when they had already scaled the 
hights, were due to a system of tactics hitherto not often followed 
by them. They have evidently learnt this mode of fighting from 
the English, who are masters in it. In defending a range of hills, 
the great advantage consists in concealing your troops just behind 
the crest, where they are fully sheltered, deploying them in line, 
and awaiting the appearance of the hostile columns. As soon as 
the heads of the columns appear on the crest, your line pours a 
volley into them, to which but a few muskets can reply, and then 
you rush upon them, in front and flank, with the bayonet. The 
English fought thus at Busaco, Pampeluna, Waterloo,354 and other 
battles, with constant success. Yet the continental troops of Europe 
appear to have lost all trace of this all but infallible mode of 
defending a range of hights. In the manuals of tactics it figured, 
but in practice it had almost disappeared before the universal 
predilection for columns covered by skirmishers. The French 
deserve great credit for having adopted from their old opponents 
this plain and effective maneuver. Had they been disposed in 
columns there is little doubt the Russians would have had greater 
advantages over them and perhaps even carried the day. But as it 
was, the fire of a deployed line of infantry, acting upon an enemy 
disorganized by a telling artillery fire and the fatigue of mounting 
a steep hill, proved overwhelming; and a hearty advance with the 
bayonet was quite sufficient to hurl back the masses that had 
already spent their spirits before the glittering steel was close upon 
them.3 
This is the third pitched battle of this war, fought in the open 
field, and like Alma and Inkerman,355 it is distinguished by its 
comparatively short duration. In Napoleon's wars a great deal of 
preliminary skirmishing characterized a battle; each party sought 
to feel the enemy before engaging him on decisive points and with 
decisive masses; and it was after each party had engaged the 
greater number of its troops only that the decisive blow was 
attempted. Here we see, on the contrary, no time lost, no fencing 
to tire out the enemy; the blow is struck at once, and upon the 
result of one or two attacks the fate of the battle depends. This 
looks a great deal braver than Napoleon's mode of fighting; yet, if 
a The concluding part of this paragraph beginning with the words "but in 
practice it had almost disappeared" does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第542页=====
512 Frederick Engels 
a superiority of two to one, as the Allies possessed on the Alma, or 
if the known clumsiness of the Russians in maneuvering may seem 
to justify such straightforward action, the fact is that it shows in 
both parties a great want of generalship; and whenever the 
sabreurs who act upon this principle happen to be opposed to a 
general who properly understands how to occupy their troops, 
how to lay snares for them and invite them to run into them, they 
will very soon find themselves in a very unenviable position. 
Finally, we repeat what we have often said; bravery in the 
soldiers and mediocrity in the generals are the chief characteris­
tics, on both sides, of the present war.a 
Written about August 31, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4494, September 14, 1855, 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1076, September 18, 1855 
and the New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 732, 
September 22, 1855 as a leading article; 
the German version was published in the 
Neue Oder-Zeitung, Nos. 409 and 411, 
September 3 and 4, 1855, marked with the 
sign x 
Instead of the last two paragraphs the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "The battle of 
the Chernaya is the third 'great' battle of the Crimean campaign alongside the 
battles of the Alma and Inkerman. Characteristic of all these battles is their 
extraordinary simplicity, we would almost say primitiveness. No long manoeuvring, 
several strong blows, rapid decision. In Napoleon's battles we find, on the contrary, 
a great deal of skirmishing, all sorts of manoeuvres, and the decisive blow dealt 
unexpectedly only after the greater part of the troops has temporarily been 
engaged. The Crimean mode of procedure looks braver but in fact only shows the 
mediocrity of the generals on both sides and bears out our view that in modern 
times the art of war has been developing in reverse proportion to war material. If 
the battle of the Chernaya by no means provides as strong evidence of the 
Russians' inability as the battle of Inkerman, it undoubtedly proves anew the 
superiority of the Western armies. It shows to those prophets who on the pretext 
of having discovered a 'new' element in history are merely giving modern colour 
and shape to their school recollections of the decline of the Roman Empire that the 
substitutes for the Goths should be looked for not among the Muscovites but 
elsewhere. 
"In The Morning Advertiser Sir Charles Napier is publishing his correspondence 
with Sir James Graham, something he has threatened to do for a long time." — Ed. 

=====第543页=====
513 
Karl Marx 
ANOTHER BRITISH REVELATION 35 
With the single exception of the posthumous papers of Sir 
A. Burnes, published by his father in order to clear his memory 
from the fahe imputation, cast upon him by Lord Palmerston, of 
having initiated the infamous and unfortunate Afghan war, and 
proving to evidence that the so-called dispatches of Sir A. Burnes, 
as laid before Parliament by Lord Palmerston, were not only 
mutilated to the entire perversion of their original sense, but 
actually falsified and interpolated with passages forged for the 
express purpose of misleading public opinion357—.with this single 
exception, there has, perhaps, never appeared a series of 
documents more damaging to the reputation of the British 
Government and of the caste which enjoys a hereditary tenure of 
office in that country, than the correspondence between Sir James 
Graham and Sir Charles Napier, just published3 by the old 
Admiral with a view to vindicate his own character. 
In this controversy Sir James Graham possesses one great 
advantage over his adversary—no revelation whatever is likely to 
lower his character in the world's judgment. The man who loudly 
boasted of having been an accomplice in the murder of the 
Bandieras; who stands convicted of having regularly opened, and 
tampered with, private letters at the London Post-Office for the 
mere benefit of the Holy Alliance; who spaniel-like licked the 
hands of the Emperor Nicholas, when he landed on the English 
shore; who even exaggerated the atrocious cruelty of the new 
English Poor Laws by his peculiar method of administering them; 
a The Times, Nos. 22149, 22150, 22152 and 22154, September 3, 4, 6 and 8, 
1855.—  Ed. 
18—3754 

=====第544页=====
514 Karl Marx 
and who, but a few months ago, vainly attempted in a full House 
to throw upon Mr. Layard the odium of the injuries he had 
himself inflicted upon poor Captain Christie3358—such a man may 
be fairly considered character-proof. There is something mysteri­
ous in his public career. Possessed neither of the uncommon 
talents which allow Lord Palmerston to belong to no party, nor of 
the hereditary party influence which enables Lord John Russell to 
dispense with uncommon talents, he has nevertheless succeeded in 
acting a prominent part among British statesmen. The clue to this 
riddle is to be found, not in the annals of the history of the world, 
but in the annals of Punch. In that instructive periodical there 
occurs, year after year, a picture drawn from the life, and adorned 
with the laconic inscription: "Sir Robert Peel's Dirty Boy." Sir 
Robert Peel was an honest man, though no great man; but above 
all, he was a British statesman, a party leader, forced by the very 
exigencies of his position to do much dirty work, which he was 
rather averse to doing. Thus, Sir James proved a true godsend to 
him, and thus Sir James happened to become an inevitable man, 
and a great man too. 
Sir Charles Napier belongs to a family alike distinguished by 
their gifts and their eccentricities. The Napiers, amid the present 
tame race of men, impress one with the notion of some primitive 
tribe,  enabled by their natural genius to acquire the arts of 
civilization; but not to bow before its conventionalities, to respect 
its etiquette, or to submit to its discipline. If the Napiers have 
always done good service to the English people, they have always 
quarreled with and revolted against their government. If they 
possess the value of Homeric heroes, they are also somewhat given 
to their swaggering mood. There was the late General Sir Charles 
Napier—undoubtedly the most ingenious soldier England has 
possessed since the times of Marlborough, but not more noted for 
his conquest of Scinde 359 than for his quarrels with the East India 
Company, which were prolonged beyond the grave on the part of 
his family. There is General Sir W. Napier, the first writer in the 
military literature of England, but not less famous for his eternal 
feuds with the British War-Office—whose regard for the narrow 
prejudices of his countrymen is so small that, at first, his 
celebrated history of the Peninsular War was unanimously 
denounced by the British reviews as "the best French account ever 
given of that War." There is also the antagonist of Sir James 
This refers to Graham's speech in the House of Commons on May 18, 1855. 
The Times, No. 22058, May 19, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第545页=====
Another British Revelation 515 
Graham, old Admiral Napier, who made his renown by unmaking 
the orders of his superiors. As for this last burly scion of the 
Napiers, Sir James fancied he had wrapped him in boa-constrictor 
folds,  but they finally prove to be mere conventional cobwebs. 
Sir James Graham, as First Lord of the Admiralty, deprived Sir 
Charles Napier, on his return to England, of his command; in the 
House of Commons he pointed to him as the responsible author 
of the Baltic failure, in proof of which he quoted some passages 
from his private letters3; he accused him of having shrunk from 
the execution of the bold orders he had received from the 
Admiralty Board; he expressed a hope that no other Lord of the 
Admiralty would at any future time be inconsiderate enough to 
hoist Sir Charles Napier's flag; and he ridiculed him in the papers 
at his disposal as "Fighting Charley," who, like the mythological 
King of France, "marched up the hill with twenty thousand men, 
and then marched down again." Sir Charles, to use his own words, 
"demanded inquiry on his conduct, which was refused; he appealed to the 
Cabinet, but received no reply, and finally to the House of Commons. The 
papers were refused, under the plea that it would be injurious to her Majesty's 
service." 
After the bombardment of Sweaborg that plea was of course at 
an end. 
Sir James thought his game the more sure, as he had taken the 
precaution of marking all his-letters "private" which were likely to 
expose himself and to vindicate his intended victim. As to the 
meaning of that sacramental word "private," Sir James  himself, 
when giving his evidence before the Sevastopol Committee, stated 
that a British First Lord of the Admiralty is wont to mark public 
instructions "private" whenever he has good reason to withhold 
them not only from the public, but even from Parliament.0 
With a man like Sir James, who thinks himself entitled to turn 
private letters into public ones, it is quite natural to convert public 
documents into private property. But this time he reckoned 
without his host. Sir Charles Napier, by boldly breaking through 
the shackles of "private instructions," is perhaps exposed to the 
chance of being struck from the British Navy list, and has 
probably disabled himself from ever again hoisting his flag; but, at 
Graham's speech in the House of Commons on March 8, 1855. The Times, 
No. 21997, March 9, 1855.— Ed. 
"Sir Charles Napier on the Bombardment of Sweaborg. To the Editor of The 
Times", The Times, No.  22141,  August 24, 1855.—Ed. 
"State of the Army before Sebastopol", The Times, No. 22054, May 15, 
1855.—Ed. 
18* 

=====第546页=====
516 Karl Marx 
the same time, he has not only barred the entrance of the 
Admiralty Board to Sir James, but also shown to the English 
people that their navy is as rotten as their army. When the 
Crimean campaign stripped from the British army its time-
honored reputation, the defenders of the ancient régime pleaded 
not guilty on the plausible ground that England had never 
pretended to be a first-rate military power. However, they will not 
dare to assert that Great Britain has laid no claim to be the first 
naval power of the world. Such is the redeeming feature of war; it 
puts a nation to the test. As exposure to the atmosphere reduces 
all mummies to instant dissolution, so war passes supreme 
judgment upon social organizations that have outlived their 
vitality. 
This correspondence between Sir James Graham and Admiral 
Napier, extending from the 24th of February to the 6th of 
November, 1854, and denied a place in full in our columns only 
from its great length, may be summed up very briefly. Up to the 
end of August, when the Baltic season, as is generally known, has 
reached its close, all went very smoothly—although Sir Charles 
Napier, on the very outset of the expedition, had told Sir James 
his opinion that 
"the means which the Admiralty had provided for fitting out and manning the 
North Sea fleet [...] were insufficient for the occasion and unequal to an encounter 
with the Russians on fair terms." 
During all this time Sir James in his letters does nothing but smile 
upon his "Dear Sir Charles." On March 12 he "congratulates" 
him on the "order " in which the fleet had left the English shores; 
on April 5 he is "satisfied with his movements;" on April 10 he is 
"entirely satisfied with his proceedings;" on June 20 he calls him 
"a consummate Commander-in-Chief;" on July 4 he is "sure that 
whatever man can do will be done by Sir Charles;" on August 22 
he "congratulates him sincerely on the success of his operations 
before Bomarsund;" and on August 25, seized with a sort of 
poetical rapture, he breaks forth: 
"I am more than satisfied with your proceedings; I am delighted with the 
prudence and sound judgment you have evinced." 
During the whole time Sir James feels only anxious lest Sir 
Charles, 
"in the eager desire to achieve a great exploit and to satisfy the wild wishes of an 
impatient multitude, should yield to some rash impulse, and fail in the discharge of 
one of the noblest of duties — which is the moral courage to do what you know to 
be right, at the risk of being accused of having done wrong." 

=====第547页=====
Another British Revelation 517 
As early as May 1, 1854, he tells Sir Charles: 
"I believe both Sweaborg and Kronstadt to be all but impregnable from the 
sea — Sweaborg more especially—and none but a very large army could operate by 
land efficiently in the presence of such a force as Russia could readily concentrate 
for the immediate approaches to her capital." 
If Sir Charles tells him on June 12 that 
"the only successful manner of attacking Sweaborg that he could see after the most 
mature consideration, assisted by Admiral Chads [...], was by fitting out a great 
number of gun-boats [...]" — 
Sir James answers him on July 11: 
"With 50,000 troops and 200 gun-boats you might still do something great and 
decisive before the end of September." 
But hardly had the Winter set in, the French army and navy 
sailed away, and the heavy equinoctial gales begun to furrow the 
Baltic waves—hardly had Sir Charles reported 
"that our ships have already been parting their cables; the Dragon was reduced to 
one anchor, and the Impérieuse and Basilisk lost one each the other night; and the 
Magicienne was obliged to anchor in a fog, and when she weighed in the night from 
off Nargen found herself obliged to anchor off Renskar Lighthouse, having drifted 
among the rocks; and that the Euryalus had been ashore on the rocks, and that it 
was a mercy she was not lost" — 
when Sir James all at once discovered that "war is not 
conducted without risks and dangers," and Sweaborg, therefore, 
must be taken without a single soldier or a single gun or 
mortar-boat! Indeed, we can only repeat with the old Admiral: 
"Had the Emperor of Russia been First Lord of the Admiralty he 
would have written just such letters." 
At the Admiralty Board, as is clearly shown by this correspon­
dence, anarchy reigned as supreme as at the War-Office. Sir James 
approved of Napier's movement inside the Belt, while the Board 
disapproved of it. In August, Sir James writes him to prepare for 
an early retreat from the Baltic, while the Board sends dispatches 
in a contrary sense. Sir James takes one view of Gen. Niel's report, 
and the Board an opposite one. But the most interesting point 
presented by the correspondence is, perhaps, the new light it 
throws upon the Anglo-French Alliance. The French admiralb 
showed Sir Charles his orders of recall on the 30th of August. The 
"Sir Charles Napier on the Bombardment of Sweaborg. To the Editor of The 
Times \ The Times, No.  22141,  August 24, 1855.—Ed. 
A. F. Parseval-Deschênes. — Ed. 

=====第548页=====
518 Karl Marx 
French army sailed on the 4th of September, and the rest of the 
French fleet left on the 19th; while Sir James Graham informs Sir 
Charles that he only knew of their withdrawal on the 25th 
September. Sir James, therefore, erroneously supposed "the 
decisions to have been taken on the spot, with Napier's consent," 
but, as he emphatically adds: "without any reference to the 
English Government." On the other hand, it seems that Niel, the 
French General of Engineers, and Louis Bonaparte's intimate 
friend, gave the advice to "destroy Sweaborg in two hours, by 
sail-of-the-line." This would seem to show clearly that he intended 
goading the English fleet into a desperate attack, in which they 
would uselessly knock their heads on the forts and sunken rocks 
of the Russian defenses. 
Written about September 8, 1855 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4502, September 24, 1855 
as a leading article 

=====第549页=====
519 
Frederick Engels 
THE FALL OF SEVASTOPOL 
After a year of varying fortunes and terrible suffering, the 
Crimean campaign has at last reached its turning-point.3  From the 
1st inst. to the 8th the Russian telegraphic dispatches admit that 
considerable damage had been done to the lines of Sevastopol by 
the allied fire, and that the damage had been repaired "as much 
as possible," and no more. Finally, on the 8th about noon the 
Allies stormed four of the bastions—were defeated at one, carried 
two, but were again compelled to leave them, though they finally 
maintained themselves in the fourth, and what was most impor­
tant, on the Malakoff Hill. The loss of this point forced the 
Russians on the 9th to march their troops from the southern to 
the northern side, and thus to abandon the town of Sevastopol, 
after having exploded their magazines, blown up the buildings, 
ruined the defensive works by springing mines under them, and 
converted, to use Gen. Pélissier's words, the whole place into an 
immense blazing furnace b; they also burnt their steamers, sunk 
their last ships-of-war, and finally broke up the bridge near Fort 
Paul.c 
a In the Neue Oder-Zeitung the article begins as follows: "London, September 11. 
At 9 o'clock last night the guns of James's Park and the Tower announced the fall of 
the southern side of Sevastopol. At the Lyceum, Haymarket and Adelphi theatres 
the managers at last had the satisfaction of soliciting the hurrahs, the 'God save the 
Queen' and the 'Partant pour la Syrie' on the strength of official dispatches rather 
than, as hitherto, of false rumours. 
"The Crimean campaign has at last reached its turning-point."—-Ed. 
A. Pélissier, "Crimée, 9 septembre, huit heures du soir", Le Moniteur universel, 
No. 254, September 11, 1855.— Ed. 
Instead of the last sentence the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "the loss of which 
forced the Russians to lay waste to and abandon the southern side".— Ed. 

=====第550页=====
520 Frederick Engels 
The arrival of considerable reenforcements after the battle of 
the Chernaya, must have relieved the allied Generals from any 
apprehension on the score of the Russian army at Inkerman; for, 
though even the remainder of the 4th and 6th Russian divisions, 
beside the two divisions of grenadiers, had joined that army, the 
Allies were now in a position to oppose successfully any number of 
men the Russians could throw across the Chernaya; while enough 
of allied troops would remain to carry on the siege, and even to 
attempt an assault. It must be confessed that the French 
Government has now been exceedingly prompt in sending to the 
Crimea a number of troops fully adequate to the Russian 
reenforcements already there, or on the march from Poland and 
Volhynia; for the number of the French forces dispatched to the 
East since the beginning of July, must amount to at least 50,000. 
Under these circumstances, the English and French advanced 
mortar batteries being in good working condition, the trenches 
were pushed up to the ditch, under the protection of a vigorous 
fire. How near the advanced trenches were established, and 
whether a complete crowning of the glacis, secundum artem* was 
accomplished, we do not yet know. The firing more and more 
assumed the character of a regular bombardment and vertical fire 
was successfully made use of to render the place untenable for 
large bodies of troops, till finally the assault was ordered. 
On the Mamelon, the Russians had last Spring constructed a 
number of fireproof and shellproof compartments with the aid of 
traverses and blindages. These contrivances gave capital protection 
against the enemy's fire, but when the assault was made, it was 
found that no room had been left for concentrating a sufficient 
number of troops for the defense of the work. Compartment after 
compartment, defended by a few men only, was carried by the 
French, and at once formed a ready-made lodgement for them. 
The same mistake appears to have been made in the completion 
of the defenses of the  Malakoff.  The thing was overdone, and 
when the French once got hold of the commanding point of the 
hill, the Russian works themselves must have afforded them 
protection against the Russian fire. 
The Redan (Bastion No. 3) and the Redan of the Careening Bay 
(Bastion No. 1 of the Russians) being situated on more level 
ground, did not admit of the terraced batteries and complicated 
defenses applicable to the  Malakoff.  Here, therefore, a simple 
coupure appears to have been made in the interior of the bastion, 
According to the rules of art.— Ed. 

=====第551页=====
The Fall of Sevastopol 521 
cutting off the salient angle and exposing its interior to an 
overwhelming fire. The troops for its defense could thus be placed 
further to the rear, and the interior of the work protected by 
sallies from the coupure. In consequence of this arrangement, 
which was of the kind generally adopted in such cases, the English 
lines and the French columns ordered to the assault of these 
positions could indeed penetrate beyond the all but abandoned 
outer wall; but when there, face to face with the coupure, they 
were crushed by its grape and musketry, and had to give up the 
assault. 
As soon as the Malakoff was carried, Gen. de Salles, on the 
French left attack, made an attempt to establish himself in the 
Central bastion (No. 5, between the Flagstaff and Quarantine 
bastions). He was repulsed. We are not informed whether this 
assault was undertaken on his own responsibility or whether it 
formed part of the original plan. Nor do we know how far the 
proximity of the French trenches to the bastion justified such a 
detached and hazardous attempt. 
The fact of the Malakoff hill being taken, at once formed the 
turning point of the struggle. From all the preceding events of this 
remarkable siege, it was to be anticipated that the French, if 
properly alive to their business, were not in the remotest danger 
of being driven out of their new position."1 The Malakoff 
completely commands the Karabelnaya and the eastern slope of 
the hill on which the town of Sevastopol was built. Taking in the 
rear the sea forts on the southern side of the harbor, it made the 
whole of the inner harbor and the greater part of the outer 
harbor untenable to the Russian ships of war. By the fall of the 
Malakoff the continuity of the defensive lines of Sevastopol 
became interrupted at that very point upon which the security of 
the whole was dependant. The possession of the  Malakoff, 
therefore, meant the possession of Karabelnaya, the destruction of 
the town by bombardment, the taking in flank and rear of the 
Flagstaff bastion, and the disappearance of the last chance of the 
town's holding out. Sevastopol had hitherto been a fortified camp 
for a large army, as indeed are all modern fortresses. By the capture 
of the Malakoff it had sunk to the rank of a mere bridge-head to 
the Russian garrison of the north side, and more than this, of a 
bridge-head without a bridge. It was therefore wise to abandon it. 
It is true we had heard a good deal of new works constructed on 
the inner slope of the  Malakoff,  with a view to maintain the 
a In the Nene Oder-Zeitung this sentence does not occur.— Ed. 

=====第552页=====
522 Frederick Engels 
defense of the Karabelnaya, after the loss of that fortification; but 
they do not seem to have been of value enough to induce Prince 
Gorchakoff to continue the defense. However, we shall now soon 
know what was their real nature.3 
Some Russian ships had already been burned in the harbor by 
shells from the allied batteries. The Malakoff once armed with 
French guns would have made it difficult for the remaining 
Russian vessels to find a safe anchorage, except just at the foot of 
Forts Nicholas and Alexander, and there is not room for a great 
many; hence, the burning and sinking of the remainder of the 
fleet. 
The Karabelnaya side being completely in the hands of the 
Allies, they are in a position to undertake operations in the field. 
Though they will not be able to establish many batteries or many 
troops in that suburb, on account of the fire from the northern 
shore of the harbor, they have succeeded in reducing the Russian 
portion of Sevastopol to less than one-half its extent before the 8th 
inst., and to a fortress capable of holding but a limited number of 
defenders. Not only is the offensive power of the garrison 
completely crushed, but its defensive strength is greatly reduced. 
A far smaller number of men will suffice to carry on the siege, 
and the troops thus set free, with the reen forcements now on the 
road or at the camp of Maslak, will be available for an expedition 
to f.upatoria. The more we examine the relative position of both 
Russians and Allies on the Chernaya, the more evident it becomes 
that neither party can drive the other away hence without great 
superiority and enormous sacrifices. The opinion in the allied 
tamp would seem to be that from 60,000 to 70,000 men should be 
sent to Eupatoria, in order to march upon the communications of 
the Russians at Sympheropol. Suppose the Russians to have 
200,000 men in the Crimea (which they certainly have not), 80,000 
men would be required for the defense of the North Forts, 60,000 
for the position on the Chernaya, and 60,000 to meet the allied 
army of Eupatoria. In the present spirit of the allied forces, it is 
certain that with equal numbers and in an equally divided field, 
they will beat the Russians; and as by taking up a position on the 
Russian line of communications they can force them to give battle, 
there does not seem to be any risk in such an undertaking. On the 
contrary, it is probable that the Russians would be able to oppose 
this expeditionary army with but 60,000 men at the very outside. 
The passage beginning with the words "It was therefore wise to abandon it" 
does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第553页=====
The Fall of Sevastopol 523 
The sooner, however, such a movement is undertaken the better 
for the Allies, and if they act vigorously they may expect great 
results. They now have both moral and numerical superiority, and 
we doubt not they will profit by it before another winter on the 
plateau has reduced their numbers and damped their spirits. 
Indeed the latest report is that by the 13th 25,000 men had 
already sailed for Eupatoria, and we shall doubtless hear of a still 
greater force following. 
Of these important events we have as yet only the meagre 
information conveyed by telegraphic dispatches. When more 
complete details reach us we shall return to the subject again.3 
Written about September 11, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4506, September 28, 1855 
and the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, 
No. 1079, September 28, 1855, reprinted 
in the New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 734, 
October 6, 1855 as a leading article; the 
German version was published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, No. 429, September 14, 
1855,  marked with the sign x 
a Instead of the passage beginning with the words "Suppose the Russians to 
have 200,000 men" the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "This would force the Russians to 
fight a battle in the open field in which, under the present circumstances, success 
would seem to be guaranteed to the Allies. But everything depends on the latter's 
taking advantage of the present situation with dispatch and energy." — Ed. 

=====第554页=====
524 
Karl Marx 
O'CONNOR'S FUNERAL 
London, September 11. Yesterday afternoon the funeral of 
O'Connor, the late Chartist leader, took place. A procession of 
20,000 people, practically all of them from the working class, 
moved from Finsbury Square and Smithfield to Notting Hill, from 
where the coffin was taken to Kensal Green Cemetery (one of the 
most magnificent burial-grounds in London). 
Four-horse hearses, decorated with enormous plumes in the 
English fashion, took their place at the head of the procession. 
Hard on their heels followed flag-bearers and standard-bearers. In 
letters of white the black flags bore the inscription "He lived and 
died for us".a  A gigantic red flag magnificently displayed the 
inscription "Alliance des peuples". A red liberty cap was swaying 
at the top of the main standard. 361 When the service in the 
beautiful, cloistered cemetery chapel was over, William Jones made 
a funeral oration at the grave of the deceased. The singing of a 
hymn concluded the ceremony. All the requirements for a great 
demonstration were at hand, but the finishing touch was missing 
because Ernest Jones was prevented from appearing and speaking 
by the fatal illness of his wife. As the procession moved back into 
the city at about half past five in the afternoon it had the ironic 
satisfaction of meeting five detachments of constables marching 
out, and greeted them each in turn with a "too late".b Since 
O'Connor died as a pauper in the true sense of the word, the 
burial expenses were met by the working class of London. 
Written on September 11, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 430, September 15, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 
a Marx quotes the English text of the inscription and gives the German translation 
in brackets.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English words and gives the German translation in brackets.— 
Ed. 

=====第555页=====
525 
Frederick Engels 
CRIMEAN PROSPECTS 3 
Beyond an imperfect list of the British officers killed and 
wounded, the journals brought by the steamer America—and we 
have examined them with care—add scarcely anything to our 
previous knowledge of the circumstances attending the capture of 
the southern side of Sevastopol. It is true that there is a plenty of 
speculation as to both the causes and the consequences of 
Gorchakoff's sudden abandonment of a place so long and so 
desperately defended; and among such speculations those of our 
correspondents at London and Paris are eminently worthy of 
attention. But there are some points of view and some considera­
tions which neither of these writers, opposite as are their views, 
seems to have dwelt upon with the necessary care, or to have given 
the due amount of importance. 
Precisely what turn matters now will take in the Crimea depends 
to a great extent on the causes which induced the Russians to give 
up the south side. That purely tactical and strategical motives were 
completely foreign to this sudden resolution, is evident. Had 
Gorchakoff considered the south side, and even the Karabelnaya, 
untenable as soon as the Malakoff should have fallen, he would 
not have thrown up so many internal defenses in that suburb. 
Though the ultimate success of the siege might be considered 
assured by the taking of that commanding point, yet from four to 
six weeks breathing time might have been gained by a stubborn 
defense, first of the inner rocks of the suburb, and then of the 
town proper. To judge from the best maps, plans and models, 

=====第556页=====
526 Frederick Engels 
there was no necessity whatever in a mere tactical or strategical 
light to abandon so hastily what had been fended with such 
tenacity. Military science alone cannot account for a step which can 
yet scarcely be attributed to the confusion and fright caused by an 
unexpected and decisive defeat. Necessities of a different nature 
must have been active to force Gorchakoff to a step which 
compromises his military position and career so seriously as 
this. 
There are two possibilities only. Either the morale of the Russian 
soldiers was so completely broken up that it would have been 
impossible to rally them in anything like order behind the inner 
lines of defense, so as to continue the struggle, or else they had 
begun to run short of provisions, not only within Sevastopol but in 
the camp without. The all but uninterrupted series of defeats to 
which the Russian army had been exposed, from Oltenitza and 
Chetatea to the Chernaya, and the assault of Sept. 8, must certainly 
have completely destroyed the spirit of the defenders of 
Sevastopol; and all the more, as they consisted principally of the 
same troops who were beaten on the Danube and later at 
Inkerman.363 The Russians have rather dull moral feelings, and can 
stand defeats longer than most troops; but no army in the world can 
hold together forever when it is beaten by every enemy it meets, 
and when to a long list of defeats it can oppose nothing except the 
negative satisfaction of its tenacious and lengthened resistance, 
and a solitary example of successful, active defense, like that of the 
18th June.364 But such a resistance in a besieged place is of itself 
demoralizing in the long run. It implies hardships, want of rest, 
sickness, and the presence, not of that acute danger which braces, 
but of that chronic danger which must ultimately relax the mind. 
The rapidly succeeding defeats on the Chernaya and at the 
Malakoff must have completed the demoralization, and it is more 
than likely that Gorchakoff's troops in the town were no longer fit 
to be led against the enemy. And as the Malakoff commanded the 
bridge to the other side, and the French guns might any day have 
destroyed it, relief became impossible, while retreat might at least 
save the troops. It is not astonishing that this demoralization 
should at last seize the garrison; it is astonishing that it had not 
done so long before. 
There are also some very strong symptoms that want of 
provisions for the army generally had a great deal to do with 
Prince Gorchakoff's sudden retreat. The interruption of Russian 
navigation in the Sea of  Azoff,  though it had not that immediate 
effect which the British and French Press, then so much in want 

=====第557页=====
Crimean Prospects 527 
of some success, expected it to have, must nevertheless in the long 
run prove troublesome to the Russians, as it confined them to one 
single line of operations, and thereby limited their supplies. The 
immense difficulty of transporting victualing stores, ammunition 
and forage from Kherson through a thinly-populated steppe 
country must have been greatly increased when this road became 
the only one by which the army could be provided. The means of 
transport, brought together by requisition from the Ukraine and 
Don Provinces, must finally have been used up; horses and 
draft-oxen must have been sacrificed in great numbers, both by 
overwork and scantiness of provender; and the nearest provinces 
once being exhausted, it became more and more difficult to 
replace the necessary stock. This shortness of supplies would show 
itself at first, not so much in Sevastopol (where reserve stores must 
have been kept up for the event of the place being invested on the 
north side too), as in the camp above Inkerman, at Bakshiserai, 
and on the line of march of the reenforcements. The reports of 
the allied commanders had more than once adverted to this being 
the case; but other circumstances too indicate that such must have 
been the fact. By this impossibility of feeding even the troops now 
in the Crimea, we can alone explain why the two divisions of 
grenadiers so long on the march, and now said to be about 
Perekop, were not allowed to advance and to partake in the battle 
on the Chernaya, and why, notwithstanding the better half of the 
troops advancing to relieve Sevastopol was thus kept back, that 
battle was yet ventured, though with a force ridiculously small in 
proportion to the task expected from it. 
Thus all indications point to this, that both demoralization of 
the greater portion of the Russian troops, and want of supplies for 
the army in the field, induced Gorchakoff not to stake too much 
on delaying, for a few days, the fall of a fortress which had 
become untenable. He profited by the last chance of saving 
the garrison, and he would seem to have done right; for accor­
ding to all appearances he would have had to leave it to its 
fate, to collect his field-army, and to retire into the interior of 
the Crimea, if not to Perekop. In this case, the garrison of the 
south side would soon have been compelled either to cross steal­
thily to the north side or to capitulate; and the north side, too, 
once cut off from all chance of ever being relieved, and gar­
risoned by demoralized troops, would have been starved into 
submission. 
So long as the Russians had a chance not only of keeping their 
army in the Crimea up to something like a force equaling that of 

=====第558页=====
528 Frederick Engels 
the Allies but were even expecting reenforcements which would 
make it far outnumber its opponents, the north side of Sevastopol 
was a position of immense importance.365 To hold the north side 
by a garrison while the field army stood where it did up to the 
latest news we have received, was to bring the allied army on the 
plateau of the Heracleatic Chersonese. It was to exclude their 
ships from Sevastopol Bay, and to deprive them of a proper naval 
base of operations nearer than the Bosphorus, for neither 
Kamiesh nor Balaklava can pass for such a thing. So long as the 
Russians were able to keep the field in the Crimea the north side 
was as much the key to the whole of the Crimea and to what gives 
the whole country any military and naval importance as the 
Malakoff was to the south side. But from the moment the Russians 
are unable to hold the field, the north side has no longer any 
great importance. It is a fortified position of a certain strength, 
but which if regularly besieged by sufficient forces is doomed to 
fall, for relief there can then be none. 
This may seem astonishing after the great importance ascribed, 
and rightly too, to the north side. And yet it is quite correct. The 
whole of this war has been, in appearance, a war of fortifications 
and sieges, and has in the eyes of superficial observers completely 
annihilated the progress made by Napoleon's rapid maneuver, 
thus carrying back the art of warfare to the days of the Seven 
Years'  War.366  But in reality nothing is more contrary to fact. 
Fortresses and groups of fortresses have no other importance 
now-a-days than as the fixed points on which an army in the field 
supports itself in its movements. Thus the camp at Kalafat was a 
bridge-head allowing Omer Pasha to menace the Russians in flank; 
thus Silistria, Rustchuk, Varna, Shumla, were the four salient 
angles, so to say, of a large fortified camp into which he could 
always retreat, and where he could not be followed unless two at 
least of those salient angles were taken or neutralized. Thus 
Sevastopol formed the pivot of the Russian army in the Crimea, 
and whenever that army was outnumbered or otherwise checked, 
Sevastopol allowed it breathing time until fresh reenforcements 
had come up. To the Allies Sevastopol was a Russian naval center 
to be destroyed, a naval base of operations to be gained; to the 
Russians it was the possession of the Crimea, because it was the 
only position to be held against far superior numbers until 
relieved. Thus the ultimate decision always rested with the armies 
in the field, and the importance of fortresses depended, not on 
their natural or artificial strength or intrinsic value, but on the 
protection and support (appui) they could give to the field army. 

=====第559页=====
Crimean Prospects 529 
Their value has become relative. They are no longer independent 
factors in the game of war, but merely valuable positions which it 
may or may not be expedient to defend by every means and to the 
last extremity. This the Sevastopol affair proves more than any 
previous occurrence. Sevastopol, like all really modern fortresses, 
takes the place of a permanently-fortified camp. As long as the 
disposable force is sufficient to defend that camp, as long as 
supplies are plentiful, the communications with the main base of 
operations secure, especially as long as that camp held by a strong 
army prevents the enemy from going past it without exposing his 
own safety—so long that camp is of first-rate importance and may 
baffle the enemy for a whole campaign. But if such is no longer 
the case; if the defending force suffers check after check, runs 
short of provisions, risks having its communications cut off and 
being reduced to the fate of the Austrians at Ulm in  1805 367 — 
then it is high time to prefer the safety of the army to the abstract 
value of the position and to retreat at once to another place 
offering greater advantages. 
This seems to be now the situation of the Russians. The greater 
part of their original active army—fourteen divisions out of 
twenty-four—is engaged, and has been partly destroyed in the 
Crimea, and what they have of reserves and militia, or other new 
formations, can stand no comparison with the troops they have 
lost. They will certainly do well not to send any more men to that 
dangerous peninsula, and indeed to abandon it as soon as they 
can. The Allies are far superior to them in numbers and especially 
in spirit. With Gorchakoff's present army to risk a battle in the 
field would be to solicit defeat. He may be turned either by the 
south coast and the valley of the Salghir, or by Eupatoria. Either 
operation would force him to give up his communication with the 
north side, never to regain it, for the numerical superiority of the 
Allies is increasing every day. It would seem that the best he can 
do is to make as bold a front as possible, while he prepares 
everything for blowing up the northern forts, and to steal a march 
or two on his opponents. The sooner he gets to Perekop the 
better. This is especially the case if the report we have from Paris 
be true that the Allies began sending an army to Eupatoria 
immediately after getting possession of Sevastopol. If they act with 
vigor, either in that direction or along the south coast and the 
passes of the Chatyr Dagh, the campaign must speedily close, 
leaving them in possession of the Crimea. So far as we can see the 
only mistakes now in their power are a serious front attack on the 
Russian position above Inkerman, or a week's inaction. The next 

=====第560页=====
530 Frederick Engels 
steamer, due here to-morrow night, can hardly fail to settle the 
question as to what they mean to do. 
Written about September 14, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4508, October 1, 1855, 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1080, October 2, 1855 as a 
leading article; an abridged German ver­
sion was published in the Neue Oder-
Zeitung, No. 435, September 18, 1855, 
marked with the sign x 

=====第561页=====
531 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
EVENTS IN THE CRIMEA 368 
London, September 14. "The ringing of bells and the thunder of 
cannon" is the slogan of the day in England at the moment. The 
world seems full of happiness and every building of the slightest 
importance, public or private, is full of Anglo-French flags. The 
same scene in Manchester as in London, despite the "Manchester 
School"; in Edinburgh as in Manchester, despite the Scottish 
philosophy. At the moment, nothing is able to dampen the general 
enthusiasm, not even the extraordinary list of fatalities flashed to 
London by the telegraph. The defeat of the British before the 
Redan bastion and the capture of the decisive point, fort 
Malakhov, by the French—this contrast alone muffles the clamour 
of victory and sets some bounds to the boastfulness. Anyone 
sharing the old prejudice—one owed like so many others to the 
uncritical confusion of modern and ancient conditions of society— 
the prejudice that industry and commerce destroy the martial 
character of a people may now inform himself of the contrary in 
England, and even in Manchester, its industrial metropolis. It is a 
very simple matter. In modern society the wealth of a nation, 
though not the wealth of the individual, increases with increased 
labour, in ancient society it increased with the increased laziness of 
the nation. Steuart, the Scottish economist, who published his 
important work ten years before Adam Smith, had already 
discovered and developed this point. 3 
a The reference is to Sir James Steuart's An Inquiry into the Principles of Political 
Œconomy, published in London in 1767 (the point in question is discussed in Volume I, 
Book I, Chapter VII) and Adam Smith's An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the 
Wealth of Nations, published in London in 1776.— Ed. 

=====第562页=====
532 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
But public enthusiasm is vainly seeking nourishment in the latest 
telegraphic despatches. They are as meagre as the first was rich. 
Pélissier writes that a "matériel immense " has fallen into the hands 
of the Allies at Sevastopol. 3 We suspect—a heap of old iron whose 
price is bound to fall. 
The turn that will be taken by events now depends mainly on 
the motives which induced the Russians to abandon the South Side 
so suddenly. This much is clear. Purely tactical and strategic 
reasons played no part in this decision. If Gorchakov had 
considered the surrender of Karabelnaya and the town to be 
inseparable from the fall of fort Malakhov, then why the huge 
mass of defence works within the suburb? In spite of the 
commanding position of the Malakhov 5-6 weeks could have been 
won by a stubborn defence, first of the inner defence works of the 
suburb and then of the town  itself.  Judging from the best maps, 
plans and models there are no purely strategic or tactical reasons 
for the sudden surrender of what has so far been held so 
tenaciously. There remain only two feasible explanations: the 
moral self-confidence of the Russian army was broken to a point 
which made it inadvisable to take a new stand behind the inner 
defence works of the town. Or the lack of provisions was 
beginning to make itself felt, not only in the town but also in the 
camp,  or, finally, both these reasons. 
The almost unbroken series of defeats suffered by the Russian 
army from Oltenitza and Chetatea to the battle on the Chernaya 
and the assault of September 8 can only have had a demoralising 
effect on the besieged troops, all the more so as a great number of 
them had witnessed the defeats on the Danube and at Inker-
man.369 Certainly, the Russians possess an obtuse sense of morale 
and as a result they can endure defeats better than other troops. 
However, even this is bound to have its limits. Resistance stretched 
over an unusually long period of time in a besieged location has in 
itself a demoralising effect. It comprises suffering, exertion, lack 
of rest, disease and the constant presence, not of acute danger, 
which steels, but of that chronic danger which breaks men down. 
The defeat on the Chernaya, where half the reserve army 
was engaged, precisely those reinforcements which were to rescue 
the South Side, and the seizure of the Malakhov, the key to the 
whole position, these two defeats must have consummated the 
demoralisation. Since the Malakhov commanded the bridge to the 
a Pélissier's report of September 10, 1855, Le Moniteur universel, No. 256, 
September 13, 1855.—  F.d. 

=====第563页=====
Events in the Crimea 533 
other side and the French could destroy it at any moment, all 
access became problematic and retreat became the last resort of 
the troops. As for the lack of provisions, there are signs that it was 
beginning to make itself felt. The interruption of Russian shipping 
in the Sea of Azov restricted the Russians to a single line of 
operations and thus shortened their supplies. The enormous 
difficulty of transporting food, munitions, etc., over a thinly-
populated steppe naturally grew as soon as the road from Kherson 
alone remained open. The means of transport requisitioned and 
collected from the Ukraine and the Don provinces had to become 
used up sooner or later, and for the adjacent provinces, since they 
were exhausted, it became more and more difficult to replace 
them. This lack of supplies must first of all have revealed  itself, 
not in Sevastopol, where great stocks were heaped up, but in the 
camp at Inkerman, at Bakhchisarai and along the reinforcements' 
line of march. This is the only possible explanation why the two 
infantry divisions which have been on the march for so long and 
are now said to be at Perekop, did not advance and take part in 
the battle on the Chernaya, and also, on the other hand, why in 
spite of the absence of this, the better, half of the replacement 
troops the battle was risked with a fighting force which was 
entirely disproportionate to its task. If these points of view are 
correct then Gorchakov had indeed no alternative but to use the 
capture of fort Malakhov as a respectable pretext for saving his 
garrison. 
Written on September 14, 1855 Printed according to the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 435, September 18, 1855 Published in English for the first 
Marked with the sign X 
The English version was published in 
the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4508, 
October 1, 1855, and reprinted in the 
New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1080, 
October 2, 1855 as a leading article 

=====第564页=====
534 
Karl Marx 
THE COMMERCIAL AND FINANCIAL SITUATION 
London, September 24. Public opinion at the moment is occupied 
almost as much with the commercial and financial situation, not 
only in Great Britain but especially in France, as with the war in 
the Crimea. As we know, the Bank of France has raised its 
discount on government bonds and similar securities to 5 per cent, 
while it discounts commercial bills of exchange at 4 per cent. The 
directors of the French bank, worried by the flow of precious 
metal from its vaults, had already decided to increase the discount 
for commercial bills of exchange to 5 per cent as well when the 
Minister of Finance 3 intervened directly and forbade them to carry 
out this operation. The concern of the government is naturally to 
maintain the appearance of an easy money market and overflow­
ing credit for as long as possible and to keep the shopkeeping 
world in a good mood. 
The Manchester Examiner has stated that 
"The drain during the last two years on the wealth of France has been 
enormous. [...] But, in two years, the Government of Louis Napoleon has spent 
£200,000,000—the municipality of Paris has lavished vast sums of borrowed 
money on the adornment of his capital — projects requiring great wealth have been 
formed, at the instigation and under the patronaere of the Government—the 
Crédit Mobilier' alone has been the parent of no less than half a dozen great 
companies, each of which has had its shares puffed up to an enormous 
premium—the capital of these companies has yet to be paid up, and an immense 
mass of every sort of share paper is passing from hand to hand without any 
reference to the reckoning day. The financial state of the Government, the purely 
speculative character of much of that enterprise, the present position of the French 
money market, and the burden of another indifferent harvest both on the people and 
P. Magne.— Ed. 

=====第565页=====
The Commercial and Financial Situation 535 
the Bourse, all points to chances of disaster which may prove as embarrassing to the 
war in the Easta as to the internal peace and prosperity of France  herself." 
With regard to the grain market the above-quoted newspaper 
comments in particular: 
"There can be no doubt that both France and England will be large, importers 
of grain; and the orders which have already been sent out to the Danube from this 
country will [...] cause extensive shipments of grain to be made from the United 
States in place of gold to Europe. Last year's was the best harvest ever known in 
this country, and yet we imported, from August, 1854, to August, 1855, 2,335,000 
quartets of wheat, and  1,588,892  cwts. of flour, and the average price, 
nevertheless, of the whole year was above 70s. [...] During the coming year [...] we shall 
require much larger imports [...] to prevent prices rising very considerably. Where 
supplies are to be obtained if not from North America? [...] The crops in Northern 
Germany also are a failure, [...] and the United States even are shipping flour to the 
Baltic, whence we have been accustomed to import no inconsiderable portion of wheat 
in times of need. Austria, it has been announced by the Government, has average 
crops,  but it is doubtful whether she will have any surplus for export, and throughout 
Southern Italy a serious scarcity is felt, which cannot, as heretofore, be relieved by 
imports from the [...] ports in the Black Sea." 
Thus in demand for gram France will not only have to compete 
with England but also with a large part of the European continent. 
Nothing shows how distasteful this situation is for its Government 
better than the half consolatory, half didactic article in the 
Moniteur^ 
As for the numerous new joint-stock companies in France which 
are mentioned by the Manchester Examiner, a work recently 
published in Paris, Opérations de Bourse? shows that in one branch 
alone—that of the joint-stock banks—their numbers have increased 
six-fold in Paris alone since the February Revolution. Before 1848 
only two were in existence; now there are twelve of these banks in 
Paris,  namely the Banque de France, the Caisse Commerciale, the 
Comptoir d'Escompte, a commandite bank under the firm of 
Lediheur and Co., the Crédit Fonder de France, the Martinique 
Bank, the Banque de Guadeloupe, the Banque de  l'île  de la Réunion, 
the Bank of Algiers, the Crédit mobilier, the Société Générale du crédit 
maritime, the Caisse et journal des chemins de fer, the Comptoir central, 
a The Manchester Daily Examiner and Times has "our policy in the East".— Ed. 
b "The condition of the money market...", Manchester Daily Examiner and Times, 
No. 193, September 24, 1855.—Ed. 
c The article, dated September 19, was published in Le Moniteur universel, No. 263, 
September 20,  1855.—Erf. 
A. Courtois fils; Des opérations de Bourse ou Manuel des fonds publics français et 
étrangers et des actions et obligations de  sociétés  françaises et étrangères négociés à Paris, 
Paris,  1855.— Ed. 

=====第566页=====
536 Karl Marx 
the Crédit industriel and the Banque de Sénégal. The paid-up capital 
of these banks amounts only to 151,230,000 francs and their total 
bank capital only to 252,480,000 francs, or about £10,000,000, 
which does not equal the capital of the Bank of England alone. 
"...The large superstructure which is built by the credit system on this small 
foundation", writes the London Economist, a journal which supports the Govern­
ment, "is anything but satisfactory. Against the capital of the Bank of France, 
91,250,000f, are issued notes to the amount of 542,589,300f, or six times the 
amount. [...] The Crédit mobilier [...] is empowered to issue bonds to ten times the 
amount of its capital. The Crédit Fonder de France [...] whose nominal capital is 
30,000,000f has issued bonds to the amount of 200,000,000f. We may anticipate, 
therefore, that a panic, or a depreciation of this mass of obligations, would cause in 
Paris and France very considerable distress...." 
Written on September 24, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 453, September 28, 1855 
Marked with the sign x Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
"Paris Banks", The Economist, No. 630, September 22, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第567页=====
537 
Frederick Engels 
THE STATE OF THE WAR 
It is plain from the advices of the last Liverpool steamer that the 
Czara has no intention of making peace under the circumstances 
now existing. His sudden departure for Odessa instead of going 
to Warsaw, where he had arranged to meet the King of Prussia15; 
the transfer of the residence of the Empress0 from St. Petersburg 
to Moscow,d the heart and center of Holy Russia; the leaving the 
administration of affairs in the hands of the Grand Duke 
Constantine, the most warlike of his brothers; and the taking of 
the other brothers with him to the seat of war—all this indicates a 
determination to prosecute the contest to some other end than can 
now be realized. At the same time extensive preparations are 
making for the defense of South Russia.6 Nikolaieff and Kherson, 
the two most important fortified points, form the centers for an 
army of reserve now collecting in the government of Kherson, and 
that portion of Taurida situated north of Perekop. Beside a 
number of army reserves (Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth 
battalions of the line-regiments), whose number it is impossible to 
fix even approximately, forty thousand men of the militia are 
reported to be collected at Nikolaieff. About twenty-five thousand 
men are said to be at Odessa. Whether these rumors are exact or 
not, the fact of the Emperor's departure shows that a considerable 
force must be concentrating there. 
a Alexander II.—Ed. 
b Frederick William IV.—Ed. 
c Maria Alexandrovna.— Ed. 
d In the Neue Oder-Zeitung the article begins as follows: "The Emperor's 
departure from Russia to Odessa; the transfer of the residence of the Empress from 
St. Petersburg to Moscow...."—Ed. 
e In the Neue Oder-Zeitung this sentence does not occur.— Ed. 

=====第568页=====
538 Frederick Engels 
The plan of operations of the Russians seems to be elaborated 
with the same foresight for which all their grand strategic schemes 
are generally distinguished. Not only is the complete loss of the 
Crimea taken into account as a possible event, but even a 
campaign in South Russia. For this purpose the line of the 
Dnieper is chosen, very naturally, as the main line of defense; and 
Kherson and Nikolaieff as the first, and Ekaterinoslav as the 
ulterior base of operations. Nikolaieff is within reach of an attack 
by water; therefore, against an enemy in possession of the Black 
Sea, an inland base is absolutely necessary. Now, Ekaterinoslav is a 
position of great strategical importance.3  Situated on the very 
point where, by a bend in its course, the Dnieper forms an angle 
of about seventy-five degrees, it is a capital center for an army 
which, in its retreat toward the interior, intends to cover itself first 
behind the southern course (N. E. to S. W.) and later on behind 
the middle course (N. W. to S. E.) of that river. An army 
advancing from Perekop into the interior of Russia would first 
have to force the passage of the Dnieper somewhere about 
Kherson, and then, advancing toward Ekaterinoslav, to pass the 
same river again at that place. Any detachments advancing on the 
left bank of the Dnieper could easily be stopped a few leagues 
south of Ekaterinoslav, on the line of the Voltschya, a river which 
there empties into the main stream. Beside these advantages, the 
whole country to the south of Ekaterinoslav is one vast steppe, two 
hundred miles in width, through which it is extremely difficult to 
convey and to feed an army; while that town  itself,  situated on the 
northern range of the steppe, and in close proximity to the rich 
and comparatively densely populated provinces of Kieff and 
Poltava, can receive any amount of provisions without difficulty. 
And lastly, Ekaterinoslav maintains the communication with the 
army of the center at Kieff and covers the road to Moscow. 
Ekaterinoslav, as we learn from trustworthy sources, is now 
being fortified and provided with the reserve magazines for the 
southern army.b Stores of food, equipments, ammunition are 
Instead of the last two sentences the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "As Kherson and 
Nikolayev lie within the range of operation not only of gun-boats but 
even of sloops of war, an inland base is needed. This is provided by Ekateri­
noslav."— Ed. 
Instead of the text following this sentence the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "If on the 
one hand this testifies to the Russians' strategic foresight—and it is certainly not in 
vain that the old general and deserter Jomini has schooled them for such a long 
time—it just as much shows, on the other hand, that they expect no successes for a 
considerable time to come. If the Allies ventured to advance into Russia's interior (via 

=====第569页=====
The State of the War 539 
collected there; and if ever the Allies should venture to advance 
into the interior, they would have to force this point before they 
could proceed any further. But even under circumstances very 
unfavorable to the Russians, the chances are that the forces of 
either party would be at least pretty equally matched at 
Ekaterinoslav. Such an advance, however, is out of the question in 
this campaign, and nearly so in that of 1856. Indeed, any 
movement of the Allies into the interior of Russia would be a 
blunder, unless the Crimea and all the countries south of the 
Caucasus, nay, even of the Kuban and Terek, were freed from 
Russian dominion, all the Russian coasts devastated, Ismail taken, 
the mouths of the Danube up to Galatch opened to trade, and, in 
short, everything done which could be attempted against the 
extremities of Russia on that side. Then even it would be a 
mistake to advance into the interior of the steppe, until the passive 
resistance of Russia, successfully maintained, left no other choice. 
It is evident that the probability of such an event occurring is not 
very great; but if the Russians are already preparing against it, we 
have another proof of that comprehensive foresight which has of 
late distinguished the chief strategical management of their forces, 
and which is apparently due to the commanding influence of 
General Jomini. 
For the present, the conquest of the Crimea is still the great task 
Perekop) they would of course have to force Ekaterinoslav. That, however, is out of 
the question in this campaign, and nearly so in that of 1856. First the Russians would 
have to evacuate the Crimea, the whole of Trans-Caucasia and the Caucasus up to the 
Terek and Kuban, Odessa would have to be burnt down, the port of Nikolayev 
destroyed and the Danube cleared up to Galatz. All these extremities of Russia would 
have to be amputated before the Allies could so much as think of undertaking a 
campaign into Russia's interior. So the long-range strategic plan of the Russians seems 
to bode nothing good. 
"The allied troops are moving towards the valley of the Upper Chernaya in 
order to turn the Russians' extreme right wing at Aitodor or the upper Belbek. 
Both Gorchakov and Pélissier say so in their dispatches. It seems to us the Allies 
are executing this manoeuvre with too much show really to pursue that end. 
"Clearly the object of the Allies is to drive the Russians from their entrenched 
position on Mackenzie's heights. Once they have succeeded in this, the Russians will 
have to abandon the northern fort and therefore evacuate the Crimea. For there is 
not a single position between Mackenzie's heights and Simferopol which cannot be 
turned, and beyond Simferopol the steppe, being untenable for large armies, offers 
no positions whatever. Whether the Russians will be able to maintain the Crimea 
therefore depends on their ability to maintain, in particular, their present position 
on Mackenzie's heights." — Ed. 

=====第570页=====
540 Frederick Engels 
of the Allies. On that head our latest intelligence3 was that they 
had sent a strong column of infantry and cavalry into the valley of 
the upper Chernaya, threatening to turn, by Aitodor or the upper 
Belbek, the Russian extreme right. Gorchakoff had telegraphed, 
besides, that the Allies were daily concentrating additional troops 
on the Chernaya. Now, this movement of the Allies toward the 
Russian right has evidently been made with such a degree of show, 
the Russians themselves having noticed it at once, that it cannot 
prelude a serious attempt at turning the Russians on that side. It 
may serve either to draw away from the camp at Mackenzie's farm 
a portion of the troops defending that intrenched position, or else 
to mask a great expedition to Eupatoria. The first supposition 
hardly seems likely, from the concentration of the allied troops on 
the Chernaya, noticed at the same time by Gorchakoff; the second 
supposition is more likely; and though, as we have before stated, a 
flank movement by the south coast would seem preferable,6 such 
an expedition, suddenly transporting a large force on the flank 
and rear of the Russians, cannot but be of great effect, and must 
decide the campaign. 
As to the actual position of the Russians in the Crimea we have 
no clear information. They are doing their best to maintain a bold 
front, and if the state of their stores allows, it is certainly the best 
they can do. Still we remain of opinion that they must soon leave 
the Crimea unless the Allies make great mistakes and they, 
themselves, receive provisions more plentifully than they have a 
right to expect. The great object of the Allies is to drive them 
away from the position of Mackenzie's hights, for that position 
once lost, the north side of Sevastopol, defended by a small 
garrison, must be abandoned to its fate, and the Crimea must be 
evacuated; because between Mackenzie's farm and Sympheropol 
there is not a single tolerable position which cannot be turned with 
the greatest ease, and beyond Sympheropol the steppe, being 
untenable for large armies, offers no positions whatever. 
One thing however is certain, namely, that there can be little delay 
in the decision of this question. The Atlantic, due here to-day, will 
most probably bring us intelligence of a battle in the field, which, if 
As can be seen from the version published in tne Neue Oder-Zeitung, the 
reference is to Pélissier's dispatch of September 11, published in Le Moniteur 
universel, No. 268, September 25, 1855, and Gorchakov's dispatch of September 17, 
published in The Times, No. 22169, September 26,  1855.—  Ed. 
b See this volume, p. 529.— Ed. 

=====第571页=====
The State of the War 541 
unfavorable to the Russians, must 
retreat from the peninsula. 
Written on September 26, 1855 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4522, October 17, 1855, 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1085, October 19, 1855 as a 
leading article; an abridged German ver­
sion was published in the Neue Oder-
Zeitung, No. 455, September 29, 1855, 
marked with the sign X be followed by their prompt 
Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第572页=====
542 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
THE REPORTS OF GENERALS SIMPSON, 
PÉLISSIER AND NIEL 
London, September 27. The reports of Generals Simpson, 
Pélissier and Niel, a and especially the despatches from British 
newspaper correspondents in the Crimea, form a vast and 
complex documentary material, and it is a time-consuming process 
to sift it judiciously. For this reason we shall be able to examine 
the events of September 7 and 8 in detail only in our next report.*3 
We may note, however, that the British press is almost unanimous, 
and rightly so, in its condemnation of General Simpson and the 
higher English commanders acting under him. The joke making 
the rounds of the Russian army, that "L'armée anglaise est une 
armée des lions, commandée par des ânes" (The English army is an 
army of lions led by asses) has been thoroughly vindicated by the 
assault on the Redan. A London newspaper is demanding a new 
Sevastopol committee, forgetting that the miserable leadership of 
the British army is the inevitable result of rule by an antiquated 
oligarchy. All preparations miscarried from the very start. The 
English trenches were still so far (250 yards) from the Redan ditch 
that the troops had to run the gauntlet of enemy fire without 
cover for a quarter of an hour and were out of breath when they 
arrived. French engineers had drawn attention to this defect 
a Simpson's report of September 9 (The Times, No. 22166, September 22, 
1855),  Pélissier's of September 11 and 14 and Niel's of September 11 (The Times, 
No. 22170, September 27, 1855).—Ed. 
The assault on the southern side of Sevastopol was analysed by Engels in the 
article promised here. There are two versions of this article, one was published in 
the New-York Daily Tribune (see this volume, pp. 546-52) and another in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung (wherever the latter differs from the English version this is pointed 
out in footnotes to the English text).— Ed. 

=====第573页=====
The Reports of Generals Simpson, Pélissier and Niel 543 
beforehand; however, the answer they received from the English 
was: 
"If we were to advance another couple of yards then we should come to an angle 
which would expose us to enfilading fire by the Flagstaff bastion and thus great 
losses." 
In the first place this risk of losses was undeniably smaller than 
that incurred by the exposure of the troops during the assault. 
Furthermore the enfilading fire could have been countered partly 
by traverses and bends in the trenches and partly by setting up 
counter-batteries. All the remonstrations of the French foundered 
against Simpson's thick-skinned obstinacy, however. What is more, 
whereas the French trenches were broad, spacious and capable not 
only of absorbing vast military forces but also of concealing them, 
the British trenches were narrow and so constructed that every 
Briton with a touch of corpulence immediately attracted the 
attention of the Russian commanders to  himself.  The wide stretch 
of ground the British troops had to run across meant that, instead 
of directly throwing themselves upon the enemy after reaching the 
object of their attack, they first of all sought cover and engaged in 
musket fire, which gave the Russians time to rally. The miserable 
inadequacy of the British preparations is also revealed by the fact 
that once their troops had gained control of the rampart, no one 
thought of spiking the Russian cannon positioned there. They had 
with them neither workers with the necessary instruments nor 
artillery troops who could have done the job with no extra 
instruments. General Simpson's tactical arrangements before and 
during the assault take the cake, however. (During the assault, as 
we learn from the [report] of a Daily News correspondent, 
Simpson, who suffered from a cold in the head, sat wrapped in a 
wide cape, in an easy chair in the Greenhilla battery.) He had 
detailed an assault party of 200 men, a covering party of 320 men 
and a total operational force of not more than 1,000 men against 
the fearsome Redan, against which the English attacks had bro­
ken for six months. When the English had broken through the 
salient of the Redan they were exposed to murderous fire from 
the redoubt, which had been transformed into a stronghold, and 
from the casemates positioned behind it on the flanks. With 
sufficient numbers they could have by-passed the redoubt, 
which would have put a speedy end to the battle. No reinforcements 
arrived on the scene, however, even though Colonel Windham 
sent for them urgently three times and eventually had to go 
a The reference is to the Mamelon. — Ed. 

=====第574页=====
544 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
himself to search for them. Thus the troops remained on the 
parapet for three fatal hours, twice forcing their way inside only to 
be slaughtered uselessly one by one, and finally had to retreat in 
great disorder. The inadequate number of troops with which 
Simpson, disposing of masses which would have sufficed twenty-
fold, originally undertook the assault, the holding back of the 
necessary reserves during the action, the useless and wanton 
sacrifice of the brave assault troops—all this amounts to one of 
the greatest scandals known to modern military history. Simpson 
would inevitably have faced a court martial under the first 
Napoleon. 
On the Continent the evil of patrimonial jurisdiction has been 
attacked, and rightly. However, the unpaid English magistracy372 is 
nothing but a modernised, constitutionally flavoured version of 
patrimonial jurisdiction. Read the following literal extract from an 
English provincial newspaper-
"Last Tuesday3 Nathaniel Williams, an elderly labourer, [...] was brought before 
a bench of magistrates, at Worcester and fined 5s., with 13s. costs, for cutting a 
small amount of wheat, belonging to  himself,  on Sunday, the 26th of August. 
He pleaded that it was a work of necessity—that the wheat would have been spoilt if 
he had not cut it—that he was employed from morning till night in farm labour. 
Nothing helped. The magistrates liberally interlarded with Reverends were 
inexorable".0 
Just as here the priests judge their own case, so do the 
factory-owners, the squiresd and the other privileged estates which 
compose the unpaid magistracy. 
We have taken the following extract from the private letter of 
an Englishman (a Whig) at present in Paris: 
"Today's warlike article (dated September 24) in the Constitutionnel seems to 
have discouraged the Paris bourgeoisie a great deal; and in three different districts, 
all of great commercial importance, however, I heard the same comments, almost 
in the same words: There you have it! For almost a year they told us that once 
Sevastopol were taken it would be possible to open peace negotiations. Now that 
Sevastopol has been taken we are told that this is a purely military matter and that 
peace cannot be contemplated before the whole Crimea has fallen. Things will 
carry on in this way and heaven knows when peace will come. All this is expressed 
a September 18, 1855.— Ed. 
Marx and Engels use the English word and give the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
This quotation coincides almost word for word with a passage in a letter to the 
editor from Worcester, signed "No Bitter Observer" (published in The Times, 
No. 22165, September 21, 1855). The letter was probably also published in a local 
newspaper.— Ed. 
The English word is used in the original.— Ed. 
Signed by the editor A. de Céséna.— Ed. 

=====第575页=====
The Reports of Generals Simpson, Pélissier and Niel 545 
in the most dejected manner. To be just, one has to admit that apart from the 
question of national glory, the present war has come at an inopportune time for 
France for many reasons. Every week the autumn reports turn out to be worse 
than was assumed the preceding week. At the moment for instance the price of 
bread in Rouen is 26 sous the four-pound  loaf,  which is the same as 3 francs or 60 
sous in Paris. In Bordeaux the municipal council has already been forced to 
approve a large sum for subsidies should the price of a four-pound loaf rise to 1 
franc,  considered a famine price in the Gironde. This situation is gradually 
spreading over the whole area of the country. The internal situation in France is 
thus extremely delicate, the partisans of the revolution are scattered over the 
country in terrifying numbers, and if the emergency becomes unbearable they may 
well gather thousands around their banners. The new organisation of the 
departmental and municipal councils was an enormous blunder. The system has 
fatal effects. In many departments at this moment no departmental council 
exists;  and the mayors appointed by the Government are now constantly forced to 
dissolve their municipal councils. Almost every day you can read an official 
announcement that the mayor of this or that town has dissolved the municipal 
council; or that Prefect N.N. has dissolved the general council. The reasons are not 
made public; but, although all comments in public are prohibited, the fact itself 
nevertheless agitates the department in which it takes place. In many respects this 
would make the presence of older and more experienced soldiers desirable." 3 
Written on September 27, 1855 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 457, October 1, 1855 Published in English for the first 
Marked with the sign X 
Retranslated from the German.— Ed. 
19—3754 

=====第576页=====
546 
Frederick Engels 
THE GREAT EVENT OF THE WAR 
The details of the successful general assault at Sevastopol, on 
the 8th ult., are now fully known to us, through the official 
reports of the allied commanders, and the correspondence of the 
European journals, the most important of which have already 
occupied a place in our paper. Of course these interesting 
statements have been read quite universally, and it is not necessary 
that we should recapitulate the facts they contain. What we desire 
to do is to give our readers a clear idea of the conditions under 
which the assault took place, and to explain why, on that occasion, 
the Allies met with such opposite results at different points of the 
attack.3 
According to Gen. Niel,b the French had pushed their trenches 
at all points quite close to the Russian works. Opposite the Little 
Redan of the Careening bay (Bastion No. 1), and the Malakoff 
(Bastion No. 2), the head of the sap was no more than twenty-five 
yards distant from the Russian ditch. At the Flagstaff (Bastion No. 
4), the distance was thirty; at the Central (Bastion No. 5), forty 
yards.  On all these points, therefore, the storming columns were 
close to the works to be stormed. The English, on the other hand, 
had given up sapping as soon as they had arrived at 240 yards 
from the Great Redan (Bastion No. 3).c This was due to the spirit 
Instead of this paragraph the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "Five French divisions 
and units of two English divisions were engaged on September 8. According to 
their own admission, the Allies lost 10,000 men out of about 45,000, i.e. almost one 
man in four. The Russian losses cannot be estimated." — Ed. 
General Niel's report of September 11, 1855, published in The Times, 
No. 22170, September 27,  1855.—  Ed. 
c In the Neue Oder-Zeitung: "Despite remonstrations by French engineers, the 
English had given up sapping 240 yards from the Great Redan (Bastion No. 3). 
The stupidity of this has already been discussed." — Ed. 

=====第577页=====
The Great Event of the War 547 
of routine still predominant in the English army. As soon as they 
had pushed their trenches to that distance, they found that on 
going any further they would be enfiladed from the Flagstaff 
bastion, which projects a good deal beyond the other Russian 
works. Now, there is a general rule in the theory of sieges not to 
trace any portion of the trenches so that its prolongation will meet 
any point occupied by the enemy, as this would lay it open to 
enfilading fire. 
This is of course right enough when one can do without such 
faulty tracing. But here, where this enfilading fire could not be 
avoided (the general plan of the siege and the nature of the 
ground precluding the idea of taking the Flagstaff bastion 
separately beforehand), it was evidently better to make faulty 
trenches than none at all. The theoretical rules in fact provide 
plenty of remedies for such an unavoidable evil. Traverses and 
the compound sorts of sap are prescribed in such a case. The 
French engineer officers, it seems, remonstrated with their English 
comrades, telling them that, although they might lose many men 
in pushing their trenches under such adverse circumstances, yet it 
was better to lose them now in completing a work which would all 
but secure the success of an assault, than to lose them during an 
assault, the result of which might be very doubtful from the want 
of covered approaches. But the British engineers knew better. The 
result shows them to have been grossly in the wrong.3 
The French general distributed his forces as follows: Against the 
key of the whole position, the  Malakoff,  M'Mahon's division; to its 
right, against the curtain connecting it with Bastion No. 1, the 
division of La Motterouge; on the extreme right, against Bastion 
No. 1 itself,  Dulac's division. The Malakoff being the only point 
which, in case of serious resistance, it was necessary to force at all 
risks,  M'Mahon had for his reserve a division of Guards under 
Mellinet. b So much for the French attack on the Karabelnaya side. 
On the town-side, the Flagstaff bastion forming a sort of advanced 
citadel on very strong ground, and having interior works of 
considerable strength, was not to be immediately attacked in front; 
but the Central bastion was to be assaulted by Levaillant's division, 
which, in case of success, was to be followed up by d'Autemarre's 
division, ordered to turn the gorge of the Flagstaff 
a This paragraph and part of the preceding one beginning with the words 
"This was due to the spirit of routine" do not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung.— 
Ed. 
b The beginning of this sentence up to and including the words "at all risks" does 
not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. — Ed. 
19* 

=====第578页=====
548 Frederick Engels 
bastion, to assail which in front, at that moment, Cialdini's 
Piedmontese brigade was concentrated in the trenches. The 
position between the Malakoff and the Flagstaff bastion was held 
by the English. They were to attack the Redan. 
The Malakoff was to be assailed first, and after its capture, the 
remaining columns were to advance on their respective objects of 
attack. The Malakoff was a large redoubt on the top of the 
commanding hill of that name, closed on all sides, but having wide 
apertures to the rear for admitting reenforcements. It was 
connected by a curtain with the Great and Little Redans to its 
right and left; they, too, were closed redoubts, containing smaller 
works, intended for réduits; while the rear faces, the embrasures 
of which looked into the interior of the redoubts, formed a 
coupure. The gorges of these coupures were again connected with 
the Malakoff by a second or interior curtain, forming a second 
line of defense. The interior of the Great and Little Redans was 
pretty free from obstructions, and therefore completely com­
manded by the artillery of the coupures and réduits. But the 
Malakoff redoubt, on which the fire of the enemy had been 
concentrated ever since the Mamelon was taken, was crammed, 
alongside the ramparts, with hollow traverses, affording bomb­
proof shelter to the gunners and troops on duty, while the interior 
was filled with large blockhouses, roofed bomb-proof, serving as 
barracks, and completely unfit for defense. When first the news of 
the taking of the Malakoff arrived, we stated that undoubtedly the 
Russians had committed the same error as in the construction of 
the Kamtchatka redoubt on the Mamelon, viz.: that in order to 
save themselves from the enemy's fire, they evidently had made 
the interior of the fort unfit for defense against an assault, by 
cutting it up into small compartments. 3 Our opinion is now fully 
borne out.b  The labyrinth of the  Malakoff,  like that of the 
Mamelon, proved quite indefensible; in ten minutes it was taken, 
never to be recaptured. 
The arrangements of the French for this assault on the 
Malakoff were admirable. Everything was foreseen and provided 
for. A new sort of bridges, the description of which is not 
forthcoming, was used to cross the ditch; they were laid down in 
less than a minute. No sooner had the assault commenced than 
the sappers constructed a flying sap from the trenches to the 
ditch, cut large passages through the Russian breastworks, filled 
a See this volume, pp. 519-23.— Ed. 
In the Neue Oder-Zeitung: "This view has now been fully borne out by 
General Niel's report."—Ed. 

=====第579页=====
The Great Event of the War 549 
up the ditch opposite, and formed a practicable road into the 
interior of the Malakoff redoubt by which supports, reserves and 
even field-guns could move up. As soon as the whole of the 
redoubt was taken, the passages in the gorge were rapidly closed, 
embrasures cut, field-guns brought up, and in a couple of hours, 
before the Russians could seriously attempt to reconquer the work, 
it was completely turned against them, and they came too late. 
Gunners were ready to spike the guns if necessary, and the 
detachments of infantry carried short-handled trenching-tools in 
their waist-belts. 
This attack was under the immediate superintendence of 
Marshal Pélissier and Gen. Niel. Whether the other attacks were 
equally well organized we are not told; but they were generally 
unsuccessful, and that of the Central bastion especially. This 
assault seems to have been undertaken by Gen. de Salles with 
quite insufficient forces, for as soon as the French arrived at the 
Russian parapet they were compelled to seek shelter behind it; the 
assault degenerated into a skirmishing fire, and was necessarily 
repulsed. What this means Gen. Simpson has taken good care to 
show us in his assault on the Redan. 3 The attack on the Little 
Redan was most bloody, and the position well defended by the 
Russians, who here alone defeated five French brigades. 
We have on former occasions noticed the absurd system 
prevalent in the British army, of forming their storming columns 
so weak that they can but count as forlorn hopes in case they meet 
with anything like serious resistance.15 That blunder was conspicu­
ous in Lord Raglan's plan of attack on the 18th of June375; and it 
seems Gen. Simpson was determined even to outdo his late  chief.0 
The salient angle of the Redan had suffered from the English fire, 
and it was determined to direct the assault against this portion as 
soon as the Malakoff should be fully secured by the French. 
Accordingly, Gen. Simpson had storming parties told off from the 
second and light divisions, amounting, all in all, to about 1,800 
This sentence does not occur in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. —Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 313-19 and 328-32.— Ed. 
Instead of this sentence the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "That method of 
procedure stems from the fact that most of the fortresses the English had to deal 
with, including Wellington in Spain, were built according to the Italo-Spanish 
system and therefore could seldom accommodate more than 500 men. Everything 
is traditional with the English and so is their method of assault, even though the 
conditions for it disappeared long ago. Thus Lord Raglan emulated the old 
Wellington method on June 18, we know with what success. Instead of drawing a 
lesson from his misfortune Simpson deemed it his duty not only to emulate Raglan 
but even to outdo him." — Ed. 

=====第580页=====
550 Frederick Engels 
men—or the half of two brigades! The other two brigades of 
these divisions were to act as supports, and the third and fourth 
divisions were to form the reserves; and beside these, the Guards 
and Highland divisions were on the spot—altogether a force of 
25,000 men; and out of these the actual assault was confided to 
about  1,800,  supported later on by about 2,000 more! Now, these 
1,800 men, unlike the French, who could jump out of their 
trenches into the Russian ditch, had to perform a journey of 250 
yards across open ground, exposed to the flanking fire from the 
curtains of the Redan. They fell in heaps, but they advanced, 
passed the ditch by escalade, penetrated into the salient angle, and 
here they found themselves at once opposed to a tremendous fire 
of grape and musketry from the coupure and réduits in the rear 
of the Redan. The consequence was that they dispersed, seeking 
shelter behind the traverses, and commenced firing on the 
Russians exactly as the French did at the Central bastion. This 
would not have done any harm, had the supports and reserves 
only advanced and followed up, in close attack, the advantages 
already gained. But hardly a man came, and those who came, 
came in driblets and irregularly. Three times Brigadier Windham, 
who commanded, sent officers to ask for the advance of troops in 
regular formation, but none were brought. All the three officers 
were wounded in crossing the plain. At last he went  himself,  and 
prevailed upon Gen. Codrington to send another regiment; when 
all at once the British troops gave way, and abandoned the Redan. 
The Russian supports had come up, and swept the place clean out. 
Then Father Simpson, who still had 20,000 men intact, resolved to 
attempt another assault next morning! 
This feeble attack of the English on the Redan stamps their 
Crimean generals with the indelible mark of incapacity. They 
appear to have an innate tendency to surpass each other in 
blundering. Balaklava and Inkerman376 were great feats in that 
respect; but the 18th of June and the 8th of September, outstrip 
them by far. So carelessly was the assault arranged that while the 
English held the salient of the Redan, not even the guns found in 
it were spiked, and therefore these very guns plied the English on 
their retreat as lustily with grape and case-shot as they had done 
during their advance. As to attempts at forcing a proper 
lodgment, neither Simpson nor the newspaper correspondents 
mention any such thing. In fact the first precautions appear to 
have been neglected.3 
a Instead of the passage beginning with the words "The salient angle of the 
Redan had suffered from the English fire" (third sentence of the preceding 

=====第581页=====
The Great Event of the War 551 
The attacks on the Redan, Central bastion and Little Redan 
were, it is true, mere demonstrations to a certain degree. But the 
attack on the Redan still had an importance of its own. That was a 
position by which the conquest of the Malakoff became immediate­
ly decisive, because if the Malakoff commands the Redan by its 
night, the Redan commands the access to the  Malakoff,  and when 
once taken, would have taken in flank all Russian columns 
marching to recapture that hill. The conquest of the Malakoff 
induced the Russians to quit the whole of the south side; the 
conquest of the Redan would have obliged them to evacuate at 
least the Karabelnaya in haste, and before they could organize that 
well-arranged system of destruction by fire and explosion under 
shelter of which they made good their retreat. The English, then, 
have actually failed to do what their allies had a right to expect 
from them, and on a very important point, too. a And not only 
have the generals failed, but the soldiers, too, were not what they 
had formerly been. Mostly young lads recently arrived in the 
Crimea, they were too eager to look out for shelter, and to fire 
instead of attacking with the bayonet. They lacked discipline and 
order; the different regiments got mixed, the officers lost all 
control, and thus the machine was out of train in a few minutes. 
Yet it must be acknowledged that, for all that, they held out in the 
Redan for nearly two hours in dogged, passive resistance while no 
support was coming up; but then we are not accustomed to see the 
British infantry sink down to the level of the Russians, and seek 
their only glory in passive bravery. 
The palm of the day belongs to Generals Bosquet and 
M'Mahon. Bosquet commanded the whole of the French assault 
on the right, and M'Mahon had the division which took and held 
the Malakoff.  This was one of those rare days in which the French 
really out-did the English in the point of bravery. In every other 
point they had shown their superiority over them long before. Are 
we, then, to conclude that the English army has degenerated, and 
that its infantry cannot boast any longer of being, in close order, 
the first infantry of the world? It would be premature to say so; 
but certainly, of all men in the world, the British generals in the 
Crimea are the best fitted to ruin the physical and moral character 
paragraph) the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "On September 8, Simpson had 25,000 men 
on the spot. Out of these he confided the actual assault to  1,800."—Ed. 
a Instead of this sentence the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "Through the blunders of 
its general the English army made a full victory impossible." The rest of this 
paragraph is omitted.— Ed. 

=====第582页=====
552 Frederick Engels 
of the army; and on the other hand, the raw material for soldiers 
which has now been for some time introduced into the ranks, is 
far inferior to what it used to be. The British people had better 
look to this; two defeats in three months form a novel feature in 
British military history. 
Of the Russians we can only say that they fought with their 
accustomed passive bravery, and in the assault made to retake the 
Malakoff even displayed great active courage. What their tactical 
arrangements were, we have no means of judging until their 
report is published. One thing is certain, namely, that the 
Malakoff was completely taken by surprise. The garrison were 
enjoying their dinner, and not any portion of them, except the 
artillery at the guns, appear to have been under arms and ready to 
meet an attack. 
If we now look at what has been done since the taking of the 
south side, we find from Gorchakoff's reports3 that 20,000 allied 
troops (of what nation is not said) have gone to Eupatoria, and 
that at the same time strong reconnoitering parties are pushed 
against the Russian left in the valley of Baidar, where the Russian 
advanced troops were compelled to retire towards Urkusta, in the 
direction of the valley of the upper Chulin, another tributary to 
the Chernaya. The corps of 30,000 men, now at Eupatoria, are 
rather weak, and could not venture to any great distance from the 
place. But others may follow. At all events, field operations have 
commenced, and another fortnight must decide whether the 
Russians can hold their ground, or whether they must leave the 
whole of the Crimea a prey to the Allies.6 
Written on September 28, 1855 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4519, October 13, 1855, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tri­
bune, No. 1084, October 16,1855 as a lead­
ing article; the German version was pub­
lished in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 463, 
October 4, 1855, marked with the sign X 
Report of September 11, 1855 in Russky  Invalid,  No. 211, September 16, 
1855.—  Ed. 
b Instead of the last three paragraphs the Neue Oder-Zeitung has: "The palm of 
the day belongs to generals Bosquet and Mac-Mahon. Bosquet commanded the 
whole of the French assault on the right, and Mac-Mahon was in charge of the 
division that held the Malakhov.—The Russians fought with their usual passive 
bravery. The Malakhov was obviously taken by surprise. The garrison were having 
dinner, and only the artillery were at their guns, ready to meet an attack." — Ed. Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第583页=====
553 
Karl Marx 
A DIPLOMATIC IMPROPRIETY 
London, October 2. Considerable surprise has been caused here 
by a speech of Sir Alexander Malet, the British envoy accredited 
to the German Federal Diet. 377 For in the speech,3  which was made 
at a dinner in Homburg given on the occasion of the capture of 
Sevastopol, he launched into a strong attack on the King of 
Prussia b and his Ministers. The British envoy said bluntly that the 
British people were entitled to expect a different policy from 
Prussia, especially since the majority of the Prussian people had 
never concealed their sympathies for the Western Powers. Sir 
Alexander is of the opinion that if Prussia had sided with the 
Western Powers, Austria would have acted energetically and it 
would have been impossible for Russia to oppose the Prussian 
coalition. Prussia is thus, as it were, made directly responsible for 
the war. As the King of Prussia is a member of the German 
Confederation, at which Sir Alexander is accredited as British 
envoy, it is widely believed that this attack will in any case give rise 
to serious representations. If he is defended by his government, it 
will be a pointer to Britain's future policy; if the contrary is the 
case one can certainly expect the recall of the envoy. 
Written on October 2, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 465, October 5, 1855 
Marked with the sign x 
a An account of it was published in The Times, No. 22172, September 29, 
1855.—  Ed. 
Frederick William IV.— Ed. Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第584页=====
554 
Karl Marx 
THE OFFICIAL FINANCIAL REPORT 
London, October 2. We now have before us the official report on 
the national revenues for the past year, half-year and quarter 
(according to Gladstone's innovations the English financial year 
ends for both expenditure and revenue on September 30). a On the 
one hand it demonstrates the elasticity of English resources, on the 
other that the probabilities calculus is not the forte of English 
financiers. With regard to the past financial year the net surplus 
amounts to £8,344,781, with regard to the past half-year to 
£2,929,699, and to the past quarter £1,924,124. The significance 
of these figures is transformed at once if one takes into 
consideration on the one hand the increase in taxation which has 
taken place under Gladstone and Lewis and on the other the 
disproportion between the tax increases as calculated and as 
realised. This is incontrovertibly revealed as soon as we look into 
details. In the customs we find an increase of £1,290,787 for the 
year, of £608,444 for the half-year, and of £364,423 for the 
quarter. This is due entirely to the new taxes on tea, sugar and 
coffee. It needs the bourgeois optimism of The Daily News to use 
this statistical premise to deduce that prosperity within the 
working classes has increased. As we know, Gladstone suspended 
the tax reductions on tea and sugar which the House of Commons 
had decreed at his suggestion in 1854. His successor Lewis added 
3 shillings per cwt. on sugar, which according to his estimate was 
to bring in £1,200,000 in taxes; 3d. per pound of tea, which 
according to his calculations was to add £750,000 to the customs; 
and finally Id. per pound of coffee, which should be equivalent to 
The report was published in The Times, No. 22173, October 1,  1855.—  Ed. 

=====第585页=====
The Official Financial Report 555 
a financial surplus of £150,000. The total surplus revenue from 
the customs for the last quarter, however, only amounts to 
£364,423,  that is far less than even half of the additional return 
expected from the increased tax on sugar alone. From the taxation 
lists we see that the consumption of coffee has fallen by almost 2 
per cent as against 1853. The customs revenue from wine and 
tobacco has fallen significantly. 
In England the excise is regarded as the barometer of the 
"comforts"3 the lower classes of the people enjoy. Here we find a 
reduction of £266,006 in the best quarter, although Sir George 
Cornewall Lewis' new tax on distilled liquors was in full operation 
in Scotland and Ireland. He counted on receiving an increase of 
£1,000,000 from his additional tax. Instead of this he has lost 
£266,006 over the quarter. As for the stamp-duty, there is an 
increase over the year of £100,472 but a loss over the half-year of 
£48,402 and for the last quarter a loss of £103,344. This is all the 
more striking when one considers that Gladstone's newly intro­
duced inheritance tax is in full operation. In the postal revenue, 
which belongs to this category (of stamp revenues), we find a 
deficit of £206,819 over the year, of £175,976 over the half-year 
and of £81,243 for the last quarter. The landed property tax 
shows an increase of £6,484,147 for the year, £2,195,124 for the 
half-year and £1,993,590 for the quarter. But we must not forget 
that Gladstone doubled the former rate of taxation and expected 
this to yield an increase of £6*/2 million, while Sir George 
Cornewall Lewis moreover passed a new additional tax of 
twopence in the pound, from which he anticipated another tax 
increase of £4,000,000. Thus with regard to the revenue from 
landed property the increase in revenue has in no way corres­
ponded to the increase in taxation, either. 
The swindles and the probable future of the Crédit Foncier and 
the Crédit mobilier 378 and other Bonapartist creations in banking 
and in bankruptcy constantly occupy the public here. In this 
connection one may recall that Emile Péreire and other directors 
of these institutions were originally Saint Simonists. These gentle­
men always expected the salvation of the world from the banks, 
perhaps also from bankruptcy. In any case they have found their 
own salvation therein. In so far as one abstracts from the great 
general ideas of the master, St. Simonism has been realised under 
Bonaparte in the only form in which it was possible. What more 
could one want! Péreire is Bonaparte's chief financial humbug and 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第586页=====
556 Karl Marx 
M. Michel Chevalier is one of his editors-in-chief, he is the 
principal economist of the Journal des Débats. Habent sua fata 
libelli". But great ideas too have their "fata". 
Written on October 2, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 467, October 6, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 
Books have their fate—a saying by the Roman grammarian and poet 
Terence, from his work De litteris,  syllabis  et metris (Carmen heroicum, verse 258).— Ed. 

=====第587页=====
557 
Karl Marx 
THE BANK OF FRANCE.—REINFORCEMENTS TO THE 
CRIMEA.— 
THE NEW FIELD MARSHALS 
London, October 4. The Bank of England has once again raised 
the rate of interest, from 5 per cent to 5V2 per cent. In the first 
instance this measure is directed against the Banque de France, 
which—by way of bills of exchange drawn on London and 
discounted there—has shipped gold to the value of £4,600,000 
from England to France in the course of the last six weeks. The 
most disturbing rumours are circulating on the stock exchange 
here concerning the financial state of the Banque de France. 
According to some of them a suspension of cash payments is 
imminent, according to others the notes of the Banque de France 
will receive a guarantee of increase "for additional security". This 
latter measure would then infallibly lead to a "run" a on the bank 
and to the immediate depreciation of its paper currency. Finally, it 
is claimed that the Banque de France will attempt to increase its 
capital to double the present amount by means of a subscription. 
However protean these rumours may appear as far as their details 
are concerned, they all indicate that the Banque de France is 
heading towards a crisis and that this institution, which has always 
been regarded as unshakeably solid since its foundation during the 
reign of Napoleon I, has become under Napoleon III just one 
more of the inverted credit pyramids which must be regarded as 
the most characteristic monuments of his reign. That section of 
French society which demanded more than anything else the 
appearance of abundant credit and of a "prospérité  toujours  croissante" b 
cannot complain when it is time to pay the price for 
Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b Constantly growing prosperity.— Ed. 

=====第588页=====
558 Karl Marx 
this pleasant deception. In any case the financial operations, stock 
exchange manoeuvres and bank speculations which caused such a 
tremendous sensation in the last years of Louis Philippe's reign 
and gave rise to a whole polemical literature of the type of Juifs 
rois de l'époque," La dynastie Rothschild^ etc., appear as mere child's 
play when they are compared with what has been achieved in this 
line from 1852 to the present time. 
At this moment there are approximately 6,000 men under 
orders for shipment to the Crimea, among them 800 artillerymen, 
900 cavalrymen and the rest infantry. In addition to these about 
4,000 infantrymen are supposed to be despatched from Gibraltar, 
Malta, the Ionian Islands and Piraeus to the theatre of war. These 
reinforcements—even taking the Foreign Legion into account— 
are far from sufficient to restore the active English army even to 
its original strength. This brought the following comment from 
Bright at a meeting in Rochdale yesterday: 
"Were I an advocate of the war I should adopt a quite different policy with regard 
to our internal military establishment. I should introduce a proper system of 
conscription, such as exists in Russia, Austria and France, and thus compel people 
from all classes to play their due part in what is called the task of the nation."0 
The appointment of the superannuated lords and earls Comber-
mere, Strafford and Hardinge as field marshals as a reward for 
General Simpson's defeat before the Redan bastion (he is to be 
recalled, incidentally) is one of the many poor jokes and frivolous 
jests with which Palmerston is wont to brighten the evening of his 
life. The first two generals may fittingly be considered  deceased,  so 
their promotion has rather the character of a retroactive 
canonisation. Their earthly career long since finished, they have 
been raised to military sainthood. Lord Hardinge holds the 
antediluvian rank of Commander in Chief of the English army and 
has amply earned his field marshal's baton for his determined and 
indefatigable sycophancy and fawning upon field marshal Prince 
Albert. What makes the business still more piquant is the 
circumstance that a victory gained with the French over the 
Russians is celebrated by the promotion of forgotten officers who 
a Written by Alphonse Toussenel.— Ed. 
b A reference to Georges-Marie Dairnvaell's pamphlets Grand procès entre 
Rothschild I er, Roi des Juifs, et Satan Dernier, Roi des Imposteurs, Histoire édifiante et 
curieuse de Rothschild I-er, Roi des Juifs... and Rothschild I-er, ses valets et son peuple, ail 
published in Paris in 1846 (the first one anonymously).— Ed. 
c Marx gives a free rendering of B right's speech made on October 3, 1855. Cf. the 
report published in The Times, No. 22177, October 5, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第589页=====
The Bank of France 559 
have fought against the French with the Russians. Thus for 
instance Lord Strafford's merit consists in having led a brigade of 
Guards at Waterloo,379  commanded the first army corps in the 
march on Paris and taken possession of Paris by occupying the 
heights of Belleville and Montmartre. 
Written about October 4, 1855 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 469, October 8, 1855 Published in English for the first 
time Marked with the sign X 

=====第590页=====
560 
Karl Marx 
THE COMMITTEE AT NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE 
London, October 6. The Committee set up at Newcastle-upon-
Tyne for the purpose of investigating the "Action of Diplomacy", 
has just published a very remarkable report. 380 We quote the most 
important passages from it and for the present we shall merely 
mention that Mr. Porter, who is a prominent figure in the 
following documents, was Vice-President of the British Board of 
Trade3 and has a place in English literature as the author of The 
Progress of the Nation. 
No. 1. Report of the Committee at Newcastle-upon-Tyne. The committee [...] have to 
report—1.  That Mr. Porter, whilst in office at the Board of Trade, during the 
administration of Lord Melbourne, and whilst Lord Palmerston was Foreign 
Minister, formed and expressed the conviction, as the result of his own observation, 
and of facts within his own knowledge, that Lord Palmerston systematically 
sacrificed the interests of England to those of Russia, in matters relating to 
commercial treaties. 2. That Mr. Porter did not conceal this conviction from his 
official  chief,  the President of the Board of Trade, Lord Palmerston's colleague; 
but that, on the contrary, when, in 1840, he was offered a mission to Paris, for the 
purpose of negotiating a commercial treaty with France, he declined to accept that 
mission, except on the express condition that he should have no communication to 
make to the Foreign Office; assigning as a reason for this demand, his conviction 
that his endeavours to conclude such a treaty would be treacherously thwarted by 
the chief of that department. 3. That this condition was submitted to; and Mr. 
Porter, in consequence, [...] undertook the mission to Paris. 4. That whilst in office, 
under Mr. Gladstone, during Sir R. Peel's administration, Mr. Porter adhered to his 
former convictions, and in addition charged Lord Palmerston with having received 
Russian money; alleging that the agent in this transaction was a Jew, by name Jacob 
James Hart, who formerly kept a gambling-house, in St. James's street, and who was 
a Here and below Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
b Labouchere.— Ed. 

=====第591页=====
The Committee at Newcastle-upon-Tyne 561 
subsequently appointed British Consul at Leipsic, by Lord Palmerston; and that he 
had ascertained this in consequence of enquiries made by the government, with a view 
of getting rid of Hart. 5. That, independently of Mr. Porter's evidence, it is an 
indubitable fact, to be ascertained by any who will take the trouble to enquire, as we 
have done, that Jacob James Hart did keep a-gambling-house, and was appointed by 
Lord Palmerston to be British Consul at Leipsic, where he was universally shunned as 
a most disreputable character. 
The committee subjoin evidence which they have taken. 
Newcastle, September 20th, 1855 G. Crawshay and others 
We publish the following extracts from that evidence: 
No. 2. Mr. Porter heard of the transaction concerning the gambling-house only 
later, under Sir Robert Peel's Administration. 
The circumstances, as related by Mr. Porter to me, are as follows: 
There was a Jew, a British Consul at Leipsic, who was considered, both by 
natives and British merchants, as a most discreditable representative of England, 
particularly as it was ascertained that he had been the keeper of a gambling-house 
somewhere about St. James's street. An attempt was made to get him removed, 
and the matter was brought before Sir R. Peel's government. But that government 
experienced such fierce and violent opposition from Lord Palmerston, who had 
made the appointment originally, that they gave way. The secret of Lord 
Palmerston's adherence to such a disreputable character came then to be inquired 
into,  and it was found that Lord Palmerston, at a time when he was in great 
pecuniary embarrassment, I think about 1825, was told by Princess Lieven to go to 
the gambling-house kept by this Jew, where a foreigner was [...] to lose to him 
£20,000 in two nights. 
Mr. Porter spoke of this openly to many persons, amongst others to Mr. 
Bright. 
April 7th, 1855 D. Ross, of Bladensburg 
No. 3. Hart's appointment was made in 1841, when Palmerston was just about 
to leave the Cabinet. A letter of Palmerston's which expressed regret that at the 
moment he did not have a more advantageous post for Hart at his disposal was 
flaunted by Hart before several people in Leipsic. 
Worthling, April 28, 1855 D. Urquhart 
No. 4. It would be as impossible for me, as it is unnecessary, to recall all private 
conversations with Mr. Porter. I shall confine myself to one incident. An important 
treaty had been concluded with a European state (Naples) under which, if it had been 
ratified, this country would in an amicable way have obtained considerable 
commercial advantages. Those in official positions who knew about the Rus­
sian action in the Cabinet and opposed it, feared that the treaty 
would be wrecked, if there remained any pretexts for discussion, formalities or 
preliminaries. Accordingly to avoid this danger, the treaty was entirely completed 
and only presented to the Government after having been approved of and signed 
by Naples. It was received in silence in Britain. No government organ was 
permitted to welcome this event. The Foreign Office ignored it completely. Those 
who had brought about the treaty induced a Member of Parliament to ask whether 
Naples had given its approval to such a treaty. Palmerston replied that this was a 
complete misunderstanding, no such treaty existed, there existed merely a few 

=====第592页=====
562 Karl Marx 
rough notes for a treaty. I recollect that Porter, after referring to this reply of trie 
Minister, opened a depository of public documents in my presence, laid hold of one, 
handed it to me and exclaimed, "Here is the treaty". It is probably still where it was. This 
treaty had been negotiated by MacGregor, now M.P. for Glasgow. Even more 
astonishing was Porter's assertion about the sacrifice of a commercial treaty which he 
had himself negotiated with France, and whose conclusion was baulked by 
Palmerston. 
May 4, 1855 R. Monteith 
No. 5. I remember having heard of the appointment of Mitchely (or some 
similar name), a Jew or a former Jew, who was joint owner and also joint editor of 
The Morning  Post.  Palmerston secured him the consulate at St. Petersburg, a position 
which he retained until the outbreak of the war, and which yielded £4,000 to 
£5,000 per annum. It was just after the general election, in 1847, that The Morning 
Post, then strictly Derbyite and Conservative, published an article about the 
Ministry, which with regard to Palmerston said that Urquhart could make charges 
against Palmerston which made one's hair stand on end. Shortly afterwards Mitchely 
received this appointment. It is true that the management of the newspaper passed 
into different hands, but from that moment Palmerston was not included in its 
general attacks on the Government but was on the contrary praised and assisted by 
the newspaper, even while it continued to support Derby and the Corn Laws. 
During the last twelve months it openly deserted the Conservative camp and 
became not only a Palmerstonian paper but also a pro-Government one. 
Charles Attwood 
Written on October 6, 1855 Printed according to the news-
DUDPF 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 475, October 11, 1855 Published in English for the first 
... . time 
Marked with the sign X 

=====第593页=====
563 
Frederick Engels 
PROGRESS OF THE WAR 
The news from the war is abundant. In addition to the report of 
Gorchakoff, on which we comment elsewhere, we have by the 
steamer of Saturday, the official accounts of the cavalry action at 
Kurulu near Eupatoria, before reported; the intelligence of an 
unsuccessful assault of the Russians on Kars, of the destruction by 
the Allies of Taman and Phanagoria, and of the landing of a body 
of allied troops in the peninsula of Kinburn. 
The cavalry action near Eupatoria was fought by twelve French 
squadrons (fourth hussars, sixth and seventh dragoons). According 
to C*en. d'Allonville's report,3 which is plain and intelligible, the 
French and Turks made an extensive reconnoissance toward the 
interior on three different roads—one to the south and two to the 
north of Lake Sasik. The two latter columns met at a village called 
Dolshak, where they discovered the approach of the Russian 
cavalry. Here the reports begin to disagree. Gen. d'Allonville 
maintains that eighteen squadrons of Russians—while the French 
were dismounted, baiting their horses—tried to turn them by the 
south and cut off their retreat to Eupatoria; that he then ordered 
his men to mount, fell upon the flank of the Russians, routed and 
pursued them for two leagues. Gorchakoff says that the Russians 
were only one regiment (eighteenth lancers) or eight squadrons; 
that they were surprised by the French after having dismounted in 
a A. Pélissier, "Grand quartier général, à Sébastopol, le 1 er octobre 1855", Le 
Moniteur universel, No. 289, October 16, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第594页=====
564 Frederick Engels 
order to unumber a battery of artillery, and that under these 
circumstances they had to run for their lives. He makes Gen. 
Korff responsible for this mistake. Now what business a whole 
regiment of lancers had to dismount and assist in unlimbering a 
battery of eight guns, and how it was that the gunners, whose 
business it was to do this work, were not at hand, we are left to 
guess for ourselves. The whole report of Gorchakoff is so 
confused, so unmilitary, so impregnated with the desire to palliate 
this first cavalry disaster, that it is impossible to treat it as a serious 
statement of facts. At the same time we see Gen. Korff made 
responsible for this defeat, as Selvan was made responsible for 
Silistria, Soimonoff for Inkerman, Read for the Chernaya.383 
Gorchakoff, though defeated in every action, is still invincible. It is 
not he who is beaten, far from it; it is some unlucky subaltern who 
upsets the general's wise plans by some clumsy mistake, and who 
generally gets killed in action in punishment for this crime. In this 
instance, however, the blunderer is unfortunate enough to 
preserve his life. Perhaps he may, later on, have something to say 
to Gorchakoff's dispatch. In the mean time he has the satisfaction 
that his opponent represents him in a far better light than his 
infallible commander-in-chief does. Since then, the British light 
cavalry division has been sent to Eupatoria to reenforce the 
French. 
Two other expeditions have been undertaken on the extreme 
flanks of the Crimean theater of war. One of these was from 
Kertch and Yenikale to the opposite side of the straits. The small 
fortresses of Taman and Phanagoria have been destroyed, about 
one hundred guns captured, and thus the entrance to the Sea of 
Azoff has been completely secured by the Allies. This operation 
was merely one of precaution; its immediate results are of no 
great consequence. 
The second expedition is of greater importance. The allied 
fleets,  with about ten thousand troops, first made a demonstration 
off Odessa, where, however, not a shot was fired, and then sailed 
to Kinburn. This place is situated near the extremity of a tongue 
of land which on the south encloses the estuary of the Dnieper 
and Bug. At this point, the estuary is about three miles wide; a bar 
with fifteen feet of water (according to the best charts) closes its 
entrance. On the north side of this entrance is situated  Otshakoff, 
on the south side Kinburn. Both these places first came into 
notoriety during the Russo-Turkish campaign of 1787, when the 
Bug formed the frontier of the two empires, and consequently 
Otshakoff belonged to the Turks and Kinburn to the Russians.384 

=====第595页=====
Progress of the War 565 
At that time, Suvaroff commanded the left wing of the Russian 
army (under Potemkin), and was stationed at Kinburn. The Turks, 
then masters of the Black Sea, crossed over from  Otshakoff.  They 
first made a diversion by landing behind the town of Kinburn, to 
the south-east; but when they saw that Suvaroff was not to be led 
astray by this false maneuver, they landed with their main body at 
the north-western extremity of the spit, exactly opposite  Otshakoff. 
Here they entrenched themselves, and attacked the fortress; 
but Suvaroff sallied forth with a far inferior number of men, 
engaged them, and, with the help of reenforcements coming up, 
drove them into the sea. Their loss was enormous. Suvaroff 
himself,  however, was wounded during this action, which was 
followed up in the following year, 1788, by the storming of 
Otshakoff. 
This time the Allies landed, not below, but about four miles 
above the town of Kinburn, so as to intercept its communications 
by land with Kherson and the interior of Russia. Their gun-boats 
will very likely soon intercept the communications by water also. 
The spit of Kinburn, for six miles above the town, is extremely 
narrow, like that of Arabat, and so low and sandy that on digging 
a few feet below the surface water is found. Thus, strong 
fortifications with deep ditches cannot be constructed there in a 
hurry; and the works thrown up by the Turks in 1787 were either 
stockades or sand-bag batteries. The fortifications of Kinburn 
themselves cannot, for the same reason, be very formidable, no 
good foundation for masonry scarps being possible, though since 
that time broad wet ditches have no doubt been constructed. 
Nevertheless, we think that Kinburn cannot long hold out against 
the Allies if energetically attacked; and once in their hands, it 
opens to them a perspective of important operations in the 
direction of Cherson and Nikolaieff — that is, the direction of the 
base of operations of the Russian army in the Crimea. This 
descent, then, may prove very important if properly followed up. 
But up to the departure of the steamer no news of anything 
decisive had arrived, and thus we are led to conclude that this 
expedition is also to be conducted in the habitual, easy, jog-trot 
style of the Allies. 
The defeat of the Russians before Kars will very probably prove 
to be the crowning event of the campaign in Armenia. The Turks, 
badly organized and short of every requisite for war, had played 
but a poor part in this portion of the seat of war. Unable to hold 
the field, they confined themselves to the occupation of Kars, 
Erzeroum and the country immediately under the command of 

=====第596页=====
566 Frederick Engels 
these fortresses. Gen. Williams, who had entered the Turkish 
service, commanded at Kars and superintended the construction 
of proper defensive works. For the greater part of the Summer 
the whole campaign on either side was confined to skirmishes, 
forays and foraging expeditions in the hill country; the general 
and first result of which was that the Russians, gradually gaining 
ground, succeeded in blockading Kars and even in cutting off its 
communications with Erzeroum. Kars is situated in a lateral valley 
of the Upper Araxes; Erzeroum at the sources of the Euphrates; 
Batoum, on the mouth of the Churuk Su (Bathys), the upper 
course of which passes near, both to Kars and to Erzeroum, so 
that one of the roads between these two places follows the basin of 
the Churuk Su as far as Olti, whence it strikes off across the hills 
toward Kars. Olti was, therefore, the central point for the Turks, 
as a road from Batoum there joins the one mentioned above, and 
Batoum was the place from which the nearest and strongest 
reenforcements were to be expected. Had the Russians succeeded 
in taking Kars, their first step would have been to establish 
themselves at Olti thereby cutting off Erzeroum from its nearest 
and best communication with the Black Sea and Constantinople. 
The Turks, however, were so dispirited that they retired as far as 
Erzeroum, merely occupying the mountain pass between the 
Upper Euphrates and the sources of the Araxes, while Olti was all 
but completely neglected. 
At last, when Kars was more closely hemmed in, they attempted 
to form a convoy of provisions at Olti, and with a strong escort to 
force an entrance into Kars. Part of the cavalry from Kars having 
been sent away, as it was useless there, actually fought its way 
through the Russians as far as Olti, and the convoy started shortly 
afterward; but this time the Russians were better on the alert—the 
Turks were completely defeated, and the convoy was captured by 
the Russians. Kars, in the mean time, began to run short of 
provisions; Omer Pasha was, indeed, sent to take the command in 
Asia and to organize at Batoum an army fit to act in the field; but 
this creation of a new army takes a deal of time, and a march 
direct to the relief of Kars by Olti would not have been the 
best course he could take, as Kars might any day be com­
pelled to surrender from want of provisions before relief could 
arrive. 
In this difficult position the Turks stood at the end of 
September; Kars was considered as good as lost, and the Russians 
were sure, by merely blockading the town, to starve it out. But the 
Russians themselves appear not to have been willing to wait until 

=====第597页=====
Progress of the War 567 
the last flour was baked and the last horse cooked in Kars. 
Whether from the fear of approaching Winter, the state of the 
roads,  shortness of provisions, superior orders, or the fear of 
Omer Pasha's relieving corps, they at once made up their minds to 
act vigorously. Siege-guns arrived from Alexandropol, a fortress 
on the frontier but a few leagues from Kars, and after a few days 
of open trenches and cannonading, Kars was assaulted by the 
concentrated main body of the Russian army under  Muravieff. 
The combat was desperate, and lasted eight hours. The Bashi-
Bazouks and foot irregulars, who had so often run before the 
Russians in the field, here fought on more congenial ground. 
Though the attacking forces must have been from four to six 
times more numerous than the garrison, yet all attempts to get 
into the place were in vain. The Turks had here at last recovered 
their courage and intelligence. Though the Russians, more than 
once,  succeeded in entering the Turkish batteries (very likely 
lunettes open at the gorge, so as to be commanded by the fire of 
the second line of defense), they could nowhere establish 
themselves. Their loss is said to have been immense; four 
thousand killed are stated to have been buried by the Turks; but 
before crediting this, we must have more detailed and precise 
information. 
As to Omer Pasha's operations, he had a double choice. Either 
to march up the Churuk Su, by Olti, to the relief of Kars, where 
he would run the risk of arriving too late for this object, while he 
would have led his army to the Armenian plateau, where the 
Russians are secure from effective front attack by a strong line of 
fortresses, and where Omer Pasha could have no opportunity to 
fall on their flanks; or he would have to march up the Rion to 
Kutais, and thence across the hills into the valley of the Kura 
toward Tiflis. There he would meet with no fortified posts of any 
consequence, and menace at once the center of Russian power in 
the South Caucasian country. A more effective means for recalling 
Muravieff from Armenia could not be found, and our readers 
may recollect that we have over and over again referred to this 
line of operations as the only one fit to deal a great blow at the 
strength of the Russians in Asia. 3 The proper basis of operations 
for this march would be Redout Kaleh; but as there is no safe 
harbor, Omer Pasha has chosen Sukum Kaleh, where there is a 
good harbor and a better road along the coast. Whether the 
a See this volume, p. 269.— Ed. 

=====第598页=====
568 Frederick Engels 
season is not too far advanced for any serious operations there we 
shall soon learn.3 
Written about October 19, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4538, November 5, 1855, 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1090, November 6, 1855 and, 
in a revised and enlarged form, in the 
New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 739, 
November 10, 1855 as a leading article 
For a description of the further fighting in the Kars area after the abortive 
Russian assault of September 29, 1855, and of the fall of Kars see this volume, 
pp. 588-94 and 595-98.— Ed. 

=====第599页=====
569 
Frederick Engels 
ASPECTS OF THE WAR 
"Of what use are allies to thee, O Russian? 
Stride forth, and thine is the whole world!"3 
Times appear to be changed since Derjavin, the poet-laureate of 
Catherine II, could venture this proud appeal to his people. At 
that period, indeed, the Russians had made giant strides. The 
whole of South, or New Russia, from the Don to the Dniester, and 
the whole of West Russia, from the Dniester to the Niémen, were 
added to the Empire. Odessa, Cherson, Kharkov, Ekaterinoslav, 
and Sevastopol were founded; and indeed so long as the "great 
nation" of the East had no more dangerous opponents to fight 
than Turkish janissaries and Polish volunteers, every march 
appeared to imply a conquest and every declaration of war to be a 
sure guarantee of a speedy and glorious treaty of peace. It is true 
the Russian legions, on venturing beyond their favorite and 
favorable ground received a terrible lesson at  Zorndorf,  and were 
saved from even a severer one at Kunersdorf by the intervention 
of the Austrian Loudon only. 386 It is true that in 1798-99 even 
Suvaroff found his match in Masséna, and had to pay dearly for 
his Italian victories with the defeat of Zurich and the disastrous 
retreat across the Saint Gothard. 387 But for all that, the time of 
Catherine and Suvaroff was the great and glorious epoch of the 
Russian arms, and never since then has a similar splendor 
surrounded them. At Austerlitz, at Friedland, the inferiority of the 
Russian army, as compared with the French, was signally 
manifested; and if at Eylau they were saved from similar disgrace, 
it was because Lestocq, with the remnants of the Prussian army, 
rendered them the same service Loudon had done at Kuners­
dorf. 388 At Borodino an inferior number of Frenchmen defeated 
a G. R. Derzhavin, On the Capture of Warsaw.—Ed. 

=====第600页=====
570 Frederick Engels 
them389; and had not Napoleon kept his guards in reserve, the 
defeat would have been decisive. The battles fought by the 
Russians during the French retreat from Moscow were far more 
glorious to the latter than to the former. And in the campaigns of 
1813 and 1814, it was the Germans who had not only to supply 
the numerical force, and to bear the brunt of every battle, but to 
find the generals who could plan them. 
Of the campaigns against Napoleon, however, it might be said 
that there was no disgrace in being beaten by a man who was in 
himself a host; but when the campaign of 1828-29, against the 
Turks,  and of 1831, against the Poles,390 showed again what 
superiority of numbers and what great efforts and waste of time it 
cost the Russians to overcome opponents far less formidable than 
Napoleon and his well-seasoned troops, the decline of Russian 
military glory was evident. It cannot be denied that at the very 
time when Russian influence in European politics was stronger 
than ever, the actual feats of the Russian army justified anything 
but such a political position. And though Russia, in consequence 
of the events of 1848-50, was actually raised to the position of 
arbiter and protector of all Europe east of the Rhine, the 
campaign which seemingly elevated her to such omnipotence, the 
Hungarian campaign, was positively disgraceful to Russian gener­
alship, and did not add a single laurel leaf to the crown of victory 
of the "invincible" Russian army. 
This "young, powerful, irresistible nation," this "people of the 
future," as the Russians modestly called themselves, in a military 
sense at least culminated long ago, and was even declining when 
the present war began. The Russian army was ranked as a 
respectable force from the tenacity and solidity of its infantry, 
though with many shortcomings which more than made up for 
these advantages. It appeared imposing by its numbers, professed­
ly ready for war at any moment, and by the implicit obedience 
which held this vast machine together. But alas! what has become 
of this mighty army, this "stern fact" which so frightened Western 
Europe! Three of its eight corps, on the Danube, were checked by 
what Turkey could find to oppose to them; and when the 
Crimean campaign began, division after division, corps after corps 
was drawn into the insatiable whirlpool, never to disentangle 
themselves again. Indeed the army was drained to its very reserves 
and elite troops. The innate bravery as well as the innate 
clumsiness of the Russian soldiers was aided by the engineering 
skill of a truly gifted man, Todtleben; it was favored by the sins of 
omission and commission of the allied generals; it achieved a 

=====第601页=====
Aspects of the War 571 
passive defense, glorious and even unparalleled of its kind, kept 
up full eleven months; but with all that, there was not a single 
actual success, not a single victory, and, indeed, invariable and 
inglorious defeat wherever the Russians attempted to take the 
initiative, no matter against what sort of enemies. 
Except the truly incredible bravery displayed by the French and 
English soldiers, and in some instances by the Turks, also, the 
whole of this war does not afford to the Allies much matter for 
bragging; from the Alma391  to the present day, their generalship 
has been worse than indifferent, and in no single instance have 
they ever seized time by the forelock. But such days as Inkerman 
and the Chernaya prove irretrievably the superiority of western 
armies over the Russians, while the repelled assaults on Silistria 
and Kars prove that under certain circumstances even the Turks 
are more than a match for them. 392 This war has been 
distinguished by more hand to hand encounters than all the wars 
of Napoleon together. Not an action but the troops have actually 
closed, even in the open field. Everywhere the bayonet has 
decided in the last instance. Now the bayonet—Russki  styk— 
always was the great boast of the Russians. And precisely with the 
bayonet have the Russians been beaten in every instance, and by 
inferior numbers too. Russki styk belongs to bygone days, and the 
men who had to shrink back at Silistria, Kars, and even from the 
small bridge-head of Oltenitza, are no longer the same as those 
who took Akaltzik, Erzeroum and Warsaw, much less the same 
whom Suvaroff made to storm Ismail and Praga. 393 "Stride forth a 
Russian" is bitter irony when applied to the step of the soldiers 
retiring over the bridge from South to North Sevastopol. 
That the position of the Russians in the Crimea is not very 
enviable is proved by the Emperor Alexander's return to the north 
without having gone to see the army before the enemy. Had there 
been any improvement in its position, any possibility of encourag­
ing it by prospects of speedy reenforcements, of increased 
supplies, and of changes in the fortune of war, surely Alexander 
would not have lost the opportunity to visit that army which at all 
events has exhibited more patience and more passive resisting 
force than any previous army, even in Russia. As he has not done 
so, there is an increased probability that the rumors are true 
according to which the Russians are resolved to retire by small 
detachments from Sympheropol toward Perekop, leaving a rear­
guard only to make a bold front against the enemy as long as may 
be necessary. There are, indeed, other circumstances tending to 
confirm these rumors. The fire of the north forts against 

=====第602页=====
572 Frederick Engels 
Sevastopol, though not very effective, is on the increase, as if they 
intended to expend all their ammunition before leaving. The 
troops about Inkerman are daily diminishing; and at the same 
time,  as if to make up for this, fresh batteries are daily erected on 
the north shore. The camp about Mackenzie's even is reported to 
be peopled by diminished numbers. On the other hand, it is true, 
stronger columns have appeared on the Upper Belbek as soon as 
the French showed themselves there, and no progress of any note 
has been made by the Allies on that side. 
It is, however, not to be forgotten that the road through the 
steppe from Sympheropol by Perekop to Cherson, offers no 
means of subsistence whatever to a marching army, and very often 
not even water. Thus small detachments only can pass at a time, as 
everything for their consumption has to be brought from a 
distance; consequently the slower Gorchakoff effects his retreat, 
the more regularly supplied will be his columns and the fewer 
men will he lose on the long march. On the other hand, the allied 
generals will commit an unpardonable military sin if they allow 
this gradual retreat of the Russians, without even ascertaining, by 
strong reconnaissances, whether it is actually taking place or not. 
As far as we can judge, Pélissier is noways satisfied on this point, 
but it is his own fault exclusively. Should he go on with his 
offensive movements at the present slow rate, he may have finished 
his preliminary operations for an attack upon the Russian position 
by the time the last Russian passes the lines of Perekop. But the 
"conqueror of Sevastopol" has now a reputation to lose, and this 
has made him even more cautious than the defeat of the 18th of 
June did. 394 Napoleon finished his campaign of 1796 in the 
maritime Alps, in six days and four battles, and that was ground 
far more difficult than the Crimean chalk-hills; but then he was 
not an understrapper to his own nephew.3  One attempt has, 
indeed, been made on the part of the Allies which displays a little 
more energy. The corps at Eupatoria, reenforced by Gen. de 
Failly's French division, consisting of nine battalions, and Paget's 
British light dragoon brigade, which counts four regiments, has 
now extended its feelers as far as half way to Sympheropol, but 
very soon retreated again. Gorchakoff, who sends this piece of 
news, b states the strength of the Allies at from thirty thousand to 
forty thousand men. We shall be nearer the mark if we take the 
first number. But with thirty thousand men disposable in the field, 
Napoleon III.— Ed. 
"Paris,  Wednesday Evening", The Times, No. 22200, November 1, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第603页=====
Aspects of the War 573 
the Eupatoria corps might attempt far bolder movements, 
especially as its line of retreat to Eupatoria, either north or south 
of Lake Sasik, cannot be cut off. Thus, after all, we find the same 
languor at Eupatoria as on the Chernaya; and that this languor, 
instead of being lashed up into action, will rather become more 
languid, there can be no doubt, if it be certain, as the whole 
British press asserts, that Gen. Codrington is to succeed old Father 
Simpson in the command of the British forces. Codrington 
distinguished himself at the Redan on the 8th of September, 
where he commanded the assaulting divisions, by his magnificent 
imperturbability. So imperturbable was he that he could afford to 
look with the marble placidity of Horace's honest man—si fractus 
illabatur orbis*—on the defeat of his vanguard, without so much as 
even suspecting that it might not be amiss to send the reserves to 
their support! Codrington, no doubt, is the man for the 
moment—the great general who has been looked for so long in 
vain—and if he gets the command the British are safe from 
defeat, as he never would allow more than his outpost troops to be 
beaten in a single day. 
That the Russians are actually retreating from the Crimea is also 
indicated by another fact. When Alexander was at Nikolaieff, he 
inspected the 31st, 32d, 33d, 34th, 35th and 36th marine 
equipages recently arrived from Sevastopol. These marine equi­
pages are battalions of sailors and marines, each of which serves at 
sea to man a ship-of-the-line, and one or more smaller vessels. 
That these troops left the Crimea when they could neither be 
missed nor replaced if any lengthened resistance was intended, 
clearly shows what is to be expected. The mission of Generals 
Benkendorf and Stackelberg to headquarters in the Crimea, in 
order to inquire into and report on the state of the army there is 
also significant, and from what we know of the doings of the allied 
generals, it may be expected that the Russian retreat, on the 
whole, will be effected unmolested and without any great loss. 
The London Times of course knows better than this.b  If 
Pélissier does not act now, it is merely to induce the Russians to 
stop in the Crimea. If they were to retreat now, while the season is 
tolerable, what could he do to prevent them? what great injury 
could he inflict on them? No; Pélissier's plan is far deeper. 
a Part of Horace's dictum "si fractus illabatur orbis, impavidum ferient ruinae" 
(if the world were to crumble into atoms, the ruins would strike him undismayed). 
Horatius Flaccus Quintus, Carmina, Lib. Ill, III.— Ed. 
b This refers to the leading article in The Times, No. 22195, October 26, 
1855.—  Ed. 

=====第604页=====
574 Frederick Engels 
Pélissier not only intends to conquer the Crimea, but also to make 
the Russians perform a counterpart to the French retreat from 
Moscow. He is waiting for Winter to set in, and then he will 
pounce upon them, expel them from their position, drive them in 
heedless flight across the frozen steppe, or, as the Russians say of 
1812,  turn against them "His Excellency Gen. Hunger, and his 
Excellency Gen. Frost;" and then have them stopped in their 
march by the flanking corps falling upon them from Eupatoria, 
from Kertch, from Kinburn, so that what cold and hunger have 
left, will have to surrender at discretion, and not a man escape to 
tell the tale of the Crimean catastrophe to his countrymen. 
Such is the strategy of the London Times. 
Written in late October 1855 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No.  4543,  November 10, 1855 as 
a leading article 

=====第605页=====
575 
Frederick Engels 
THE RUSSIAN ARMY 
At the time the war between the Western Powers and Russia was 
declared, the Anglo-French press was of opinion that Russia would 
have no lack of men to fight, but that she would soon be short of 
money. Financial difficulties were counted on to counteract the 
strength and to impede the movements of those millions of 
soldiers which Russia could, it was said, send forth at any time 
against her enemies. But what has been the actual fact? Russia, 
though ostensibly banished from all the great European Stock 
exchanges, has found no difficulty in contracting a loan395 ; her 
paper money, in spite of repeated fresh issues, maintains its credit; 
and her troops on their marches are fed, and the means of 
transport are furnished by the population in a manner impossible 
in any other less exclusively agricultural country. Blockaded as her 
ports are, she has managed hitherto to weather all those financial 
shoals upon which the London wiseacres were sure she would 
founder. As to the inexhaustible supply of men, however, matters 
look far different. While England with voluntary enlistment at 
home and abroad has managed gradually to increase her Crimean 
army to some forty thousand men, while France has only called in 
for the present year one hundred and forty thousand men instead 
of eighty thousand, and yet could send to the East an army 
numerous enough for more work than Pélissier could cut out for 
it, what has Russia had to do? Two general levies have been 
ordered on the whole extent of territory subject to the conscrip­
tion, each averaging ten men to every one thousand male souls; 
then a general levy for the militia of twenty-three men to each one 
thousand souls, and now a fresh general levy for the line of ten 
men to each one thousand souls is again decreed. The average 

=====第606页=====
576 Frederick Engels 
levy, in time of peace, is about five per one thousand for one-half 
of the empire, the other half furnishing recruits the year 
following. Thus two-and-a-half per one thousand male souls on 
the whole empire (except, of course, in the provinces not subject 
to conscription) is the yearly average. The two years of war, 
however, have now already caused levies to be made amounting in 
the whole to fifty-three to each one thousand souls, or about two-
and-a-half per cent of the entire population, male and female— 
that is, in each of the two years, ten times the amount of the 
regular peace recruiting. If we suppose France to have, during the 
two years of the war, recruited for her army altogether three 
hundred thousand men, which is certainly beyond the mark, that 
would make, for a population of thirty-six millions, five-sixth per 
cent in two years, or five-twelfths per cent per annum—that is, 
just one-sixth of the numbers which Russia has had to incorporate 
in her army. It is true that in Russia about one-ninth per cent, and 
in France two-ninths per cent, of the entire population are taken 
annually in time of peace, for military service; but then, as the 
time of actual service in Russia is more than twice as long as in 
France, that circumstance is more than balanced. 
That this continuous drain upon the able-bodied male popula­
tion begins to tell in Russia, while its counterpart is hardly felt in 
France, we learn from all quarters. In Poland particularly we are 
informed that hands are wanted for the tillage of the soil; and the 
great discontent of the nobles at the general abstraction of their 
most valuable serf-property is another proof of the fact. The 
appointment of an out-and-out aristocrat, Lanskoy, to the ministry 
of the Interior, and his circular to the nobility,3 stating that the 
Emperor Alexander, by a ukase, has guaranteed to them all their 
rights and privileges, shows how seriously alarmed the Court is at 
these symptoms of discontent among the owners of serfs. 
The most remarkable feature, however, in these quickly-
renewed recruitings, is the insignificance of the actual numerical 
increase gained, through them, for the army. Reckoning the total 
number of male souls subject to conscription at twenty-two 
millions, which is certainly low, in two years no less than six 
hundred and sixty thousand men have been enrolled in the ranks 
of the line, and five hundred and six thousand in those of the 
militia. Of the latter, indeed, a portion only have been mobilized, 
amounting perhaps to two hundred thousand men; so that the 
actual drain on the able-bodied male population has been about 
a Issued on August 28, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第607页=====
The Russian Army 577 
eight hundred and sixty thousand men. Beside these should be 
counted the soldiers of the reserve, dismissed on furlough for the 
last five or ten years of their term of service, and called in before 
the war broke out; but as most of these were called in as far back 
as 1853, we will not take them into account here. 
In spite of these reserves, forming the fifth and sixth battalions 
of each infantry regiment—in spite of the six hundred and sixty 
thousarîd recruits incorporated partly in the first four line-
battalions of each regiment, partly in the newly-formed second 
reserve (seventh and eighth) battalions of these regiments, the 
various bodies of the line are still far short of their full 
complement of men. The most curious proof of this is afforded by 
a proclamation issued at Nikolaieff, by the commander of the 
army of the south, Gen. Lüders. 3 He declares that by imperial 
order, twenty-three druginas h of the militia (twenty-three thousand 
men) attached to the army of the south, are to be incorporated 
with the line, and that they are to join the third and fourth 
battalions of each regiment. Now this measure cannot possibly 
have any other signification than that the regiments forming the 
army of the south are so reduced in numbers, that the mass of the 
soldiers of the third and fourth battalions are to be transferred to 
the first and second battalions while their places are to be filled by 
the militia. In other words, before the incorporation of the militia 
with them, the four battalions of these regiments were scarcely as 
strong as two battalions of the full complement. If such losses have 
taken place in an army the greater portion of which has never 
been before the enemy, and no portion of which has been 
engaged since Silistria, what must have been the losses in the 
Crimea and in Asia! We gain at once an insight into the actual 
state of the Russian army, and the conjecture which this insight 
allows us to make as to its wear and tear, explains the possibility of 
two-thirds of a million of men being absorbed into it without 
visibly increasing its numbers. 
But how is this immense and disproportionate wear and tear 
brought about? First, by the enormous marches the recruits have 
to make from their respective homes to the chief towns of the 
provinces, thence to their depots, and finally to their regiments— 
not to count the marches these regiments have to make afterward. 
It is no trifle for a recruit to march from Perm to Moscow, from 
Lüders' proclamation was reported in The Times, No. 22200, November 1, 
1855.—  Ed. 
b See this volume, p. 440.— Ed. 
20—3754 

=====第608页=====
578 Frederick Engels 
Moscow to Wilna, and finally from Wilna to Odessa or Nikolaieff. 
And if such interminable marches are hurried on by the supreme 
will of a man like Nicholas, who fixes the hour of arrival as well as 
the hour of departure, and punishes every deviation from his 
order; if brigades, divisions, army-corps, are precipitated in hot 
haste from one end of the empire to the other, regardless of the 
numbers left behind on account of sickness and fatigue; if a march 
from Moscow to Perekop has to be made at the rate of an 
ordinary forced march, which elsewhere is never continued 
beyond two days—a great deal of this wear and tear is explained. 
But to this overstraining of the physical powers of the soldier must 
be added the confusion necessarily arising from the notorious 
mal-administration of every department in the Russian service, 
especially in the army commissariat. Then comes the method of 
having the soldiers fed on the march as far as possible by the 
inhabitants of the country on the line of march—a method quite 
practicable if well managed, in an exclusively agricultural country, 
but illusory and open to the greatest inconvenience wherever, as in 
Russia, the commissariat and the commanding officers make good 
their embezzlements out of the stores stolen from the peasantry. 
And finally come the formidable miscalculations which necessarily 
must occur wherever armies disseminated over such a vast extent 
of ground are made to move by orders from one center, and are 
expected to execute them with the regularity of clockwork, while 
all the premises upon which these orders are based are false and 
unreliable. It is not the sword and the shot of the enemy, it is not 
the sickness inevitable in many parts of Southern Russia, it is not 
even the necessity of long marches which so decimates the Russian 
army; it is the special circumstances under which the Russian 
soldier is enlisted, drilled, inarched, treated, fed, clad, lodged, 
commanded and fought, which can account for the terrible fact 
that very nearly the whole of the Russian army, as it existed in 
1853,  has already disappeared from the face of the earth without 
having made its opponents suffer more than one third of such a 
loss. 
The order of the day of General Lüders is remarkable for 
another circumstance. It confesses openly that the militiamen are 
anything but fit to be led against the enemy. It implores the old 
soldiers not to laugh at or despise these young troops for their 
awkwardness under arms; it admits that they hardly know 
anything about drill, and introduces an alteration in the drill-
regulations which must have been expressly sanctioned by the 
Emperor. The men are not to be "disgusted" by useless 

=====第609页=====
The Russian Army 579 
parade-drill; the most indispensable movements only are to be 
practiced with them; handling, loading, firing their muskets, firing 
at the target, movements in column, and skirmishing—everything 
else is declared to be useless parade-drill. Thus a Russian general, 
under the express sanction of the Emperor, condemns two-thirds 
of the whole Russian drill-regulations as useless  stuff,  fit for 
nothing but to disgust the soldier with his duties; and these 
regulations were the very work of which the late Emperor 
Nicholas was most proud! 
The "young soldiers", whose very gesture and step are thus 
described as provoking the laughter of their comrades, would not 
in any other country be called recruits. They have been under 
arms from six to ten months, and yet they are as clumsy as if they 
came straight from the plow. It cannot be said that the long 
marches they have had to make have left them no time for drill. 
Napoleon in his latter campaigns incorporated his recruits in their 
respective battalions after a fortnight's drill, and then dispatched 
them to Spain, to Italy, to Poland; they were drilled during the 
march, both while marching and when arrived in quarters; and 
when they joined the army, after six or eight weeks' marching, 
they were expected to be fit for active service. Never did Napoleon 
allow his recruits more than three months' drill to become 
soldiers; and even in 1813, when he had to create a fresh army, 
fresh cadres, and everything, he brought his conscripts down to 
the battlefields of Saxony in three months from the time they had 
joined their depots; and his opponents soon learned what he 
could do with these "raw recruits." What a difference between this 
quickness of adaptation with the French and this clown-like 
clumsiness of the Russian! What a certificate of incapacity in the 
officers of this Russian militia! And yet, Lüders says, these officers 
have nearly all served in the line, and many of them have smelt 
powder. 
The restriction of the drill to the most indispensable movements, 
too, shows what Lüders expects from his new reenforcements. 
Skirmishing and movements in column alone are to be practiced; 
no deployments into line, no formations of columns out of the 
line. The Russian soldier, indeed, is of all the least fit for line 
movements, but he is quite as unfit for skirmishing. Close 
column-fighting is his forte, that formation in which blunders of 
commanding officers are followed by the least possible disorder 
and derangement of the general order of battle, and where the 
cohesive instinct of the brave but inanimate mass may make up for 
these blunders. The Russian soldiers, like the wild horses of the 
20* 

=====第610页=====
580 Frederick Engels 
steppe when persecuted by wolves, throng together in a shapeless 
mass,  immovable, unmanageable, but which will hold its ground 
until a supreme effort of the enemy forces it asunder. But, 
anyhow, line formations are necessary in many circumstances, and 
even the Russians have recourse to them, though in a moderate 
degree. What then is to become of an army which cannot form in 
line at all, or which when got into line with a deal of trouble, 
cannot reform in column without throwing everything into 
confusion? 
Written about November 2, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4548, November 16, 1855, 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1094, November 20, 1855 as a 
leading article 

=====第611页=====
581 
Karl Marx 
BIG MEETING IN SUPPORT OF POLITICAL 
REFUGEES 396 
London, November 13. An exceptionally well attended meeting 
was held in St. Martin's Hall last night. The notices announcing 
the meeting spoke of "a joint demonstration against the recent 
expulsions from Jersey, the proposed Alien Bill 397 and the present 
war policy".3  The last point, however, was dropped to ensure 
concord on the other two points. The chairman, Mr. Edward 
Miau, M.P., gave a survey of the events which led to the expulsion 
and then continued: 
"The simple object of this meeting is to protest both against the past and 
against the future. We claim on behalf of political exiles here the right 
of asylum (cheers) on the simple ground that they are political exiles 
(cheers), whose misfortunes suffice to secure our sympathy and protection 
(cheers). We do not ask what politics they profess or what might be the party 
in their own country to which they belong. We make no distinction between 
prince and plebeian in this respect. (Cheers.) We want the right of sanctuary to be 
accorded equally to all who come to these shores. Hitherto we have done this 
impartially. We have extended our hand to Prince Louis Napoleon, just as we 
sheltered a forgotten monarch under the name of John Smith. (Cheers and 
laughter.) We have granted the protection of our laws to Orleanists, Fusionists, 
Royalists and Republicans not according to the policy of the rulers of the country from 
which they fled, but according to the laws of this country. (Cheers.) Our national 
hospitality has bid them all a cordial welcome. Among others we have held in high 
esteem Kossuth (prolonged applause) whom The Times recently called the noble 
Magyar, we have likewise afforded Mazzini the protection he sought. (Loud 
applause.) We had not thought it necessary to inquire whether the political views of 
these men were in accordance with our own; it sufficed that they were exiles from 
their own country for political causes, and their misfortunes were a sufficient passport 
Below follows a summary of a report of this meeting published in The Times, 
No. 22210, November 13, 1855,— Ed. 
Louis Philippe.— Ed. 

=====第612页=====
582 Karl Marx 
to our sympathies. (Cheers.) This is what we claim for the Jersey [...] refugees. (Hear, 
hear!) This is what we claim for all who come to these shores and we will not bate one 
jot of our national hospitality at the bidding of any one. (Loud and prolonged cheers.) 
It is therefore fitting that those who come here should be welcomed to the full 
enjoyment of British liberty and not merely to a prison. (Hear, hear!) There must be 
no registration of political refugees, no police surveillance. (Hear, hear!) The freedom 
of these persons, just as our own, must not be placed in the hands of any minister or 
the Crown", etc. 
After Mialfc fairly long speech, which was greeted with 
tremendous applause and did not pass off without fierce attacks 
on Louis Napoleon and Austria, Mr. Washington Wilks read the 
following letter from Cobden: 
"My dear Sir,—  I cannot, I am sorry to say, take a part in your demonstration 
against the arbitrary treatment of M. Victor Hugo and his brethren in exile. But 
although distance from town and other engagements prevent me from being 
present, I sympathize very cordially with the promoters of the meeting. Surely such 
proceedings as those which you are meeting to protest against ought to open the 
eyes,  of at least that part of the public which is supporting the war (cries of oh, 
oh) from a sympathy with liberalism abroad, as to the gross delusion that has been 
practised on their credulity (cries of oh, oh) by those who have told them that in 
the hands of our present Government the war in which we are engaged is a 
struggle for liberty. (Hisses and cheers.) Depend on it, the tendency, both at 
home and abroad, ever since the peace of Europe was broken, has been the very 
reverse; and give us but a few years more of war, and we shall find ourselves 
retrograding to the dark political doings of Sidmouth's evil days. ' (Cries of no, no, 
hissing and cheering.)" 
R. Cobden 
The meeting then passed the following resolution: 
"That this meeting utters its indignant protest against the recent expulsion of 
refugees from Jersey, and affirms that foreigners landing in the dominion of the 
British Crown become at once entitled to the natural and legal right of 
Englishmen—a public examination and trial by jury before exposure to any penal 
consequences. That this meeting pledges itself and calls upon the country to resist 
by all lawful means the apprehended attempt to carry through Parliament an act 
invalidating or restricting the right of sanctuary." 
This demonstration will be followed by quite a number of 
similar ones. Incidentally I cannot refrain from observing that the 
whole refugee question consists of much smoke and little fire. 
Public opinion has definitely turned against the government, but I 
also believe that this uproar was allowed for in the government's 
calculations. The government responded to Louis Napoleon's first 
demands so clumsily, tragi-comically and blusteringly merely to 
demonstrate the fact to him that further concessions were beyond 
the power of a British government. Had it been in earnest, the 
government would have proceeded more skilfully and would not 

=====第613页=====
Meeting in Support of Political Refugees 583 
have struck in such a grotesque way and so long before the opening 
of Parliament. Palmerston does not love the refugees, but he regards 
them as a means which he must keep at hand so as to be 
able to threaten the Continent with them when the occasion arises. 
I am convinced that just now the refugees have less reason for 
anxiety than ever before. 
Written on November 13, 1855 
First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
No. 537, November 16, 1855 
Marked with the sign X Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第614页=====
584 
Karl Marx 
TRADITIONAL ENGLISH POLICY 
Concerning the foreign policy of English Whigs a most 
erroneous impression prevails; it is supposed that they have been 
ever the sworn foes of Russia. History clearly establishes the 
contrary. In the diary and correspondence of James Harris, first 
Earl of Malmesbury-—for several years, under both Whig and 
Tory administrations, English Minister at the Court of St. 
Petersburg—and in the Memoirs and Correspondence of Charles 
James Fox, edited by Lord John Russell, we find astounding 
revelations of Whig policy as inspired and inaugurated by Fox, 
who is still the political hierophant of the Whigs, being in fact as 
much revered by them as Mohammed is by the Osmanlis. To 
understand, therefore, how England has been ever3 subservient to 
Russia, we will revert for a moment to facts antecedent to the 
accession of fox to the Cabinet. 
In the diary of the Earl of Malmesbury we perceive the anxious, 
impatient haste with which England pressed her diplomacy on 
Russia during our War of Independence.401 Her Embassador was 
instructed to conclude by any means an alliance offensive and 
defensive. The reply of the Czarina in the first instance was 
evasive: the very word "offensive" was odious to Catherine; and it 
was necessary first to wait the course of events. Finally the English 
diplomat discerned that the obstacle was Russia's desire of English 
support for her Turkish policy; and Harris advised his Govern­
ment of the necessity of nourishing the Russian appetite, if her aid 
against the American Colonies was to be secured. 
The New-York Daily Tribune has "even".— Ed. 

=====第615页=====
Traditional English Policy 585 
The following year the proposition of Sir James Harris assumes 
a milder form; he does not ask for an alliance. A Russian protest 
to hold France and Spain in check, if backed by a naval armament, 
will be acceptable to England. The Empress replies that she can 
perceive no occasion for such a measure. The Embassador, with 
servile flattery, remonstrates that 
"A Russian Sovereign of the seventeenth century [...] might well have spoken 
so, but since that epoch Russia has become a leading power in Europe, [...] and the 
concerns of Europe are hers also. [...] If Peter the Great could behold the Russian 
navy [...] allied to that of England [...] he would confess himself no longer the first 
of Russian rulers" 
— and so on in the same strain. 
The Empress accepted this flattery, but rejected the Embas­
sador's proposals. Two months later, on November 5, 1779, King' 
George wrote to his "lady sister," the Czarina, an autograph letter 
in old-fashioned French. He no longer insisted on a formal 
protest, but would be satisfied with a simple demonstration. 
"The apparition merely" — such were his royal words — "of a portion of the 
Imperial fleet will suffice to restore and confirm the peace of Europe, and the 
league joined against England will at once vanish." 
Has ever another power of the first order so abjectly suppli­
cated? 
But all this wheedling on the part of England failed of its object, 
and in 1780 the armed neutrality was proclaimed.402 England 
patiently swallowed the pill. To sweeten the dose her Government 
had previously proclaimed that the merchant-vessels of Russia 
should not be stopped or hindered by English cruisers. Thus, 
without compulsion England at that time surrendered the right of 
search. Soon afterward the English diplomat assured the Cabinet 
at St. Petersburg that British vessels of war should not molest the 
subjects of the Empress in their commercial pursuits; and in 1781 
Sir James Harris claimed as a merit for the English Board of 
Admiralty that it overlooked the frequent case of Russian vessels 
conveying naval stores to the enemies of England, and that 
wherever such vessels had been by mistake arrested or hindered, 
liberal indemnity for the detention had been awarded by the 
Board. Every inducement was employed by the English Cabinet to 
detach Russia from the neutrality. Thus, Lord Stormont writes to 
the Embassador at St. Petersburg: 
"Is there no dear object with which to tempt the ambition of the Empress — no 
concession advantageous to her navy and her commerce, which may move her to 
help us against our rebellious colonies?" 

=====第616页=====
586 Karl Marx 
Harris replies that the cession of Minorca will be such a bait. In 
1781 Minorca was proffered to Catherine—but not accepted. 
In March, 1782, Fox entered the Cabinet, and immediately the 
Russian Minister at London3 was advised that England was ready 
to treat with Holland, with whom the previous Ministry had 
declared war on the strength of the treaty of 1674403— wherein it 
was conceded that Free ships make Free goods—and would at 
once conclude an armistice. Harris is instructed by Fox to 
represent these advances as an evidence of the deference which 
the King desires to pay to the wishes and opinions of the Empress. 
But Fox does not stop here. A Cabinet Council advises the King to 
make known to the Russian Minister residing near his Court that 
his Majesty is desirous of sharing the views of the Empress, and of 
forming the most intimate relations with the Court of St. 
Petersburg, making the declaration of neutrality the basis of 
stipulations between the two countries. 
Soon after this Fox resigned. His successor, Lord Grantham, 
certified that the rather favorable disposition of St. Petersburg 
toward London was the fruit of Fox's policy; and when Fox 
reentered the Cabinet, the idea was proclaimed by him that an 
alliance with the Northern Powers was the policy for an 
enlightened Englishman, and should continue to be so forever. In 
one of his letters to Harris he admonishes him to regard the Court 
of St. Petersburg as the one whose friendship is of the first 
importance to Great Britain, and avers that the proudest aim of 
his first brief administration was to make plain to the Empress 
how sincerely the English Ministry desired to follow her counsels 
and win her confidence. The partiality of Fox to a Russian alliance 
was extreme. He advised the King to write to the Empress and 
invite her to lend her condescending attention to the affairs of 
England. 
In 1791, Fox, being then in the Opposition, said in Parliament15 
that 
"it was something new for a British house to hear the growing greatness of 
Russia presented as matter for anxiety. [...] Twenty years before, England had 
introduced Russian vessels into the Mediterranean. He (Fox) had advised the 
King not to impede the annexation of the Crimea to Russia. England had con­
firmed Russia in her scheme to found her own aggrandizement on the ruin of 
Turkey. It were madness to betray jealousy of Russia's increased power in the 
Black Sea." 
I. M. Simolin.— Ed. 
Fox's speech in the House of Commons on March 29, 1791.—Ed. 

=====第617页=====
Traditional English Policy 587 
In the course of the same debate, Burke, then a Whig, 
observed: 
"It is something new to consider the Turkish Empire as a part of the European 
equilibrium;" 
and these views were urged in still stronger language, again and 
again by Burke—who is held by every party in England as the 
paragon of British statesmen — down to the close of his political life; 
and they were caught up by the great leader of the Whigs,3 who 
succeeded in command of that party. 
During Lord Grey's administration in 1831 and 1832, he took 
occasion in a discussion on foreign policy to state his conviction 
that it would be for the advantage of Turkey herself and the 
happiness of Europe if that Power were merged in the Russian 
Empire. Was Russia less barbarous then than she is pictured now? 
Was she less then that hideous despotism which modern Whigs in 
such terrible color portray her? And yet not alone was her alliance 
coveted with fawning servility, but she was encouraged by English 
liberal statesmen to that very design for which she is now so 
vehemently denounced. 
Written about December 28, 1855 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4597, January 12, 1856 as a 
leading article 
a Fox.—Ed. 

=====第618页=====
588 
Frederick Engels 
THE WAR IN ASIA 
Little by little we are getting at the details of the fall of Kars 404; 
and so far they fully confirm what we have habitually asserted to 
be the case with respect to the Turkish army in Asia Minor. 3 It is 
now beyond the possibility of denial that that army has been 
systematically ruined by the neglect of the Turkish Government, 
and by the unchecked sway of Turkish indolence, fatalism and 
stupidity. Indeed, the facts now disclosed go a great way to prove 
that even direct treason, as is commonly the case in Turkey, has 
had much to do with the fall of Kars. 
As far back as the beginning of last year's campaign, we had 
occasion to show to our readers the wretched condition of the 
Turkish army at Erzeroum and Kars, and the flagrant peculation 
from which that state of things proceeded. b There were concen­
trated for the defense of the Armenian highlands the two 
army-corps of Asia Minor and Mesopotamia, beside part of the 
corps of Syria. These corps had been reenforced by their redifs or 
reserve battalions, and formed the nucleus of a numerous host of 
Kurdish and Bedouin irregulars. But the four or five unfortunate 
battles of 1853 and 1854, from Akaltzik to Bayazid. had destroyed 
the cohesion and spirit of this army, while the want of clothing 
and provisions during the Winter completely ruined it. A motley 
assemblage of Hungarian and Polish refugees, adventurers as well 
as men of decided merit, had been collected at its headquarters, 
See this volume, pp. 484-89.— Ed. 
See the section "The Turkish Army" in Engels' series of articles The Armies of 
Europe (this volume, pp. 451-56).— Ed. 

=====第619页=====
The War in Asia 589 
without any officially-recognized position. Before the ignorant, 
jealous and intriguing Pashas the adventurers could pass them­
selves off as first-rate men, while the really useful men among 
these refugees were treated as adventurers; in the end it was a 
race of vanity and intrigue, discreditable to the refugees as a mass, 
and destroying almost every vestige of their influence. Then came 
the British officers, who were received with great respect, backed 
as they were by the consideration due to an allied Government, 
and by the utter helplessness of the Turkish commanders. But 
they, too, failed in their attempts to infuse anything like military 
spirit into the Armenian army. Their efforts might now and then 
rouse a Pasha from his stolid apathy for a moment, secure the 
construction of the most indispensable defensive works at Kars, 
and prevent, from time to time, some of the grossest instances of 
peculation and even connivance with the enemy; but this was all. 
When Gen. Williams, last Spring, strained every nerve to procure 
the most indispensable stores of provisions at Kars, he was 
constantly checked. The Turkish commissariat thought a siege out 
of the question; it had no horses to move stores with. When asses 
were found to be abundant, they thought it derogatory to the 
Sultan's 3 stores to be transported by asses, and so forth; so that in 
the end Kars, the bulwark of Armenia, at only two marches from 
the Russian stronghold of Gumri, was, in fact, left without any 
provisions at all, and had to forage for itself in the environs. It 
was the same with regard to ammunition. After the Russian attack 
of Sept. 29, there remained but three days' ammunition for the 
artillery, though it is to be remembered that no actual siege took 
place—the 29th September being the only real fighting-day 
during the blockade. The medicine-chests sent to the army 
contained all sorts of rubbish, and the surgeons were provided 
from Gonstantinople with obstetrical instruments to probe wounds 
and amputate limbs with! 
This was the state of things in Kars. That with such scanty 
resources a garrison composed of the demoralized troops of 
Anatolia should have made such a desperate resistance on the 
29th of September, and held out so long afterward against 
hunger, is one of those redeeming facts in Turkish history which 
abound in the present war. The same fatalism which leads to 
apathetic indolence in the superiors produces this stubborn 
resistance in the masses. It is the last remnant of the spirit that 
bore the banner of Islam from Mecca to Spain and was only 
a Abdul Mejid.— Ed. 

=====第620页=====
590 Frederick Engels 
checked at Poitiers.405  Its offensive strength is gone, but a trace of 
its defensive power has remained. This stubbornness of resistance 
behind walls and ramparts is essentially Turkish; it would be a 
great mistake to attribute the credit of it to the presence of 
European officers. If such were present at Kars and Silistria in 
1855 and 1854, they were not so at Varna, at Braila, at Silistria in 
1829,  when the same feats of heroism were exhibited. 406 What 
European officers could do in such instances was to correct 
mistakes, to strengthen redoubts, to give unity to the system of 
defense, and to prevent direct treachery. But the individual 
bravery of the soldiers has always been the same, whether they 
were present or not; nor was it wanting at Kars, even among 
the disorganized troops of the all but destroyed army of Ana­
tolia. 
This leads us to the merits of the British officers who played a 
conspicuous part in the defense of Kars, and who are now 
prisoners of war at Tiflis. That they did a great deal toward 
preparing the means of resistance, that to them is due all the 
credit for having fortified the place, provisioned it as well as 
possible, lashed the Turkish Pashas out of their dreamy indolence, 
and conducted the defense on the 29th of September, cannot be 
doubted. But it is preposterous to ascribe to them, as the British 
press now does, all the credit of the 29th September, and of the 
defense generally, and to set them down as a parcel of heroes, 
abandoned in the hour of danger by the cowardly Turks, for 
whose sake they sacrificed themselves. That during the assault 
they were foremost in the ranks of the defenders, we do not 
intend to deny; the Englishman is of so pugnacious a nature that 
the greatest and most common fault of the British officer, in a 
battle, is to forget his duty as an officer and to fight as a private 
soldier. Indeed, when he does this he is sure of the applause of his 
countrymen, although in any other army he would risk being 
cashiered for loss of presence of mind. But on the other hand, the 
Turkish soldier is so accustomed to see his own officers run away 
that when once his spirit is up, he cares nothing at all for officers 
or command, but fights where he happens to stand, and is not at 
all the man to notice or much less to be inspired by the fact of half 
a dozen Englishmen beside him, attempting to display their 
bravery. That the fortifications of Kars were planned in an 
exceedingly faulty manner we fully demonstrated immediately 
after the assault of September 29 a was known here, and the 
a See this volume, pp. 563-68, 694-702.— Ed. 

=====第621页=====
The War in Asia 591 
judgment we then passed upon them has since been completely 
confirmed by the official map of these fortifications published by 
the British Government. Finally, then, the merits of these British 
officers at Kars must be measured by the French proverb: "In the 
kingdom of the blind, the one-eyed is a king." Many a man who 
cannot muster the knowledge necessary to pass the examination 
for Sub-Lieutenant in France, would make a great General among 
the Cochin-Chinese; and if British officers are notorious in their 
own country for professional incompetence, it must not be 
expected that they will be illuminated by sudden floods of 
knowledge or genius on taking service in Turkey. For our part, we 
believe that Kmety deserves as much credit as any man who 
partook in the defense of Kars. 
While this was the state of things at Kars, what was going on at 
Erzeroum? A dozen old Pashas passed their days in smoking their 
chibouks, quite unconscious that any responsibility rested upon 
them, that Kars was hard pressed, or that the enemy was within a 
few marches, on the other side of the Dewe Boyun hills. A few 
thousand regular troops, accompanied by some irregulars, 
marched to and fro, never risking an attack on the enemy, and 
returning as soon as they had descried his outposts. There was 
neither the force nor the spirit to relieve Kars, and consequently 
Kars was starved out while the army of Erzeroum scarcely dared 
to demonstrate in its favor. General Williams must have known 
that he could not expect any assistance from that quarter. But 
what reports, what promises he received respecting the effect of 
Omer Pasha's movements, we have no means of guessing. It has 
been said that Williams intended, at the last extremity, to force his 
way with the garrison through the Russian army; but we doubt 
whether such a plan was seriously entertained. The hilly ground, 
offering but very few passes by which Erzeroum could be gained, 
was all in favor of the Russians; if a few defiles were well occupied 
by them, this plan was not feasible. On the other hand, 
movements of troops become almost impossible toward the latter 
end of October in a country elevated from  5,000  to 8,000  feet 
above the sea, where Winter sets in very early and lasts from six to 
nine months. If Kars could hold out till Winter, the loss of a 
garrison of 6,000 regular troops would be nothing in comparison 
to the time gained by the prolonged defense. Erzeroum, the great 
center of all the Turkish stores in Armenia, was almost without 
fortifications, and would thereby be made safe till May, 1856; 
while the actual advantage gained by the Russians would be 
confined to the virtual possession of the villages of the Kars Chai 

=====第622页=====
592 Frederick Engels 
and the Upper Araxes, neither of which could have been disputed 
to them, even if the garrison of Kars had succeeded in reaching 
Erzeroum. This town was scarcely fortified at all; if the garrison of 
Kars had actually found its way thither toward the middle of 
October, there would not have been a sufficient force to defend it. 
As an open town only can Dewe Boyun be defended, by a battle in 
front of it, in the Pass. 3 Thus the patience of the garrison of Kars 
saved Erzeroum. 
Again, the question is asked, whether Omer Pasha could not 
have saved Kars, and almost every European correspondent in the 
East has an answer of his own to it. It is even now attempted to lay 
all the blame of the fall of Kars on Omer Pasha, and that by the 
very parties who formerly were full of his praise. The fact is, that 
in the first instance, Omer Pasha was retained in the Crimea, 
against his own will, until it was almost too late to undertake 
anything on a grand scale before Winter. When finally he went to 
Constantinople to settle his plan of operations, he had to spend his 
time in counteracting intrigues of all kinds. When at last 
everything was ready, the promised British transports were not 
forthcoming; and when the army was concentrated near Batoum, 
and later on at Sukum Kaleh, no stores, ammunition and means of 
transport were provided. How, under such circumstances, Omer 
Pasha was expected to march to the direct relief of Kars, it is not 
easy to make out. We find that during his Mingrelian expedition, 
he could never venture to go more than two or three days' march 
from the coast, and yet there he had good Russian military roads 
to march on. But in going to Kars, either by Erzeroum or 
Ardahan, he would have had to march either twenty or twelve 
days from the coast, using for his roads the beds of rivers and 
paths across the hills, where nothing more clumsy than a 
pack-horse can pass. The caravans from Trebizond to Erzeroum 
have no other roads to travel over, and the fact that they never 
use vehicles is the best proof of what ground they have to traverse. 
And this is the only track which is at all beaten; as to the so-called 
roads from Batoum into the interior, their existence is still more 
problematical, as no great traffic passes over them. The wise 
military critics who reproach Omer Pasha with not having 
marched straight upon Kars should first study the accounts of 
men who have traveled over the ground—such as Curzon and 
The New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune and New-York Weekly Tribune have: "As an 
open town only can be defended by a battle in front of it, in the Dewe Boyun 
Pass."  — Ed. 

=====第623页=====
The War in Asia 593 
Bodenstedt.a As to the allegation of the London Times, that Gen. 
Williams had pointed out to Omer Pasha Batoum as a starting 
point for a direct march on Kars,b we can only say that Williams 
knows Armenia, where he has lived many years, far too well to 
propose such a thing. 
All things considered, Omer Pasha could not do better than 
menace the communications of the Russians before Kars. How far 
he might be enabled to do this effectively depended upon the 
mobility of his own army and on the Russian forces opposed to 
him. Leaving out of the question the first consideration, as a 
matter to be judged of after the fact, we concluded from the 
beginning, that in all probability the Russians would prove too 
strong for the invading army. Our very first statement of the 
forces at the disposal of  Bebutoff,  and which has turned out quite 
exact, showed that even at Kutais, the Russians, with a little 
management, might oppose a superior force to the Turks. And so 
they did. Had Omer Pasha been ever so free in his movements, he 
could not have forced, with the army at his command, the passage 
of the Rioni. But beside this, the slowness and uncertainty with 
which his supplies were brought up, hampered his operations 
from the start. After every two or three marches he had to halt 
nearly a week in order to form the most indispensable depots of 
provisions; and when at last he had advanced three days' march 
from Redout Kaleh into the interior, he was completely paralyzed. 
Finding at the same time a superior army before him, he could 
but retreat to the coast, where the Russians followed him, 
harassing his rear very severely. The Turkish army now bivouacs on 
the coast and is being transported to Batoum, Trebizond, and other 
places, having suffered severely both from the enemy and from 
sickness. Mingrelia, with the exception of the coast forts, is again in 
the hands of the Russians. 
This concludes the third lucky campaign of the Russians in Asia: 
Kars and its Pashalik conquered; Mingrelia freed from invasion; 
and the last body of Turkish troops remaining in the field, Omer 
Pasha's army, considerably weakened numerically and morally— 
these results are not to be despised in a country like that 
south-west of the Caucasus, where all operations are necessarily-
slow in consequence of the ground and of the want of roads. And 
a The reference is to F. Bodenstedt's book Die Völker des Kaukasus und ihre 
Freiheitskämpfe gegen die Russen, published in Frankfurt am Main in 1848, and R. 
Curzon's book Armenia: A Year at Erzeroom, and on the Frontiers of Russia, Turkey and 
Persia.— Ed. 
b The Times, No. 22254, January 3, 1856.— Ed. 

=====第624页=====
594 Frederick Engels 
if these successes and positive conquests are placed as a set-off 
against the occupation of the south side of Sevastopol, of Kertch, 
Kinburn, Eupatoria, and a few Caucasian forts by the Allies, it will 
be seen that the advantages actually gained by the latter are not so 
overwhelming as to justify the rhodomontade of the British press. 
It is a very significant fact that the Paris Constitutionnel, in an 
article inspired by the French Court, directly charges Lord 
Redcliffe with being the principal cause of the Asiatic disasters, by 
his not only withholding from the Porte the subsidies granted to it 
on the part of the Allies, but also inducing it to keep back, as long 
as possible, the reenforcements intended for the theater of war. 3 
Written about January 11, 1856 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4608, January 25, 1856, 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1114, January 29, 1856 and 
the New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 751, 
February 2, 1856 as a leading article 
L. Boniface, "D'après les nouvelles qui viennent de Constantinople...", Le 
Constitutionnel, No. 8, January 8, 1856.— Ed. 

=====第625页=====
595 
Frederick Engels 
THE EUROPEAN WAR 
The system of warfare carried on hitherto by the Western 
Powers against Russia, has completely broken down. It will not do 
to carry on this year's campaign, if campaign there is to be, upon 
the plan which has, so far, been followed up. To concentrate the 
whole forces of France, England, Turkey and Sardinia, against 
one particular point in the Crimea, a point which, by using 
indirect means, might have been gained as an accessory; to fight 
for that point eleven long months, and then to obtain only one 
half of it; to neglect all other opportunities for dealing effective 
blows at the enemy to such an extent that Russia could obtain by 
the conquest of Kars, a counterpart to the loss of the south side of 
Sevastopol—all that might do for a campaign or two, in a war 
where the most vulnerable points of the opposing parties were 
covered by the neutrality of Central Europe. But it will do no 
longer. The Council of War which has just been sitting in Paris, is 
the best proof that now we shall have something like war in 
earnest if the war is to continue at all. 407 
The war, as hitherto carried on, has been a state of official 
hostilities, mitigated by extreme politeness. We do not here allude 
to civilities marking the unavoidable intercourse of flags of truce, 
but to the civilities which the very councils of war of the 
contending parties displayed to their opponents. That the war 
arose at all, is the fault of a miscalculation on the part of the 
Emperor Nicholas. He never expected that France and England 
would join to oppose his designs upon Turkey; he looked out for 
a quiet little war of his own with the Sultan,3 which might lead his 
troops for a second time to the walls of Constantinople,408 arouse 
European diplomacy when it would be too late, and finally give his 
a Abdul Mejid.— Ed. 

=====第626页=====
596 Frederick Engels 
own diplomatists a chance of gaining, as usual, twice as much in 
conferences and congresses as his troops could have gained by the 
sword. Unfortunately, unexpectedly, unwillingly, Russia and the 
Western Powers were entangled into war over this business before 
they were aware of it, and to war they had to go, though none of 
them liked it. Now, either party had a last means of warfare in 
perspective which it thought would frighten the other from 
resorting to extremities. It was expected to be a war of principles, 
and of a more or less revolutionary character in which Germany 
and her dependencies, Hungary, Poland, Italy would have to 
partake. The ultima ratio* of the West was to be the setting loose 
of the oppressed nationalities of Hungary, Poland, Italy, and more 
or less of Germany also. The ultima ratio of Russia, on the other 
hand, was the appeal to Panslavism, the realization of the dreams 
fostered by enthusiasts for the last fifty years, among the Slavonic 
population of Europe. 
But neither the Russian Government, nor that of Louis 
Bonaparte (not to speak of Palmerston) chose to appeal to such 
means of action before the last extremity had arrived; and in 
consequence the war has been carried on with a mutual 
forbearance and urbanity scarcely habitual between legitimate 
monarchs of ancient lineage, much less between such upstarts and 
usurpers as the Romanoffs, the Hanoverians, and the Pseudo-
Bonapartes. The Baltic coast of Russia was scarcely touched; no 
attempts at permanent lodgment were made there. There, as in 
the White Sea, private property was much more assailed than 
Government property; and on the coast of Finland, especially, the 
British fleets seemed to have no other end in view than to 
reconcile the Fins to the Russian rule. In the Black Sea similar 
principles were acted upon. The Allied troops sent there appeared 
to have come for the purpose of making the Turks long for a 
Russian invasion; for that is the only conclusion to be drawn from 
their conduct, ever since 1854 till now. The most innocent portion 
of the time they spent in Turkey was during their stay at Varna, 
when, incapable of doing good, they did at least no considerable 
harm except to themselves. When at last they started for the 
Grimea. They managed to carry on the war in such a way that the 
Russian Government had every reason to be highly satisfied with 
them. The Duke of Cambridge has been, lately, distributing plenty 
of medals to the French troops returned from the Crimea; but no 
medals, crosses, grand-crosses, stars and ribbons the Russian 
Final argument or last resort.— Ed. 

=====第627页=====
The European War 597 
Government can bestow will adequately express the gratitude it 
owes to the directors of the campaign of 1854 and '55. Indeed, 
when the south side of Sevastopol was abandoned by its Russian 
garrison, it had cost the Allies in dead and invalid 250,000 men, 
beside millions on millions of money. The Russians, always 
worsted in battle, had regularly defeated their enemies in 
resolution, activity, and the skill of their commanding engineer.3  If 
Inkermann was an indelible disgrace to the Russians, the building 
up of the redoubts on Sapun and the Mamelon by the Russians, 
under the very nose of their opponents, was an indelible disgrace 
to both English and French. And, after all, it appears that 
Sevastopol did not so much exhaust the forces of Russia as those 
of the Allies, for it did not prevent the Russians from taking Kars. 
This taking of Kars is, in fact, the most disgraceful thing which 
could have happened to the Allies. With the enormous naval 
armaments at their disposal, with a number of troops superior, 
ever since June, 1855, to the Russians in the field, they never 
attacked the weakest points of Russia, the Transcaucasian prov­
inces.  Nay, they even allowed the Russians to organize in that 
part an independent base of operations, a sort of vice-royalty, 
capable of holding out some time against a superior attack, though 
the communications with the mother country might be inter­
rupted. Not satisfied with that, not forewarned by the continuous 
defeats the Asiatic-Turkish army had suffered in 1853 and '54, 
they prevented the Turkish army of Omer Pasha from doing any 
good in Asia, by keeping it in the Crimea, and in the Crimea they 
gave it nothing to do except hewing wood and drawing water for 
its Allies. Thus, after the whole coast from the straits of Kertch to 
Batoum had been carefully cleared of all Russian settlements, after 
thereby a line had been gained on which ten or fifteen points 
could be chosen as capital bases for any operations against 
Caucasia or Transcaucasia—the weakest part of Russia as we have 
often shown 0 — nothing was done, until at last Kars being hard 
pushed, and the army at Erzeroum being fit for nothing, Omer 
Pasha was allowed to undertake his unfortunate expedition to 
Mingrelia—too late to do any good. 
This obstinacy in concentrating the pith of the war in a 
Peninsula about the size of Long Island, has certainly served to 
keep aside all unpleasant questions. No nationalities, no Panslav-
Todtleben.— Ed. 
See Engels' article "The Progress of the Turkish War" (present edition, 
Vol. 12, pp. 450-56) and the article by Marx and Engels, "State of the Russian 
War" (present edition, Vol. 13, pp. 246-52).— Ed. 

=====第628页=====
598 Frederick Engels 
ism, no trouble with Central Europe, no necessities for conquest, 
no great decisive results which might embarrass ulterior negotia­
tions by implying the necessity of imposing real sacrifices On any 
party, have appeared upon the scene. But to the men engaged in 
the actual campaign this is not agreeable. To them, at least from 
the Sergeant-Major downward, the war has been a matter of stern, 
stubborn fact. Never, as long as there have been wars, has such 
brilliant bravery been thrown away for such inadequate results as 
in this Crimean campaign. Never have such numbers of first-rate 
soldiers been sacrificed, and in such a short time, too, to produce 
such indecisive successes. It is evident that such sufferings cannot 
be imposed again upon the armies. There must be some more 
palpable gain than barren "glory." You cannot go on fighting at 
the rate of two great battles and four or five general assaults per 
annum, and yet remain always on the same spot. No army stands 
that in the long run. No fleet will stand a third campaign of the 
modest nature of the two last, in the Baltic and Black Seas. If the 
war is to continue, we hear, accordingly, of the invasion of Finland, 
of Esthonia, of Bessarabia; we are promised Swedish auxiliaries, 
and Austrian demonstrations. But at the same time we are 
informed that Russia has accepted the Austrian proposals as a 
basis for negotiation, 409 and while this is far from settling the 
question of peace, it opens a possibility of that consummation. 
There is, then, a chance that there may not be another cam­
paign; but if one does come, we may presume that it must be much 
more extensive and fruitful than those that have preceded it. 
Written about January 18, 1856 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4616, February 4, 1856 as a 
leading article 

=====第629页=====
599 
Karl Marx 
THE AMERICAN DIFFICULTY.—AFFAIRS 
OF FRANCE 410 
London, Friday, Feb. 8, 1856 
Except the venal gentry of the Ministerial press, nobody in 
England seems to believe much in our Anglo-American difficul­
ty.411 Some people consider it a trick to withdraw attention from 
the peace negotiations. Others pretend that Palmerston will push 
on to a mutual recall of embassadors, when he will go out, as Pitt 
did before the peace of Amiens,412 to return when a truly English 
Minister is again wanted. From the manner in which the dispute is 
maintained very clever people look upon the whole as a simple 
election dodge of the President.3  The Democratic press beholds 
Bonaparte behind the scenes, delighted in fanning internecine war 
between the Anglo-Saxons on either side of the Atlantic. 
Everybody else is quietly convinced that there is not the least 
chance of hostilities, however high official language may run. This 
view, we observed, is entertained also by the French Government 
paper, the Constitutionnel, which offers its master as pacificator for 
the New as well as for the Old World. b . 
The principal circumstance not to be lost sight of in estimating 
this affair is the almost virtual extinction of the entente cordiale 
between England and France, 413 more or less openly confessed by 
the English press. Take, for instance, the London Times, the paper 
which not long ago proclaimed this Bonaparte a much greater 
man than the real Napoleon, and proposed to expel all the vicious 
people who would not bow to that creed. In a leading article it 
now suggests that the only obstacle to peace is Bonaparte's 
Pierce.— Ed. 
L. Boniface, "Une question intéressante...", Le Constitutionnel, No. 37, February 
6, 1856.—Ed. 

=====第630页=====
600 Karl Marx 
over-eagerness for it. This is followed up by another article 
hinting that the "chosen instrument of Providence" is, after all, a 
mere pis-aller of French society, accepted "because there was not 
to be found one single man in whom the nation could place its 
confidence and esteem." In a third article it denounces his whole 
staff of generals, ministers, functionaries, &c, as a motley band of 
stockjobbing desperadoes.3 The language of the provincial press of 
England is even less reserved. Observe, on the other hand, the 
altered tone of the French journals—their fulsome adulation and 
flattery to Russia; so singularly contrasting with their moderate 
antipathy for England. Further, observe the very confident 
menaces of a general Continental coalition held out by the 
Austrian, Belgian and Prussian papers. Lastly, take the Russian 
press which in its peace homilies ostentatiously addresses itself to 
France alone, without as much as mentioning England. 
"A rainbow of peace," says the Nordische Biene, "has appeared in the horizon, 
and has been joyfully hailed by all friends of civilization.... In these two years of 
war with Four Powers, the Russian people has given a striking proof of its great 
and noble character, and has earned the respect of its enemies. [...] As regards France, 
it may be positively affirmed that the French nation loves and respects the 
Russians, admires their courage and self-denial, and takes every opportunity of 
expressing its sympathy, as it did when there was a short suspension of hostilities in 
the Crimea, as also when Russian prisoners passed through France. The French 
prisoners, on their part, have been treated by the Russians like brothers." 
Le Nord of Brussels bluntly intimates that Bonaparte cultivated 
the Austrian mediation from the beginning with the view to throw 
off the English alliance at the first opportunity. c 
The alliance with France then being about to be supplanted by a 
rupture with that country, England, still at war with Russia, 
evidently cannot mean to embark in a war with America, and it is 
plain that no importance, beyond what has been pointed out, can 
attach to the present difficulty between the two Governments. 
Peace in Europe itself is by no means certain. With regard to the 
conditions presented by the Allies to Russia414 : the fact is there is 
hardly the appearance of a concession in their acceptance. The 
cession of a problematic strip of land in Bessarabia, marked out by 
a mysterious chain of mountains not to be discovered on any map, 
is more than counterbalanced by the obdurate silence on the 
Russian acquisition of Kars, suspiciously mentioned since in a 
The articles in question were published in The Times, Nos. 22277, 22278 and 
22275,  January 30, 31 and 28, 1856. Pis-aller means "last resort".— Ed. 
Severnaya Pchela, No. 11, January 14, 1856.— Ed. 
c Le Nord,  No. 19, January 19, 1856.— Ed. 

=====第631页=====
The American Difficulty 601 
Petersburg paper as a Russian province. Meanwhile, the advan­
tages of an armistice, together with the other opportunities in the 
course of turning up, do not make it improbable that Russia, 
having had the time to concentrate her forces on all the decisive 
points, may wish to continue the war. The great pledge of peace, 
however, is the absolute necessity for Bonaparte to conclude it at 
any price. On the one hand the means for carrying on the war are 
failing him; on the other hand there is growing up a necessity of 
repeating the Crimean expedition, as Montalembert said of the 
expedition against Rome, in the interior of France.415 
Shortly before the acceptance of the preliminaries of peace by 
Russia, it was generally current at Paris that Bonaparte contem­
plated a forced loan, to be borne proportionately to the amount of 
direct taxes. The vacuum in his exchequer is forcibly demonstrated 
by the condition of his army in the Crimea. For some time past 
the lamentable state of the troops under Pélissier has been alluded 
to by correspondents. The plain statement which follows is given 
by a British non-commissioned officer writing to The Birmingham 
Journal, under date of Sevastopol, January 5: 
"To-day was very fine. About 3 o'clock a strong north wind blew, and it froze 
very hard, which soon made us button up. Our men do not feel the cold; but you 
would pity the poor French. They are eternally dragging fuel from Sevastopol. 
They are miserably clad and, I think, are worse fed. Every hour of the day there 
are some of them looking for biscuit. Our men pity them, and are very kind. Our 
sentries have orders not to allow them in the camp, because some were in the habit 
of selling cugnac, which caused some of our men to get drunk. But the poor French 
manage to elude the sentries occasionally, and introduce themselves with bono 
Ingl'is. Of course, our men know what they want, and never send them away 
empty-handed. The poor fellows have not so much as a glove to put on their 
hands.  The only article I see they have got more than they had in Summer is a 
hood to their great-coat, and a pair of common, coarse cloth gaiters, which reach 
the knee, and are buckled round the knee with a few straps. They do not wear 
socks,  and they generally have had boots. The fact is, they are the picture of misery, 
and indeed they feel it when they see the British soldier with his fine seal-skin cap, 
tweed coat, lined with fur, a fine, large comforter round his neck and one round 
his waist, and a fine, strong pair of ox-hide boots which come to the knee." 
The state of Napoleon's finances must be wretched enough, 
when he leaves his army, his one and all, in the condition just 
described; at the same time, an inference as to their administration 
may be drawn from the fact that these two years of war have cost 
already more than all his uncle's3 campaigns, from 1800 to 1815, 
together. Even Bonapartist generals, returned from the Crimea, 
are said to have commented indignantly on the impudent 
robberies of Morny & Co., at the expense of the army. These 
Napoleon I.— Ed. 

=====第632页=====
602 Karl Marx 
remonstrances have found publicity in a semi-official paper, which 
has the following: 
"If peace be concluded, the emperor will turn his whole attention to the 
finances, and especially to certain abuses too inherent to great movements of 
speculation, such as certain accumulations of incompatible offices, and certain 
fortunes a little too rapidly acquired." 
Meanwhile revolutionary symptoms manifest themselves in the 
youth of the universities, in the working-classes, in a portion of the 
middle class, and what is the worst for Bonaparte, in the army. 
On the affair of the Ecole Polytechnique, we are informed that 
Bonaparte, although sufficiently exasperated at their taciturn 
attitude on the 29th of December when he played the Roman 
Senate with this army (as he likes to play the Roman Imperator 
with his Senate), 416 at first meditated a compromise with the Ecole. 
The students were given to understand that the Emperor was 
inclined to maintain that institution, if they consented, as an 
opportunity would be given them to manifest sympathy for the 
dynasty. To this the Ecole replied by their delegates that not only 
they would not cry vive l'Empereur, but would drive any of their 
comrades from school who should utter that cry. It was upon this 
reply that the dissolution of the anarchical establishment was 
determined.  One-half,  composed of the pupils destined for 
military service, will be transferred to Vincennes, there to form a 
simple school of artillery. The other  half,  destined to the civil 
service, will be in the Ecole Normale. 3 The building itself is to be 
converted into barracks. Such is the end of the pet institute of 
Napoleon the Great. 
The prison of Mazas is filled with pupils of the University of 
Paris,  and with other young men who, at the funeral of David, the 
sculptor, had raised the cry of Vive la liberté. There was a 
circumstance connected with the demonstration against Nisard 
peculiarly annoying to Bonaparte. The police having made their 
razzia among the students for having hissed Nisard's apotheosis of 
Tiberius as the savior of Roman society, the rest formed in a body, 
and, traversing all Paris, went to Nisard's residence, Rue Courcelles, 
and summoned him to put their comrades at liberty. A detach­
ment of soldiers of the line dispatched after them arrived there 
almost at the same time. Received with cries of Vive la ligne, h they 
immediately stood at ease, and refused to act. To prevent a 
further fraternization, they were at once withdrawn, and sup-
Pedagogical higher school in Paris.— Ed. 
Long live the Army! — Ed. 

=====第633页=====
The American Difficulty 603 
planted by sergents de ville.* The students removed in a body to the 
Qdéon, where they invaded the pit, and kept singing the "Sire de 
Franc Boissy," 417 shouting the more offensive verses right into the 
ears of Bonaparte and Eugénie, who were present in their box. 
The Bonapartist press confess that the number of arrests 
effected in the departments amount to 5,000; the figure given 
elsewhere of 15,000 is therefore probably the whole truth. This 
conspiracy of the laborers,418  it now appears, had its ramifications 
in the midst of the army. It became necessary to break up the 
whole school for non-commissioned officers at La Flèche, and to 
change all the garrisons of the center of France. In order to 
suppress this dangerous spirit in the army, Bonaparte is having 
recourse to that most dangerous experiment of the Restoration, 
setting up a complete system of espionage through all ranks of the 
army. This new legion of honor has led to some very lively 
altercations between Marshal Magnan and certain superior officers 
who do not think it much to the taste of the troops. 
The movement of the working classes of Paris, as in all times 
preceding a crisis, is betokened by quod libets,h the greatest favorite 
of which is the 
"Voilà qu'il part, voilà qu'il part, 
Le petit marchand de moutarde, 
Voilà qu'il part pour son pays 
Avec tous ses outils," etc. 
To leave no doubt as to who is meant by the little mustard-
vendor, the police has prohibited the song. 
The esteem in which Bonapartist institutions are held, is 
illustrated by an anecdote related in the  Nord.  Some Senators did 
not hesitate to approve of the act of M. Drouyn de Lhuys in 
resigning his senatorship, but took good care not to imitate him. 
Morny being asked if any of them were likely to follow the 
example, replied that he had excellent reasons to believe the 
contrary. "But what reasons have you?" asked his interlocutor. "I 
have thirty thousand very good reasons, one franc a piece," coolly 
answered Morny. d 
a Police.— Ed. 
Medleys.— Ed. 
c "He is leaving, he is leaving, 
The little mustard-vendor. 
He is leaving for his country 
With all his belongings," etc.— Ed. 
d Le Nord,  No. 37, February 6, 1856.—Ed. 

=====第634页=====
604 Karl Marx 
One more circumstance may be mentioned of immense meaning 
in the present condition of the French people. I don't revert to the 
stock-jobbers, for whom peace and war are equally convenient. 
The first time in their history the mass of the French people have 
shown themselves indifferent to their old hobby "la gloire." This 
ominous fruit of the revolution of 1848 proves in a manner not to 
be mistaken, that the epoch of Bonapartism has passed its climax. 
Written on February 8, 1856 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4634, February 25, 1856, 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1123; February 29, 1856 as 
a leading article 

=====第635页=====
605 
Karl Marx 
THE FALL OF KARS 419 
The papers relating to the fall of Kars, as laid before the British 
House of Commons, have been described by our London 
correspondent as arranged with a view to conceal, rather than 
disclose the truth; and a careful examination of the Blue Book in 
which they are contained 3 evinces the correctness of that 
judgment. Hardly less remarkable and significant than the papers 
themselves, are the comments they have elicited from the leading 
press of London. The Times, for instance, has devoted three 
consecutive articles to the subject,1 " selecting, however, as the 
special marks of its flourishes, invectives and arguments, the 
dispatches covering the interval from August 2, 1854, the day of 
General Williams's appointment as British Commissioner at the 
head-quarters of the Turkish army in Asia, to the latter part of 
January, 1855, when his personal quarrels with Lord Stratford de 
Redcliffe had, at last, died away. The real aim of The Times, in 
giving this exaggerated importance to that portion of the 
documents which do not even touch on the epoch of actual 
warfare, is transparent. On the one hand, public attention was to 
be diverted from the darkest pages in this most melancholy Blue 
Book; and on the other, Lord Redcliffe is to be made the 
scapegoat of the Government at home. The rest of the daily 
Papers Relative to Military Affairs in Asiatic Turkey, and the Defence and 
Capitulation of Kars. London, 1856. Below Marx quotes documents included in this 
collection.— Ed. 
1 This refers to the series of articles published under the heading "The 
Capitulation of Kars" in The Times, Nos. 22320, 22322 and 22323 on March 20, 22 
and 24, 1856. The last, fourth, instalment in this series appeared in The Times, 
No. 22325 on March 26, after Marx had written this article.— Ed. 

=====第636页=====
606 Karl Marx 
London press, with the exception of The Morning  Herald,  are but 
too happy to follow in the track beaten by The Times. 
To become initiated in the mysteries of that disastrous Asiatic 
campaign, we must start from a quite different point, and 
commence by inquiring into the action of the Allied Governments 
during the decisive epoch, beginning with the first advance of the 
Russians from Gumri, in May, and ending with the capitulation of 
Kars,  on November 24, 1855. 420 Carefully concocted as it is, 
mutilated by omissions, falsified by extracts, beautified by patches 
and plasters, even this Government publication, if put to the 
critical rack, may be forced to speak truth. 
Toward the end of May, 1855, Gen. Williams reports to Lord 
Redcliffe, who reports to Lord Clarendon, that a large Russian 
force, consisting of 28,000 infantry, 7,500 cavalry, and 64 pieces of 
artillery was assembled around Gumri; that the Mushir3  had 
received information of their intention to attack Kars, and that 
their own (Turkish) force concentrated in the intrenched camp 
consisted of 13,900 infantry, 1,500 cavalry, 1,500 artillerymen, and 
42 field-pieces. When Redcliffe received this letter from Williams, 
and Clarendon from Redcliffe, both already held in their hands 
another letter from Williams, in which he makes the following 
statement: 
"I left Erzeroum yesterday (2d June) en route for Kars, which place the enemy 
has announced, in an order of the day, his intention to attack.... I have now four 
months' provision in that garrison" (viz.: at Kars), "and [...] trust the central 
Government and the Allies will soon prove to this remnant of an army that it is not 
absolutely forgotten by them." 
The English Government, then, was informed that if Kars 
should be cut off from Erzeroum, and a blockade be established 
by the Russians, the fortress could not hold out much longer than 
Oct. 3, 1855. If it did fall rather more than a month after, it was 
because the garrison were Turks, and not beef-eaters. 
On the receipt of the dispatches from General Williams, 
Redcliffe makes urgent recommendations to the Porte that 
reenforcements with fresh supplies and money should be sent 
forthwith to the army of Kars. He even invites the Seraskier, b now 
that Circassia is cleared of the Russians, to unite the army of 
Batoum with that of Kars. Why the Porte objected to this 
proposal, the following dispatch from Gen. Williams explains: 
Vassif Pasha.— Ed. 
The Turkish War Minister, Rushdi Pasha (Mehemet).— Ed. 

=====第637页=====
h c •F*M te«i 
«.VUAJWV«.«^ *> <l*V**^a\  'V -A- "—i Sj***' 
.. ***»«*- *^*-rasai-* • -^r^^^«.^r^ri^A,;  : ;,;; 
^A*\ 
.:> 
Fragment of the first page of Marx's notes 
for his articles on the fall of Kars .•&, 
<*^" 

=====第638页=====

=====第639页=====
The Fall of Kars 609 
"Kars, June 28,  1855.—  Mustapha Pasha of Batoum has [...] recently written to 
me to say that he had only 3,772 regular troops, and was pressed by the enemy." 
On June 28, Lord Redcliffe reports to Lord Clarendon that: 
"Tt is some consolation to him [...] that even at this eleventh hour the Porte has 
recognized the necessity of listening to his advice, and sending out reenforcements 
without further delay." 
The only difficulty avowed by Redcliffe himself was to decide 
where those reenforcements were to come from. 
"How are they to be provided with the necessary supplies? [...] Nothing can 
with prudence or consistency be detached from the army under Omer Pasha in the 
Crimea. At Batoum, Sukum Kaleh, and other neighboring stations on the coast, it 
would be extremely difficult to muster more than 11,000 men. [...] The other parts 
of the Empire afford no additional reserves, with the exception of Bosnia, where it 
is still possible that a few thousand men might be detached. I speak of regulars. 
Bashi-Bazouks may be procured, but your lordship knows what little dependence is 
to be placed on such undisciplined hordes. There remains the half-formed corps of 
Gen. Vivian, and the irregular cavalry collected by Gen. Beatson and his officers. 
[...] In Bulgaria I question the existence of more than 50,000 men, including 
garrisons.... Austria, it is true, has declared her intention of considering the passage 
of the Danube by Russia a casus belli, and she also stands pledged to the exclusion 
of that power from the Danubian Principalities; but the resolution which in such an 
emergency would enable the Porte to take its line upon those assurances, and to 
overlook the awkwardness of leaving an important position inadequately 
defended, is more fit to be admired than to be embraced." 
According, then, to the avowal of Redcliffe  himself,  he urges the 
Porte to send to Kars "reenforcements of every description," while 
he is quite aware that there exist none of any description 
whatever. 
On June 30 there took place at the Grand-Vizier's3  house, on 
the Bosphorus, a meeting between the Grand-Vizier, the Seraskier, 
and Fuad Pasha on the one side, and Redcliffe, attended by 
Brigadier Mansfield, on the other. The Turkish Ministers pro­
posed, as they had done before, to collect an army at Redout Kaleh, 
which was to advance to Kutais, and to make from there an 
excursion into Georgia. They proposed that the expeditionary 
force should be composed as follows: 
Vivian's Contingent 20,000 
Beatson's 3,000 
Batoum garrison 12,000 
Albanians 2,000 
Total To be drawn fm Bulgaria.  5,000 
Egyptian Cavalry 800 
Tunis Horse 600 
43,400 
Ali Mehemet Pasha.— Ed. 

=====第640页=====
610 Karl Marx 
The Turkish Ministers expressed their readiness to intrust the 
direction of the expedition to a British commander, and to accept 
General Vivian in that capacity. Gen. Vivian at once raised 
difficulties as to the means disposable for this plan, and 
considered the employment of his contingent as premature and 
interfering with the arrangements for its organization. Two weeks 
later Redcliffe communicated to his Government that— 
"Preparations for the said expedition are in progress, and that it might save 
much valuable time if he was informed at once by telegraph whether Government 
was prepared to sanction a powerful diversion, by Redout Kaleh and Kutais into 
Georgia." 
On July 13th, 1855, Lord Clarendon sends a dispatch wherein 
he first repeats the objections raised by General Vivian, and then 
adds his own: 
"Her Majesty's government are of opinion that the wiser course would be to 
send reenforcements to the rear of the Turkish army, instead of sending an 
expedition to the rear of the Russian army. The reenforcements might go to 
Trebizond, and be directed from thence upon Erzeroum. The distance from 
Trebizond to Erzeroum is less than from Redout Kaleh to Tiflis, and the march is 
through a friendly instead of through a hostile country; and at Erzeroum the army 
would meet supporting friends instead of opposing enemies, and supplies instead 
of famine. 
"If the army of Kars cannot maintain that position against the Russians, it should 
fall back upon Erzeroum, and the whole Turkish force should be concentrated there. 
If the Russians are to be defeated" (are they?), "it will be easier to defeat them by the 
whole force collected than by divided portions of that force: and a defeat would be 
the more decisive the further it took place within the Turkish frontier." 
On the following day, July 14, Clarendon also addresses the 
following telegraphic answer to Lord Redcliffe's telegraphic 
question: 
"The plan for reenforcing the army at Kars, contained in your dispatches of the 
30th June and 1st inst., is disapproved. The reasons will be sent by the messenger 
to-day against employing the Turkish contingent until it is fit for service. 
Trebizond ought to be the base of operations, and if the Turkish army of Kars and 
Erzeroum cannot hold out at the latter place against the Russians, it might fall back 
on Trebizond, where it would easily be reenforced." 
It is very curious that this telegraphic dispatch, dated London, 
July 14, had not arrived at Constantinople on July 19, on which 
day we find Redcliffe writing again to Clarendon: 
"An appeal has [...] been made by means of the electric telegraph to her 
Majesty's Government, who were entreated to lose no time in making known their 
pleasure as to the proposed diversion." 

=====第641页=====
The Fall of Kars 611 
In fact, this answer from London only reached Constantinople 
on the 30th of July, six days after the arrival there of the London 
mail of the 14th of July. On July 15 the Seraskier informs Lord 
Redcliffe, through Gen. Mansfield, that: 
"The 15,000 men in Bulgaria destined to form part of the expedition were in 
readiness to march to the coast with sufficient means of transport, and that, in 
general, his preparations were so advanced as only to require the assent of Her Majesty's 
Government to carry them into effect." 
Meanwhile, appeals from Gen. Williams for assistance followed 
upon appeals. On June 23 he announces that— 
"The enemy [...] has pushed forward large bodies of cavalry, [...] and urgently 
recommends the immediate landing of troops at Trebizond, and if the season 
admit of it, strong demonstrations from Redout Kaleh." 
On June 26, he writes that the Turkish army in Kars was 
surrounded by the Russians, who had established themselves on 
the high road between that fortress and Erzeroum, and cut off a 
portion of the provisions collected for the army. On June 27, he 
states that the Russian army was master of the surrounding 
country. On June 28, that the enemy was master of all beyond the 
reach of their guns, and that the troops at Kars were twenty-three, 
twenty-seven and twenty-eight months respectively in arrear of 
their pay; and on July 7, that the united forces of the Russians 
were ready either to assault or to more closely invest Kars, by 
cutting off their only remaining communication with Erzeroum via 
Olti.  It is true that these latter dispatches did not arrive in London 
till July 26; still the use of the telegraph occurred to the British 
Government only on August 9—not indeed to advise what should 
be done in consequence of this news, but only to raise fresh 
difficulties against what the Porte was preparing to do. On the 
same day on which Lord Clarendon addressed Lord Redcliffe by 
telegraph, Lord Panmure addressed General Vivian as follows: 
"War Department, July 14, 1855. 
"Sir: I transmit herewith, for your information, a copy of a dispatch which the 
Earl of Clarendon has addressed to her Majesty's Embassador at Constantinople, 
on the subject of the plan proposed by the Porte for the relief of the Turkish army 
at Kars, and I have to acquaint you that I entirely concur in all that is said in that 
dispatch as to the objectionable character of the plan proposed by the Porte. I 
place such full reliance on your professional ability that I feel no anxiety lest you 
should undertake any expedition of a nature so wild and indigested as that 
contemplated by the Porte. While it is your duty to give every aid in your power, 
not simply as commanding the Contingent, but as a British officer enjoying the 
confidence of her Majesty's Government, to our allies, the Turks, it is at the same 
time necessary that you should be cautious in not risking the honor of the British 
21* 

=====第642页=====
612 Karl Marx 
name and your own reputation by undertaking military operations for which 
proper bases have not been laid down, communications opened, supplies arranged, 
and transport provided. A coup de main by means of suddenly throwing an army 
on the coast to threaten, or even to attack an enemy's stronghold, is one thing; but 
a deliberate expedition to invade an enemy's country, and on his own territory to 
make war against him, is quite another. In the first case something may be 
hazarded; but in the other every preparation must precede action. Moreover, from 
all the information which has reached me, I have every reason to believe the army 
of Bat ou  m to be in a deplorable state. I know the Contingent to be scarcely 
organized; of the Bulgarian troops you can have no knowledge; and I presume 
that Beatson's troops are as little reduced to control and discipline as your own 
troops. In short, I am assured that it would be madness to attempt to succor 
Brigadier-General Williams in this way. It is too late to regret the policy which has 
left that gallant officer.and his army exposed to such straits; but it would only be 
opening the way to fresh failure to follow out such schemes as have been proposed 
for the purpose of relieving him. You must, as I have no doubt you feel, lose no 
time in getting your force into order for service, which will be sure to await you 
somewhere as soon as you are ready for it; but organization is as necessary for an 
army as endurance and valor, and without the former the latter qualities are utterly 
The plan proposed by the Porte was, in its general conception, 
bold and strategically correct; it amounted, in fact, to the adoption 
of an eccentric position with respect to the invading army, 
menacing Tiflis, the center of the Russian power in Asia, and thus, 
by threatening to cut off Muravieff's basis and line of operations, 
forcing him to retreat from before Kars. A Mingrelian expedition 
held out fair prospects not only of relieving Kars, but of affording 
ample opportunity to gain the great point in all warfare, viz.: 
throwing the enemy on the defensive. But, the urgency of the 
danger being admitted, such an expedition could hardly be 
undertaken save on the condition of its being pushed on with 
rapidity, with a numerically sufficient force, and with an abun­
dance of supplies and means of transport. Now, the army 
proposed by the Porte for this service, apart from its motley 
composition and the unfinished drill of certain portions, was to 
muster 43,000, or, as Redcliffe computes them, only 36,000 men. 
It was with about the same force that Omer Pasha afterward 
undertook the expedition; still, when he arrived at the Rioni 
(Phasis), his army had dwindled down to 18,000 or 20,000 men. 
Muravieff had, in his immediate rear, Gumri, as his nearest 
support, a fortress expressly calculated for the offensive against 
the Turkish territory; he was therefore enabled to keep his 
position till informed of the advance on Tiflis being near its 
accomplishment. However, for the expedition to assume this 
dangerous turn, there was required the descent of at least 55,000 

=====第643页=====
The Fall of Kars 613 
to 60,000 men on the Circassian coast, the capture of Kutais, and 
the forcing of the pass of Gori. The Turks not having that force at 
their disposition, there remained but the alternative of marching 
via Trebizond on Erzeroum, thence to relieve, reenforce and 
provision Kars and limit themselves to the defensive. An army of 
20,000 men was, at all events, more useful at Erzeroum than one 
of only 40,000 in Mingrelia. There were also difficulties in the way 
of that operation; the roads being extremely bad, a considerable 
force with its artillery and ammunition could hardly reach 
Erzeroum in less than three months, and thus the crisis might 
have been over long before the army could arrive on the scene of 
action. If, on the other hand, a small force were sent, it might 
succeed in reestablishing the communication between Erzeroum 
and Kars, but would be insufficient to guard Erzeroum if Kars 
had fallen. It is clear, then, that the Turks had hit on the best plan 
for the relief of Kars; but that the Allies, by locking up in the 
Crimea the only Turkish army capable of carrying it out, 
prevented its execution. 
Let us now come to the objections raised by the British 
Government. Lord Clarendon commences his attack, not upon the 
weak points, but on the strategically correct points of the Turkish 
plan. He thinks it wiser for an army to strengthen its defensive 
basis in its own rear than to undertake offensive operations in the 
rear of the enemy. We will leave him to settle this point with old 
Napoleon or Jomini, while we can quite understand his anxiety for 
a safe retreat. He thinks it better for an army to march through a 
friendly country than through a hostile one, if march it must. In 
his first dispatch he says that if the Turkish army could not 
maintain its position at Kars, it should fall back on Erzeroum. Did 
he not know Kars was the key of Erzeroum, and that but for the 
prolonged defense of Kars, Erzeroum in its then state of defense 
would have fallen in the same year? But, as his Lordship 
entertains peculiar views as to the offensive and the marching of 
armies, so he holds opinions of his own with regard to defensive 
warfare. A defeat of the Russians, he says, would be the more 
decisive, the nearer it took place to the gates of Constantinople. In 
his telegraphic dispatch of July 14, he goes a step further, and 
coolly recommends the Porte to withdraw its army not only from 
Kars,  but also from Erzeroum, falling back on Trebizond, "where 
it could easily be reenforced." He would have the Turkish army 
come to its reenforcements, if the reenforcements would not come 
to it. Not choosing to recollect, before the fall of Kars, the 
importance of Erzeroum as the center not only of the commercial 

=====第644页=====
614 Karl Marx 
but also of the military resources of Anatolia, he discovers, after 
the fall of Kars (when writing to Lord Cowley in December, 1855), 
that that alone was sufficient 
"to bring about the worst consequences, if prompt and decisive measures are 
not taken. Masters of that strong fortress, threatening Erzeroum, and commanding 
all the mountain passes, the Russians might be able to force the whole of Kurdistan 
and the Armenian population to assist them against the Sultan3; and the Allies 
might in a few months learn that far greater dangers threatened the Ottoman 
Empire on the side of Asia than on that of Europe." 
From the same telegraphic dispatch (14th July) we also see that 
the Turkish contingent was formed for no other purpose than to 
remove from the control of the Porte the only reenforcements of 
its armies. 
This much would seem to result from the dispatches of 
Clarendon, namely: that it was a settled point with the British 
Government as early as July, 1855, that Kars and Erzeroum 
should fall into the hands of the Russians. This strange and 
indeed almost impossible view of the case is further confirmed by 
the dispatch of Lord Panmure to General Vivian. Nothing could 
be more curious than the distinction drawn by this English 
Minister between his own Crimean expedition and the Mingrelian 
expedition intended by the Porte. Because the civilized Govern­
ments of the West had ventured upon a headlong coup de main 
against Sevastopol, the barbarians of the East must not undertake 
a "deliberate" expedition against Georgia. The forces enumerated 
in the Turkish plan he scatters to the winds, and laughs at the 
notion that Turkey possessed any army fit for operations, except 
the one pent up in the Crimea. What, then, after all, was the 
meaning of the hectoring and bullying instructions as to reen­
forcements with which the British Government worried the poor 
Porte? Was it to read well in a Blue Book on "The fall of Kars?" 
Written about March 25, 1856 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4671, April 8, 1856 as a 
leading article 
a Abdul Mejid.— Ed. 

=====第645页=====
|f.t„„..r.u-»T.u™..T...,.«, I LONDON, SATURDAY, APRIL  5,1856.  I  mfigSSfftUaasara 
Karl Marx 
THE FRANCE OF BONAPARTE THE LITTLE 
The France of Bonaparte the Little, revelling at the birth of a 
son3 of a Montijo, lavishing the treasures of a nation on a 
ludicrous pageantry, "all clinquant, all in gold, like heathen 
gods," b that France is terribly contrasting with the France tortured 
at Cayenne, smarting at Lambessa, lingering at Belle-Île, 422 and 
rotting in the Bagne —with the France starving in the Crimea and 
the France in France reeling on the brink of bankruptcy. 
In the letter of Citizen Tassilier, literally translated from the ori­
ginal,0 the reader will find the genuine and soul-stirring story of the 
French citizens transported to Cayenne. The press of true-born 
British flunkeyism, it is true, trumpets into the ears of the drowsy 
world in most hyperbolical flourish the great news of the boundless 
magnanimity and rather superhuman clemency of the sausage-
hero of the camp of Satory proclaiming a general amnestyd and 
deafening the first screams of his testy baby by the shouts of 
thousands of Frenchmen given back to their families and to liberty. 
But turning away from the paid exaltation of the sycophant, let 
us harken to the unbribed language of facts. Boustrapa e offers the 
men he has tortured during four years, to tear asunder their 
chains, on the condition of their consenting to brand themselves 
a Prince Eugène, titled King of Algeria (born March 16, 1856).— Ed. 
b Shakespeare, Henry  VIII,  Act I, Scene 1.— Ed. 
( The People's Paper has the following editorial note here: "M. Tassilier's letter 
we are forced to postpone till next week, from want of space. We direct the 
particular attention of all our readers to it." Marx's translation of the letter was 
published in The People's Paper, No. 206, April 12, 1856.— Ed. 
The New-York Daily Tribune has: "superhuman clemency of Louis Bonaparte, 
proclaiming a general amnesty".— Ed. 
e A nickname of Louis Bonaparte, formed of the first syllables of Boulogne, 
Strasbourg and Paris, the cities where Bonapartist coups were staged in August 
1840,  October 1836 and December 1851, respectively. The New-York Daily Tribune 
everywhere has "Bonaparte" instead of "Boustrapa".— Ed. 

=====第646页=====
616 Karl Marx 
with indelible infamy, and to pass through the furcae Caudinae of 
the lower empire.424  If they will declare loyal submission to the 
empire, that is, sanctify the coup d'état, and abnegate the 
Republic—if they will sell their souls, Boustrapa is ready to sell 
them their lives. 
"Already," says the Moniteur? "at the inauguration of the empire, this generous 
appeal has been made." 
Thus,  the Moniteur  itself b avows that the general amnesty, now 
puffed as a stupendous novelty, is but a repetition of a stale farce 
played off four years ago. The genius of corruption flatters 
himself that his victims are now brought down to his own level, 
that they are sufficiently broken in to accept 0 as a grace in 1856 
what they indignantly resented as an affront in 1852. 
The Moniteur decks its "generous appeal" to meanness with 
wisely calculated forgeries and falsifications. It pretends that after 
the events of June 1848, 11,000 persons having been condemned 
to transportation to Algiers, the clemency of the President left 
only 306 in Africa. Now, with the same Moniteur in our hand, we 
assert that from the 11,000 prisoners made in June 1848, there 
remained in November 1848, at the time when the Assemblée 
Constituante discussed the execution of the decree of transporta­
tion, only  1,700;  that 1,500 of them were sent to Belle-Ile, and on 
the 8th March, 1849, under the ministry of O. Barrot, 700 out of 
these 1,500 were directed to Bona, in Africa. It is then this last 
figure of 700 that the grace of Boustrapa has reduced to 306, and 
not as his lying Moniteur has it, the enormous number of 11,000, 
and that small grace itself was only a trick played off against the 
assembly. However, we are obliged to thank the Moniteur for 
having reminded France of the atrocious infamies committed by 
Cavaignac and the Bourgeois Republic. d 
As to the transported and exiled of December, the same 
Moniteur computes their number at  11,201,  and affirms that this is 
now reduced to  1,058.  Now, the coup d'état made more than 
11,000 victims in the sole departments of the Lower Alps, Hérault, 
Var and Nièvre, and at this very moment there remain at least 
12,000 victims doomed to exile or deportation. It is notorious that 
the coup d'état has affected more than 50,000 persons. It should be 
further remarked that the "generous appeal" of the Moniteur is 
exclusively addressed to those deported to Algiers and other 
Le Moniteur universel, No. 80, March 20, 1856.— Ed. 
The New-York Daily Tribune has: "the official journal  itself".—  Ed. 
The New-York Daily Tribune has: "to humbly accept".— Ed. 
This sentence does not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 

=====第647页=====
The France of Bonaparte the Little 617 
foreign possessions, the slightest allusion being avoided to the 
condemned of Angers, the incarcerated for participation in secret 
societies, to those thrown into the Bagne by the ambulant war 
councils of 1851, to the prisoners of Belle-Ile, to the students 
locked up for hissing the paid white-washers of Boustrapa, etc. By 
way of compensation, the Moniteur announces an unsophisticated 
and unconditional amnesty for poachers, smugglers, forgers, 
thieves, deserters, convicts, and id genus omne. a It is quite in 
keeping with the character of the Lower Empire and the 
precedents of the Brummagem0 Bonaparte, that the birth of a son 
should prove a holiday for all the lower relations of the father. 
From the victims of the coup d'état we pass now to its tools, from 
the men who opposed it to the slaves that executed it, from the 
soldiers of liberty to the army of the Crimea. If it is a great 
historical sign that Bonaparte, in midst of the fresh delusions of a 
new fangled dynasty, and the supreme triumph of his admittance 
into the embalmed air of rancid legitimacy, still wants to be 
acknowledged by his wretched victims, and, therefore, hypocriti­
cally bids for their adhesion to the empire, c it is a trait of historical 
irony, not less notable that at the very time the head and the 
members of the society of the 10th December423  are feasting the 
success of the coup d'état in pompous profusion at Paris, the army 
that imposed this disgusting rule upon France is expiating its 
crime in the Crimea by denudation, starvation, agony and death in 
their most dismal and hideous forms. 
In the first period of the Oriental campaign, from November 
1854,  to March 1855, the upstart of December was extolled as a 
second providence and in every tune was sung the admirable 
military administration of the empire of all the glories, in contrast 
to the scandalous sufferings that befell the English army from 
intentional treason at home andd the natural working of a 
superannuated system. But, as in every other feat of the Lower 
Empire, what was taken for a substance, was but a theatrical 
phantasmagoria calculated for immediate stage effect. During two 
years Bonaparte had been exclusively bent on preparing for war. 
He had strained every nerve of the immense power of centralised 
d Le Moniteur universel No. 81, March 21, 1856. Id genus omne means "all 
persons of that sort".— Ed. 
' This word does not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 
c Instead of the words "for their adhesion to the empire" the New-York Daily 
Tribune has "the acknowledgement".— Ed. 
The words "intentional treason at home and" do not occur in the New-York Daily 
Tribune.—Ed. 

=====第648页=====
618 Karl Marx 
France to provide for the first movement of his army.a Indeed, it 
is not to be wondered at, that even the wretched adventurer of 
Strassburg and Boulogne should not succeed, during the first two 
years of his misrule, in breaking down the admirable organisation 
of the French army, bequeathed by the first revolution. It is a 
miracle that he has contrived that point in the first two years of 
actual warfare. Having lavished more wealth on a Bat-
rachomyomachia426 of his own, than the Great Napoleon in fifteen 
years of his Iliad,b he finds at the beginning of the third year the 
resources of France drained, her military administration broken 
up, and her very army dwindling away from misery. The cancer 
that eats up the French army is the organic principle of the Lower 
Empire—theft and embezzlement; and but two years were needed 
to make its work appear on the surface. 
The wretched state of the French army was for a long time 
carefully concealed not only in the French but also in the English 
press.427  Now-a-days it has become a secret running the streets and 
encumbering the thoroughfares. It has become a truth no longer 
controverted after Bonaparte's own Moniteur has given it the lie 
direct. 0 For the present purpose it will suffice to quote from the last 
letter of the Times' Sebastopol correspondent: — 
"The French army, however, numerous as they may show it to be on paper, is 
dwindling sadly; scurvy and fever are playing havoc in its ranks: I recently stated 
its daily loss at 170 men ... now the French admit the daily mortality in their army 
to be 120 men, and in some days considerably more. The right wing of the army, 
in the Baidar valley, suffers the most.... When the mild weather sets in, a great 
increase of disease is to be anticipated.... The sick returns of the French will be 
terrible.... The French army is being expended at least as rapidly as it was by shell 
and shot during the severest part of the siege." 
Insufficiency of shelter, want of covering, and the scarcity of 
foode are pointed at as the principal causes of their trials. Having 
described the rigour of the weather, "tubs of water in the huts 
having frozen to a depth of 3 inches," and the prevalence of 
The New-York Daily Tribune has: "He had strained every nerve of the 
centralized power of France to provide for the first movements of his army—then 
the main prop of his usurpation and which had not yet served his turn." — Ed. 
The New-York Daily Tribune has: "Having lavished more wealth in that short 
struggle than the great Napoleon in the fifteen years of his warfare...."—Ed. 
c This refers to reports published in Le Moniteur universel, Nos. 84 and 85, 
March 24 and 25, 1856. In the New-York Daily Tribune this sentence does not 
occur.— Ed. 
Here and below Marx quotes from a report by W. H. Russell published in 
The Times, No. 22324, March 25, 1856.— Ed. 
In the New-York Daily Tribune the words "principally of wine and vegetables" 
are added here.— Ed. 

=====第649页=====
The France of Bonaparte the Little 619 
snow-storms which "allowed few huts to remain in which the snow 
did not make its appearance in great quantities," the correspon­
dent puts the question what the French army must have suffered 
in tents not huts carefully fitted out, not double tents well dug out, 
but single and unprotected tents. He concludes by stating that "it 
is really painful to meet the French convoys of sick," and that 
Marshal Pélissier is more anxious to hide them from the English 
army than to mitigate their sufferings. 
We add another quotation from The Morning Advertiser, the very 
paper that shared with The Morning Post the infamous privilege of 
hailing Bonaparte's advent in 1851 and of still trumpeting Lord 
Palmerston as the truly English minister: — 
"There are 3,000 sick in the French camp of the Chernaya—the ambulances 
are choked and the medical staff decimated by disease and exhaustion—the 
commissariat has broken down, and is unable to feed the troops — the men are 
actually begging biscuits from the soldiers at the outposts—scurvy from the want of 
vegetables, and typhus from the want of meat, rage with indomitable virulence — 
and the contrast between the two armies is the source of open discontent on the 
part of the French soldiery. The transports are insufficient to convey the sick to 
Constantinople — the hospitals there have more than 12,000 patients in them — the 
epidemic is a positive pestilence—and the mortality frightful—the troop-ships 
arriving from the east at Marseilles are loaded with the dregs of fever, and the 
vessels and the typhoid patients are consigned to the lazaretto at Frioul."a 
What is to be done with this withering army?b  are they to be 
soothed by recitals of the Arabian tale of the King of Algiers' 
"nativity"? or by the description of the embroidered and 
gold-laced uniforms of the cautious hero's pampered guards? It 
should be recollected that French soldiers have no stomach for 
undergoing injuries like English privates.  Proof,  if proof be 
wanted, the several attempts made in the French army to shoot 
General Pélissier, a fact recorded by the Gazette de Milan, c 
Radetzky's Moniteur. Nor must it be imagined that the army of the 
line in France remains a dull spectator of the Crimean tragedy. 
The razzias of the Paris police are beginning to affect the 
barracks. d The Zouaves ordered to Paris to chafe public en-
a The quotation from The Morning Advertiser and the preceding paragraph do 
not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. 
Instead of this sentence the New-York Daily Tribune and New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune have: "What is to be done with these discontented legions, dying from a 
wretched commissariat, scandalous neglect, and notoriously organized plunder?" — 
Ed. 
c Gazzetta Ufficiale di Milano.— Ed. 
Instead of this sentence the New-York Daily Tribune has: "The razzias of the 
Paris police have lately been directed at two barracks situated on the right bank of 
the Seine." — Ed. 

=====第650页=====
620 Karl Marx 
thusiasm by their exhibition are already removed from the capital, 
they having become suspicious. Two other regiments returned 
from the Crimea have also been banished into the provinces. The 
antagonism between the guard and the line is daily growing more 
embittered, Bonaparte being about to create at this very moment 
new guard regiments in sufficient numbers to enable this 
privileged corps to keep the garrison of Paris, exclusive of the 
regiments of the line. Having bribed the army into antagonism to 
the country, he is now trying to bribe an army within the army—a 
rather dangerous experiment this. 
The Finances—we would not call them the heels of this strange 
Achilles, he being rather tall at his heels—require a separate 
article for a full exposition. For the present it may suffice to state3 
that the funds falling somewhile hence, it was consequently 
expected the announced conclusion of peace, and the birth of 
another Bonaparte could not fail to send them up. Such an issue 
was not quite left to chance. Not only the Government gave orders 
to freely use the public chests at its disposal for the purchase of 
public funds, but the credit mobilier, and similar mushrooms of 
Bonapartist credit were, during two consecutive days, largely 
employed in buying stock. All these manoeuvres notwithstanding, 
on the very news of the "nativity," instead of rising, the funds 
went down, and continue to go down. Bonaparte, in great rage 
now, prohibited the sale on Change of any but governmental 
quoted papers, and had then the principal stockjobber summoned 
to the Préfecture de Police. 
When the statuary of Pallas Athene tumbled down in the 
Parthenon, such an accident told fatal tidings to the Republic of 
Athens. Bonaparte's bust, tottering on its pedestal in the 
Synagogue,13 where the marketable value of governments is settled, 
and the peoples' history discounted, presages the downfall of the 
Empire of Agio. 
Written about April 1, 1856 Reproduced from The People's 
First published in The People's Paper, No. Paper 
205, April 5, 1856 (signed: K. M.) and 
simultaneously in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4676, April 14, 1856, re­
printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1136, April 15, 1856 as a 
leading article 
The preceding sentence does not occur in the New-York Daily Tribune. The 
paragraph begins as follows: "As for the finances of France, it may suffice to 
state...."  — Ed. 
The New-York Daily Tribune has: "in the temple".— Ed. 

=====第651页=====
Karl Marx 
THE FALL OF KARS 

=====第652页=====
Written in late March and April 1856 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The People's Paper, Nos. 
205, 206, 207 and 208, April 5, 12, 19 
and 26, 1856 
Signed: Karl Marx 

=====第653页=====
623 
[I] 
[The People's Paper, No. 205, April 5, 1856] 
The fall of Kars is the turning-point in the history of the 
sham-war against Russia. Without the fall of Kars no Five Points, 
no Conferences, no treaty of Paris, in one word: no sham peace. 429 
Then if we can prove from the Government's own Blue 
Book3  — carefully cooked, as it is mutilated by extracts, deformed 
by omissions, plastered and patched up by falsifications—that 
Lord Palmerston's cabinet has planned from the beginning, and 
systematically carried out to the end, the fall of Kars, the veil is 
lifted and the drama of the Oriental War with all its startling 
incidents emerges from the mist diplomatically wrapt around it. 
Towards the end of May, 1855, General Williams reports to 
Lord Redcliffe, who reports to Lord Clarendon, that 
"a large force, consisting of 28,000 infantry, 7,500 cavalry, and 64 pieces of 
artillery, was assembled round Gumri, and that the Mushir had received 
information of the intention of the enemy to attack Kars. We have in that 
entrenched camp 13,900 infantry, 1,500 cavalry, 1,500 artillerymen and 42 field 
pieces." 
Seven days later, on June 3rd, Williams informed Clarendon: 
"I have now four months provisions in the garrison of Kars, and I trust the 
central government, and the allies, will soon prove to this remnant of an army that 
it is not absolutely forgotten by them." 
This despatch (see Kars papers, No. 231) was received in 
Downing-street, c on June 25th. On that day, consequently, the 
a Papers Relative to Military Affairs in Asiatic Turkey, and the Defence and 
Capitulation of Kars, London, 1856. Documents from this book are quoted 
below.— Ed. 
b Vassif Pasha.— Ed. 
c 10 Downing Street is the official residence of the British Prime 
Minister.— Ed. 

=====第654页=====
624 Karl Marx 
British government knew that on Oct. 3rd, Kars must fall if not 
relieved; and this knowledge became the basis of its operations. 
On July 11th, Lord Clarendon receives three despatches from 
General Williams, dated June 15th, 17th, and 19th, stating 
severally that a skirmish of the advanced posts had taken place; 
that on the 16th of June a regular attack of the entrenched camp 
by the Russians had been gallantly repulsed by the Turks, and 
lastly that the enemy had made a flank march upon the 
entrenched camp, and established himself in force (30,000) within 
an hour's march of the weakest point of the Turkish position. 
Williams concludes the last of these despatches with the following 
words: 
"Unfortunately we have no irregular cavalry. ... The enemy has already partially 
interrupted our communications with Erzeroum." 
When the same news reached Constantinople, Lord Redcliffe 
was invited to a Conference at the Grand Vizier'sa  house on the 
Bosphorus. It was proposed by the Turkish ministers to relieve 
Kars by an expedition from Redout Kaleh by Kutais into Georgia, 
the force to consist of— 
Vivian's Contingent 20,000 
Beatson's 3,000 
Batoum Garrison  1"2,000 
Albanians 2,000 
From Bulgaria  5,000 
Egyptian Regular Cavalry 800 
Tunis Horse 600 
Total 43,400 
The Porte expressed its readiness to entrust the direction of this 
expedition to a British commander, and to accept General Vivian 
in that capacity. This proposition reached Lord Clarendon on July 
11th. On July 12th, Lord Redcliffe further informed him by 
telegraph that 
"Preparations for an eventual expedition [...] are in progress. It might save 
much valuable time if you would inform me at once by telegraph whether 
government is prepared to sanction a powerfid diversion by Redout Kaleh and 
Kutais into Georgia." 
From June 25th to July 12th the British government, apprised 
of the danger of Kars, moved not a finger to come to the rescue, 
Ali Mehemet Pasha.— Ed. 

=====第655页=====
The Fall of Kars 625 
not once was the telegraph set in motion; from the very day, 
however, when there is some Turkish plan for the relief of Kars to 
be thwarted, they suddenly are all activity. On July 13th (see No. 
248 of Kars papers) Clarendon addresses a despatch to Redcliffe 
to this effect: 
"Her Majesty's government are of opinion that the wiser course would be to 
send reinforcements to the rear of the Turkish army, instead of sending an 
expedition to the rear of the Russian army. The reinforcements might go to 
Trebizond, and be directed from thence upon Erzeroum. The distance from 
Trebizond to Erzeroum is less than from Redout Kaleh to Tiflis, and the march is 
through a friendly instead of through a hostile country; and at Erzeroum the army 
would meet supporting friends instead of opposing enemies, and supplies instead 
of famine. If the army at Kars cannot maintain that position against the Russians, it 
should fall back upon Erzeroum, and the whole Turkish force should be 
concentrated there. If the Russians are to be defeated, it will be easier to defeat 
them by the whole force collected than by divided portions of that force; and a 
defeat would be the more decisive, the further it took place within the Turkish 
frontier." 
On the day following the receipt of Redcliffe's telegraphic 
despatch, Clarendon becomes still more liberal, adding Erzeroum 
also to the list of places to be fallen back from. 
(Telegraphic.) 
"The Earl of Clarendon to Lord Stratford de Redcliffe, 
Foreign Office, July 14th, 1855. 
"The plan for reinforcing the army at Kars contained in your despatches of 
30th June, and 1st instant (should be the 12th inst.) is disapproved. The reasons will 
be sent by the messenger to-day against employing the Turkish Contingent until it 
is fit for service. Trebizond ought to be the base of operations, and if the Turkish 
army of Kars and Erzeroum cannot hold out at the latter place against the 
Russians, it might fall back upon Trebizond where it would easily be reinforced." 
If Kars is the key to Erzeroum, Erzeroum is the key to 
Constantinople, and the central point of the strategical and 
commercial lines of Anatolia. Kars and Erzeroum once in the 
hands of Russia, the British land-trade, via Trebizond to Persia, is 
cut off. The British Government, aware of all these circumstances, 
coolly advises the Porte to surrender the keys of its house in Asia, 
when scarcely one of the two was in danger, and invites the 
besieged army of Kars to come to the reinforcements forbidden to 
come to the besieged army. "If," says his lordship, "the Russians 
are to be defeated" (where is the necessity? he seems to ask) he 
thinks a defeat would be the more decisive and easy the further it 
took place within the Turkish frontier, i.e., the more strong places 
and territory are surrendered to the Russians, and, in fact, the 
nearer behind Constantinople. 

=====第656页=====
626 Karl Marx 
These despatches of Lord Clarendon are worthily backed by the 
following despatch from my lord "Take care of Dowb" Pan-
mure, 430 the English Carnot, to Lieutenant-General Vivian: — 
"Lord Panmure, to Lieut.-General Vivian, 
"War-Department, July 14, 1855. 
"Sir,— I transmit, herewith, for your information, a copy of a despatch which the 
Earl of Clarendon has addressed by the present opportunity to her Majesty's 
embassy at Constantinople, on the subject of the plan proposed by the Porte for 
the relief of the Turkish army at Kars, and I have to acquaint you that I entirely 
concur in all that is said in that despatch as to the objectionable character of the 
plan proposed by the Porte. I place such full reliance on your professional ability, 
that I feel no anxiety lest you should undertake any expedition of a nature so wild 
and undigested as that contemplated by the Porte. Whilst it is your duty to give 
every aid in your power, not simply as commanding the Contingent, but, as a 
British officer enjoying the confidence of her Majesty's Government, to our allies 
the Turks, it is at the same time necessary that you should be cautious in not 
risking the honour of the British name and your own reputation, by undertaking 
military operations for which proper basis has not been laid down, communications 
opened, supplies arranged, and transportation provided. A coup de main by means 
of suddenly throwing an army on the coast to threaten, or even to attack, an 
enemy's stronghold is one thing; but a deliberate expedition to invade an enemy's 
country, and on his own territory, to make war upon him, is quite another. In the 
first case something may be hazarded; but in the other every preparation must 
precede action. Moreover, from all the information which has reached me, I have 
every reason to believe the army of Batoum to be in a deplorable state. I know the 
Contingent to be scarcely organised; of the Bulgarian troops you have no 
knowledge, and I presume that Beatson horse are as little reduced to control and 
discipline as your own troops. In short I am assured that it would be madness to 
attempt to succour Brigadier-General Williams in this way. It is too late to regret 
the policy which has left that gallant officer and his army exposed to such straits; 
but it would only be opening the way to fresh failures to follow out such schemes 
as have been proposed for the purpose of relieving him. You must, as I have no 
doubt you feel, lose no time in getting your force into order for service which will 
be sure to await you somewhere, as soon as you are ready for it; but organisation is 
as necessary for an army as endurance and valour, and without the former, the 
latter qualities are utterly unavailing." 
This despatch puts down Lord Palmerston's war minister a 
regular clown, useful only for the amusement of his master. To 
threaten, "or even" to attack, the stronghold of Sebastopol, where 
Russia had accumulated the defensive labour of twenty years, 
appears to him one thing very sensible, because it was a needless 
coup de main on the part of the allies; but a "deliberate invasion" 
on the part of the Porte, of an enemy's country with the purpose 
of beating him—"Dowb" never heard of such a thing. He entirely 
concurs with Clarendon in opinion that, to strengthen the rear of 
one's own army, instead of acting in the rear of the enemy, is the 
true essence of strategy—a point we may leave him to settle with 

=====第657页=====
The Fall of Kars 627 
Napoleon I, Jomini, and all other great strategists. He also concurs 
with his friend in thinking, that in warfare an army must never 
march through hostile, but always through friendly countries— 
"with supplies instead of famine"—the true philosophy of the 
trencher-knife. But through the complacent silliness of the clown 
we catch a glimpse of the mind that moves him! or could it be 
given to poor Dowb, to make the discovery that Georgia was a 
hostile, instead of a friendly country—Georgia, Russia's Poland in 
the Caucasus. 
The Turkish proposal which Dowb styles wild and ill-digested, 
was, in its general conception, bold, correct, we may say the only 
strategical idea given birth to in the whole war. It reduced itself 
to taking up an eccentric position with respect to the besieging 
army, to menace Tiflis, the centre of the Russian power in Asia, 
and to force Muravieff to retreat from Kars by the threat of 
becoming cut off from his basis of operations and line of 
communications. Such a Mingrelian expedition bade fair not only 
to relieve Kars, but to afford the opportunity of advancing 
offensively on all parts, and thus to gain the greatest point in all 
warfare—viz., to throw the enemy on the defensive. But the 
danger being urgent, such a plan, to result in success, required to 
be pushed on vigorously, with a sufficient force, and abundant 
means of supply and transport. Having in his immediate rear 
Gumri, as his first base of operations, a fortress directly calculated 
for the defensive against the Turkish territory, Muravieff was 
enabled to keep his position, till convinced of an advance upon 
Tiflis really becoming dangerous. To assume that character there 
was required a descent on the Circassian Coast of at least 55,000, 
the capture of Kutais, and the forcing of the pass of Gori. Omer 
Pasha, who, at a later period, undertook the same expedition at 
the head of 36,000 men, mustered on the Rioni hardly 18,000 to 
20,000. 
There can exist no doubt that an army of 20,000 men at 
Erzeroum would have been more useful than one of only 40,000 
in Mingrelia. On the other hand it should not be forgotten that at 
the time when the Porte made its proposal, the Russians at Tiflis, 
according to the Blue Book  itself,  amounted to only 15,000 men, 
and Bebutoff with his reinforcements had not yet arrived. 
Besides, the movement of an army sufficiently large for its 
purposes from Trebizond to Erzeroum, and thence to Kars, with 
supplies, ammunition, and guns, would have cost, on Omer 
Pasha's assurance, exactly four months. Lastly, if the Porte 
proposed a right plan, with insufficient means, it was the part of 

=====第658页=====
628 Karl Marx 
its ally to provide the right means, and not to suggest a false plan. 
Sixty-thousand Turks were at that time pent up in the Crimea, in 
inactivity—and those the only effective troops of Turkey. 
"At Batoum, Sukum Kaleh, and other neighbouring stations on the coast," 
writes Lord Redcliffe, under date 28th June, "it would be extremely difficult to 
muster more than 11,000 men.... The other parts of the empire (Bulgaria 
excepted), afford no additional reserves, with the exception of Bosnia, where it is 
still possible that a few thousand men might be detached; I speak of regulars, 
Bashi-bazouks may be procured, but your lordship knows what little dependency is 
to be placed on such undisciplined hordes... In Bulgaria I question the existence of 
more than 50,000 men, including garrisons. [...] Austria, it is true, has declared her 
intention of considering the passage of the Danube by Russia a casus belli—and she 
also stands pledged to the exclusion of that power from the Danubian 
Principalities; but the resolution which in such an emergency would enable the 
Porte to take its line upon those assurances, and to overlook the awkwardness of 
leaving an important position inadequately defended is more fit to be admired than 
likely to be embraced." 
What troops, then, remained at the disposal of the Porte, save 
the Anglo-Turkish Contingent? and this, as results from the 
despatches of Clarendon and Panmure, was only a contrivance to 
withhold from the Porte its last available force. 
But did the British Government oppose any plan of theirs to the 
Turkish one? Was it in any way bent on sending the Anglo-
Turkish Contingent to Trebizond, and thence to Erzeroum or 
Kars? In his despatch dated July 14th, Clarendon declares himself 
"against employing the Turkish Contingent until it is fit for 
service." If unfit for service, it was as unfit for the Erzeroum 
expedition as for the Mingrelian one. Clown Panmure, in his 
despatch of the same day, writes to Vivian, the commander of the 
Contingent: — "You must lose no time in getting your force into 
order for service, which will be sure to await you somewhere, as 
soon as you are ready for it"—thus summoning him to be ready 
not for an immediate service, not for Erzeroum, but somewhere— 
that is, nowhere. Still, on Sept. 7th (see No. 302 of Papers), 
Clarendon considers the Anglo-Turkish Contingent so little 
organised as to be unfit to encamp in the entrenched lines before 
Sevastopol. It is thus evident that the British Government brings 
forth the Erzeroum plan, not to execute it, but to thwart the 
Mingrelian expedition of the Porte. It was not opposed to a 
certain plan for the relief of Kars, but to any plan. "It would be 
madness to attempt to succour the army of Brigadier-General 
Williams.... It is too late to regret the policy"(Palmerston's policy) 
"which has left that gallant officer and his army exposed to such 
straits," said Panmure to Vivian. It is too late to do anything but 

=====第659页=====
The Fall of Kars 629 
surrender Kars to Russia, and Erzeroum into the bargain, says 
Clarendon to Redcliffe. Not only was this plan settled by the 
Palmerstonian Government as early as July 13th, but it is 
confessed in the Blue Book, and not a moment shall we see them 
swerving from it. 
From No. 254 to 277 of the Kars Papers every despatch of 
Redcliffe during July exhibits the Porte busily engaged in the 
preparations for Vivian's Mingrelian expedition. How came this to 
pass? 
On the 12th July, 1855, as will be remembered, Lord Redcliffe 
telegraphed to the Earl of Clarendon that the preparations for the 
Mingrelian expedition, under General Vivian were in progress, 
and "to save much valuable time," he applied for Government 
instructions to be sent by telegraph. Consequently, by telegraph, 
Clarendon despatches his protest against the Turkish plan, but, 
although this message bears the inscription of July 14th on its 
front, it does not reach Constantinople till July 30th, when we find 
Lord Redcliffe writing again to Clarendon: — 
The unfavourable judgment passed by Her Majesty's Government on the plans 
which have lately been under discussion, with a view to the relief of the Sultan's3 
army at Kars, has naturally increased the Porte's embarrassment. It was my duty to 
make it known to the Turkish Ministers, not only as an opinion, but, with respect 
to General Vivian's Contingent, as a veto. A most serious dilemma is the immediate 
result. Her Majesty's Government not only withhold the Contingent, but express a 
decided preference for the alternative of sending reinforcements to Erzeroum by 
way of Trebizond. This opinion is not adopted by the Porte, or indeed by any 
official or personal authority here. The Seraskier, Orner Pasha, General Guyon, 
and our own officers,[...] agree with the Porte, and the French Embassy, in preferring 
a diversion on the side of Redout Kaleh, as offering better chances of success, 
supposing, of course, the necessary means of transport, supply, and other 
indispensable wants, can be sufficiently provided.... Meanwhile, the advices from Kars 
are not encouraging, and time of precious value is unavoidably wasted in doubt and 
uncertainty. 
The way from Constantinople to London being not a whit 
longer than the way from London to Constantinople, it is a very 
curious fact indeed that Redcliffe's telegraphic despatch, leaving 
Constantinople on July 12th, should reach London on the 14th of 
that month, while Lord Clarendon's despatch, leaving London on 
July 14th, should reach Constantinople only on the 30th, or about 
that date. Redcliffe, in his despatch of July 19th, complains of the 
silence of the Government whom he had entreated "to lose no 
time in making known its pleasure." From a later despatch, dated 
a Abdul Mejid.— Ed. 
Rushdi Pasha. "Seraskier" means "War Minister".— Ed. 

=====第660页=====
630 Karl Marx 
July 23rd, we learn that he had received no answer even then. In 
fact, the receipt of the answer is not acknowledged, as we have 
said, before the 30th. There can exist, then, no doubt that the 
London date of the Clarendon despatch is false, and that it was not 
sent until weeks after the date given in the Blue Book. This 
falsification betrays the aim of the delay. Time of precious value 
was to be wasted, doubt and uncertainty were to be engendered, 
and above all, the Porte was to kill the whole of the month of July 
with preparations for Vivian's expedition, which the British 
Government was determined should not take place. 

=====第661页=====
631 
[II] 
[The People's Paper, No. 206, April 12, 1856] 
The strategical scruples of the British Government not allowing 
it to settle, during the interval of three months, its views of the 
great operations to be undertaken by the Porte, nothing would 
seem more fair and urgent than that it should have sent in the 
meantime, on its own responsibility, a small detachment via 
Erzeroum, to re-open the communications between that town and 
Kars.  The allies were masters of the Black Sea, and the British 
Government had at its uncontrolled disposition General Beatson's 
4,000 Bashi-bazouks, the only effective corps of Turkish irregular 
horse. Once landed at Trebizond they might have reached 
Erzeroum in ten days, escorting provisions to Kars, and thus 
enabling that fortress to prolong its resistance to from four to six 
weeks, when the severe Armenian winter setting in, all offensive 
movements on the part of the besiegers would have been stopped. 
General Beatson wrote to Redcliffe on the 7th July, applying to be 
sent on active service. 
No notice was taken of his memorial. On the 14th of August 
petitions were presented by the troops themselves, praying that 
they might not be inactive, but be despatched to Asia. They 
received no answer whatever. Beatson ventured upon a third 
remonstrance on September 12. The forbearance of the British 
Government being now exhausted by the harassing importunities 
of the indiscreet petitioner, some diplomatic-military intrigues 
were set on foot, crowned by Beatson's dismissal from the service. 
As Beatson himself was dismissed from the service, so all his 
communications with the Government are dismissed from the Blue 
Book. 

=====第662页=====
632 Kar] Marx 
We have seen how stubbornly the British Government was bent 
on an expedition to Erzeroum via Trebizond. On the news of the 
Russians having established themselves on the high-road between 
Erzeroum and Kars, and cut off a portion of the provisions 
collected for the Kars army, some spontaneous efforts at 
immediate relief were risked from Trebizond, behind the back of 
the British Embassy. In Redcliffe's despatch, dated July 16th, 
1855,  is enclosed a report from Vice-Consul Stevens, to this effect: 
"Trebizond, July 9, 1855. My Lord,— I have the honour to report that [...] 
Hafiz Pasha left for Erzeroum yesterday with 300 artillerymen and 20 field-pieces. 
A large force of irregulars, which may reach the number of 10,000, is now 
assembling, and will march to-day for the same place, (signed, Stevens.)" 
Redcliffe, as in duty bound, forthwith asks for explanations, on 
the Seraskier's silence with regard to the collection of 10,000 
irregulars at Trebizond, and the advance of Hafiz Pasha for 
Erzeroum. 
"All that I had heard on the subject from his Excellency," he complains, "is 
that Toussoum Pasha was directed to go to Trebizond, and thence perhaps to 
Sivas,  where he would assemble 4,000 irregulars, and proceed with them to the 
theatre of war." 
By drawing lines between Trebizond, Sivas and Erzeroum, it will 
be seen that they form an isosceles triangle—the basis of which, 
viz., the line from Trebizond to Erzeroum, is about one-third 
shorter than either of the sides. To send, then, reinforcements 
direct from Trebizond to Erzeroum instead of sending Toussoum 
Pasha from Constantinople to Trebizond, from Trebizond, 
"perhaps," to Sivas, there to waste time in collecting an irregular 
force, with the view of advancing perhaps upon Erzeroum, was 
too rash a course not to be rebuked by the British Ambassador. 
Not daring to tell the Seraskier that the relief of a besieged town 
depends on a well calculated dilatoriness, he puts him the 
question: 
"May it not be doubtful whether so large a body of Bashi-bazouks suddenly and 
loosely brought together, may be of any use to any party but the enemy?" 
The Seraskier very properly replying, 
"that he had insisted on having the necessary funds wherewith to pay them, 
which was the main instrument of control, and that he had threatened to retire 
from office, if his demand was not complied with." 
Lord Redcliffe turns at once hard of hearing. 
In entering upon the second plan of operations proposed by the 
Porte, and baffled by its Allies, we tread a maze, where all is 
meander and no forth-right. 

=====第663页=====
The Fall of Kars 633 
From a despatch of Lieut.-Colonel Simmons's, the British 
commissioner in Omer Pasha's camp, dated July 15th, addressed to 
Lord Clarendon, and from Omer's memoranda enclosed in it, the 
following facts may be collected. On June 23rd Omer Pasha 
received a letter from General Williams, stating that the communi­
cation with Erzeroum was cut off, and requiring in the most 
pressing terms that reinforcements might be sent to Kars with the 
least possible delay, or that a powerful diversion might be made 
on the side of Redout Kaleh. Under date of July 7, Omer Pasha 
addressed a memorandum to the allied commanders—Simpson 
and Pélissier —requesting them to assemble a council of the allied 
generals and admirals commanding-in-chief, in order to come to 
an immediate resolution. In his memorandum he proposes that, 
"he should throw  himself,  with the part of his army which is here"(at Balaklava) 
"and at Kertch — 25,000 infantry, 3,000 cavalry from Eupatoria, and a proportional 
artillery — upon some point of the Coast of Circassia, and by menacing from thence 
the communications of the Russians, oblige them to abandon the siege of Kars." 
In support of this proposal, Omer argues that the Ottoman 
army in Asia, to the number of 10,000 men blockaded in the 
entrenched camp of Kars by a superior Russian force, is in a 
position in which it is probable that from want of food it may be 
obliged to capitulate; that the garrison in Kars is in fact the 
Ottoman army in Asia; that if the garrison of Kars should yield, 
Erzeroum, a town, from its situation, difficult to fortify, will fall 
into the hands of the enemy, by which means he would become 
master of the communications with Persia, and of a great part of 
Asia Minor; that by accepting his proposal the Allies will make use 
of the chief advantages which they possess, viz., the facility of sea 
transport, and of the only Turkish army that is effective and 
capable of marching, viz., his own. In answer to that memoran­
dum, Marshal Pélissier and General Simpson write that, "in 
absence of further information, they consider a conference would 
be premature." Omer Pasha, however, on July 12th, addresses 
them again, to inform them that, 
"in the meanwhile he had received from his Government a despatch, according 
to which, the whole of Turkey in Asia, up to the gates of Constantinople  itself,  is 
undefended, and entreating him, as every hour is of the greatest value, 
immediately to find the means, and put in execution the resources necessary to 
avert the great danger in which the Government of Turkey, and in consequence 
the cause of the Allies, are placed." "Under these circumstances," he adds, "since I 
have in the Crimea 60,000 Turks, of whom the greater part are Asiatics, and whose 
families and property are exposed to the ravage of the enemy, and since I find that 
that army is inactive in the Crimea, without prospects of any immediate service that 

=====第664页=====
634 Karl Marx 
I can discover, I consider it my duty to my sovereign and the common cause to 
repeat my former proposal." 
Accordingly he invites them to a conference at the English 
head-quarters. Simultaneously with this common note to the allied 
generals he caused [Lieut.-JColonel Simmons to address a confi­
dential letter to General Simpson and Admiral Lyons, of which we 
give the following extract: — 
The Porte have proposed to General Vivian to take the Turkish Contingent to 
Redout Kaleh.... Omer Pasha, however, thinks there will be great risk in sending 
them there, as the men are not yet acquainted with their officers, the officers do 
not speak their language, and consequently cannot command them in the field, and 
the Contingent, although it might form a garrison, cannot yet be in a condition to 
march into the interior. The force of the Contingent also is small to make the 
contemplated operation. Omer Pasha also thinks that possessing, as he does, the 
confidence of the Turks, and being well-known in Asia, where he has had several 
campaigns, he is more likely to gain the sympathies and assistance of the 
inhabitants in provisioning and gaining information, [...] than strangers who do not 
know the language or country. 
On July 14th the Conference took place, attended by Omer 
Pasha, [Lieut.-JColonel Simmons, Generals Simpson, Pélissier, and 
Martimprey, and Admirals Lyons, Bruat, and Stewart. Omer 
Pasha went into a detailed statement of the Russian forces in Asia, 
and their operations in the vicinity of Kars. He amply developed 
the arguments above quoted, and forcibly stuck to the opinion that 
"no time was to be lost in preparing a movement to check the progress of the 
Russians in Asia." 
However, as [Lieut.-]Col. Simmons reports to Clarendon, 
"the generals and admirals having received no information from their 
respective ambassadors at Constantinople, which should lead them to believe that 
the affairs of Asia were in that precarious state in which Omer Pasha, from the 
information received from his Government.believed them to be," decided that "in 
the absence of such information they would give no opinion on the subject." 
In this instance, then, the allied generals declined giving any 
opinion on the subject, because they had received no information 
from their respective Governments. Afterwards, the allied Govern­
ments declined giving their orders because their generals had not 
given their opinion. Rather startled at the cool behaviour of the 
allied commanders, at their curious tactics of making their 
incredulity in facts a reason for giving no opinion on them, and at 
the incivility of giving the lie to his Government, the only one 
immediately interested in the matter, Omer Pasha, rose at once, 
and peremptorily declared that, 

=====第665页=====
The Fall of Kars 635 
"under the circumstances, he felt it his duty to proceed to Constantinople for a 
few days to confer with his Government." 
Accordingly, two days later, July 16th, he proceeded to 
Constantinople, taking with him [Lieut.-]Colonel Simmons, but 
being accompanied also by one [Lieut.-JColonel Suleau, "ostensibly 
travelling for the purpose of restoring his health" (see enclosure 1 
in No. 270 of the Kars papers), but really charged by Pélissier and 
Simpson with the mission of thwarting Omer Pasha's project. This 
Suleau, attached to the staff of Simpson, conveyed a letter to 
Redcliffe from poor General Simpson—the most unlucky warrior 
ever heard of, as General Evans has it a—in which that general 
tells his ambassador not that he and his colleagues did not believe 
in Omer Pasha's statements, but that "they entertained the 
strongest objection to the withdrawal of any troops from the 
Crimea at this moment"—not that they had thought fit to 
withhold their opinion from Omer Pasha, but that he 
"earnestly begs his Excellency to use his powerful influence with the Porte to 
cause their opinion to prevail over that of his Highness, " for "great public 
interests were at stake," and "serious consequences might result from his success." 
Success indeed! It was Omer Pasha's success that troubled 
Pélissier's sleep, who, up to that period, had nothing to boast of 
but the disgraceful battle of the 18th of June. 431 Poor Simpson, the 
unlucky warrior, naturally obtuse, as General Evans affirms his 
mind to be, was clever enough to catch the uneasiness of his 
co-commander, and to manage an intrigue in the rear of Omer 
Pasha, the only manoeuvre he can be said to have executed during 
the whole Crimean campaign. 
In a despatch, dated July 19th, Redcliffe writes to Clarendon 
that 
"the night before last (July 17th) he was surprised to hear that Omer Pasha had 
arrived suddenly from the Crimea [...] and went straight to the Seraskier." 
He chuckles at the rumour reported by the fanariot432 Pisani, 
that 
"the generalissimo's arrival without the orders of his Government had created 
some feelings of dissatisfaction," and is under "a strong impression that Omer will 
best consult the interests of the alliance by returning without unnecessary delay to 
the command of his forces in the Crimea." 
a Evans' speech in the House of Commons on February 29, 1856. The Times, 
No. 22304, March 1, 1856.— Ed. 
Omer Pasha.— Ed. 

=====第666页=====
636 Karl Marx 
Notwithstanding Redcliffe's strong impression, Orner Pasha's 
stay at Constantinople was prolonged from the 17th of July to the 
beginning of September. It will be seen, by and by, how this 
waste of time was occasioned. 
On July the 23rd, Redcliffe informs Clarendon that 
"Omer Pasha [...] had proposed [...] to the Porte to make himself an incursion 
towards Georgia, starting from Redout Kaleh, and turning Kutais to good 
account." 
This idea had been debated the night before (July 22) in a 
council at the Grand Vizier's,3 and the result of the deliberations 
had been 
"that the troops to be employed in the above-mentioned manner, under the 
command of Omer, should be taken from Eupatoria, to the amount of 20,000, and 
from Bulgaria to the amount of 5,000, and that the Contingent, with its numbers 
completed, should occupy the vacant space at Eupatoria. By way of alternative, 
it is proposed, that if the above-mentioned plan be objectionable, it might be so far 
modified as to take only 10,000 men from the Crimea, and 15,000 from Bulgaria, 
including those destined to form part of the Contingent." 
Now, this despatch, which Clarendon is said to have received on 
August 1st, on the arrival of which he immediately took occasion to 
address a despatch to Lord Cowley, the British Ambassador at 
Paris,  is evidently and wilfully misconstrued in its main passage— 
viz., the passage in which the Porte is stated to have proposed the 
withdrawal from Eupatoria of 20,000 men, to be placed under the 
command of Omer Pasha, and their replacement at Eupatoria by 
the Turkish Contingent. It is this very passage to which Clarendon 
points in his despatch to Lord Cowley, stating "Her Majesty's 
Government to be favourably disposed to it," and expressing "his 
hope that the Government of the Emperor will concur in it." In 
this passage Eupatoria is interpolated for Balaklava. From the 
despatch of [Lieut.-JColonel Simmons, dated 15th July, received 
by Clarendon on the 30th July, it will have been seen that Omer 
Pasha, in his memoranda to the allied generals, and in the war 
council, insisted upon taking with him that part of his army which 
is here (Balaklava), which he had brought from Eupatoria, and 
which he declared the only one fit for the Asiatic campaign. Did 
Omer Pasha alter his opinion, after arriving at Constantinople? 
The contrary is shown from a despatch dated August 2nd, in 
which Simmons  states:  — 
"His Highness Omer Pasha informed me that he should be happy to give over 
to complete the contingent any of the Turkish troops under his command, except 
Ali Mehemet Pasha.— Ed. 

=====第667页=====
The Fall of Kars 637 
the division which is now at the camp before Sebastopol, which being composed of 
his best troops, he is naturally desirous to have with him, if he make the proposed 
movement to Asia." 
Will it be asserted that the Porte in the council of the night of 
July 22nd, arrived at a resolution contrary to Omer's proposal? In 
the very despatch of 23rd July in which Redcliffe reports the 
Porte's resolution, he tells Clarendon that, 
"Omer Pasha has been most graciously received and most generously rewarded 
by the Sultan," and adds, "I need not add that he is on excellent terms with his 
Majesty's ministers, and particularly with the Seraskier Pasha." 
Any discrepancy, therefore, between the Porte and its command­
er-in-chief,  is out of the question; both of them appear equally 
startled on receiving from London the injunction of placing the 
troops at Eupatoria under Omer's command, and withdrawing 
from it the troops at Sebastopol and Kertch. What, then, was the 
intention of the British Government in forging the above passage? 
To conceal from the public that while exhibiting themselves as the 
patrons of Omer's project before the French Government, by a 
mere shuffling of words they substituted for the Porte's own 
proposal, one directly hostile to it. Thus a new subject of dispute 
was provided. Matters were embroiled still further, and the 
occasion was afforded to waste August and September with orders 
and counter-orders. The false play of the British Government is 
apparent even in the arrangement of the Blue Book. To confound 
the reader, Clarendon's despatch to Cowley figures on page 248, 
followed up from page 248 to 252 by an extract from Redcliffe's 
despatch of July 19th, Simpson's letter to Redcliffe of July 16th, 
Omer Pasha's letters and memoranda, and only in the last place by 
Redcliffe's despatch of July 23rd, of which Clarendon's instruction 
to Cowley pretends to be the sequel. 
We must now stay for a moment in the Foreign-office, 
Downing-street, there beholding the Earl of Clarendon busily 
engaged in acting the head clerk of great Palmerston. Two days 
after the despatch of his message to Redcliffe on July the 16th, he 
is forwarding to Redcliffe another despatch concluding with the 
following words: 
"Her Majesty's Government would still recommend that whatever force is sent 
for the relief of the army of Kars should proceed to Trebizond. If, indeed, Omer 
Pasha, who, we understand, is about to proceed to Constantinople, should 
determine to take any part of his own army with Tunisians and Albanians, to 
Redout Kaleh, her Majesty's Government would have nothing to say to that 
proceeding." 

=====第668页=====
638 Karl Marx 
Redcliffe's despatch dated Constantinople, 23rd July, having 
reached London on August 1st, in exactly nine days, the despatch 
of Clarendon dated 16th July, again wants more than half a 
month to reach Constantinople. It had not arrived on July 30th, 
when Redcliffe w.rote that 
"her Majesty's Government insisting upon having the reinforcements sent via 
Trebizond placed the Porte in the most serious dilemma." 
Redcliffe, then, was not in possession of Clarendon's despatch, 
according to which her Majesty's Government have nothing to say 
to the Redout Kaleh expedition, if undertaken by Omer Pasha 
himself.  It is a feature peculiar to the chronology of this strange 
diplomatic-military drama that all despatches sure to create delay 
arrive with the most admirable speed, while all those pretending to 
recommend speed arrive with the most inexplicable delay. But 
there is another point quite as startling in Clarendon's last-quoted 
despatch. While Lord Redcliffe writes from Constantinople, dated 
July 19th,that he was surprised to learn of Omer Pasha's sudden 
arrival at Constantinople, on the 16th of July, on the very day 
Omer Pasha left the Crimea, Clarendon informs Redcliffe, from 
London, that "he understands Omer to be about to proceed to 
Constantinople." Omer Pasha  himself,  we know, adopted this 
resolution only on July 14th, after the breaking up of the 
war-council. In the interval from July 14th to the 16th no vessel 
left Sebastopol for Constantinople, so that Omer was obliged to 
request Admiral Lyons to place at his disposition her Majesty's 
ship Valorous. Are we then to understand that while the 
despatches, the Foreign-office telegraph, from London, require 
seventeen days to arrive at Constantinople, the despatches it 
receives from the Crimea convey intelligence of events even before 
they do happen? Not quite so. There was the submarine telegraph 
from Sebastopol to Varna, and the telegraph from Varna to 
London; so that Clarendon may have had direct intelligence the 
very day of the war-council's sitting. But where is this telegraphic 
despatch dated Sebastopol? Certainly not in the Blue Book. It is 
simply suppressed. And why? The same electric wire which 
informed Clarendon of Omer Pasha's intended departure must 
have informed him of the resistance he met with on the part of 
Pélissier, that is on the part of the French Government. Thus the 
question would naturally arise why Clarendon quietly waited from 
16th July to the 1st of August to break the matter to the French 
Government, and to commence negotiations with it on the point 
on which the whole campaign depended? To prevent this question 

=====第669页=====
The Fall of Kars 639 
the telegraphic despatch has disappeared. But having suppressed 
that despatch from the Crimea, why did he insert his own 
despatch, from London, dated the 16th July? As no trace can be 
discovered of the latter ever having reached Constantinople, its 
omission would have caused no palpable blank in the Blue Book. 
A double-edged end was aimed at. On the one hand the readiness 
of the English Government to relieve Kars was to be paraded in 
contrast to the difficulties raised by Bonaparte, and the whole 
odium of the delay to be shifted to his shoulders. On the other 
hand, Clarendon's belief in the spurious despatch of the 23rd July, 
was to be proved by his willingness to leave to Omer Pasha any 
part of his army, before he was aware of the resolution of the 
Porte to clog him with the Eupatoria army; having once become 
aware of this resolution, Clarendon, it is true, did stand upon it, 
Omer Pasha's and the Porte's protests notwithstanding. All the 
proceedings of Clarendon, his encouraging the Porte to occupy 
July with Vivian's expedition, his deferring the negotiations with 
Bonaparte to August, his substitution in the despatch to Paris a 
spurious proposition of the Porte, the very acceptance of which by 
Bonaparte was sure to become a source of further imbroglio in 
this comedy of errors—all these proceedings tended to the same 
end—to kill time. 

=====第670页=====
640 
[III] 
[The People's Paper, No. 207, April 19, 1856] 
On August 2nd, 1855, Lord Cowley telegraphs from Paris that 
"Count Walewski foresees objections to the proposal" made by 
Clarendon in the name of the Porte. Thus the occasion is afforded 
to the clever Earl of displaying, in a despatch dated August 3rd, 
his patriotic zeal, and of pressing on the French Government the 
enormous consequences likely to arise from Kars and Erzeroum 
falling into the hands of Russia. The following day, Aug. 4th, he 
receives a despatch from Paris to this effect: 
"Telegraphic—Lord Cowley to the Earl of 
Clarendon. 
"Paris,  August 4, 1855.—The French Government will not oppose the projected 
expedition to Asia Minor under Omer Pasha, provided that the numbers of the 
Turkish contingent before Sebastopol are not diminished." 
Notwithstanding its conditional form this is the unconditional 
acceptance of the proposal made by Clarendon on August 1st in 
the name of the Porte according to which the troops stationed at 
Eupatoria were to be given over to Omer Pasha, and General 
Vivian's contingent to replace them there. On the same day 
Clarendon despatched the following to Redcliffe: 
"August 4th.— Omer Pasha can go to relieve Kars, provided he does not 
diminish his Turkish troops before Sebastopol or disturb the garrison at Yenikale." 
The French government had only protested against the 
diminution of the Turkish troops before Sebastopol. The English 
government add another clog by sequestrating the Turkish troops 
at Yenikale too. On August 8th, Clarendon received a letter from 
General Williams dated Kars, July 14th, stating that General 

=====第671页=====
The Fall of Kars 641 
Muravieff had made close reconnaissances on the 11th and 12th 
July, and that on the 13th 
"he appeared with his whole army on the southern heights above Kars which 
form the key of our defences, and by the crowning of which Kars was taken in 
1828 „433 
The letter concludes with the words, 
"I have just heard that the Russian general expects reinforcements from 
Bayazid via Gumri, and that those troops recently expelled from the garrisons of 
the coast of Circassia are also marching into the interior of Georgia, and may take 
part in the future operations of Asia Minor." (No. 276) 
Having become aware of the reinforcement of the Russians, the 
zeal of Clarendon for the diminution of the Turkish forces 
receives a fresh impulse. He immediately sits down to complete his 
index militum  prohibitorurrf: 
"Telegraphic—The Earl of Clarendon to Lord 
Redcliffe. 
"Foreign-office, Aug. 9, 1855.—General Vivian's contingent to go immediately 
to Eupatoria. The Turkish troops there 10,000 or 12,000 to go with Omer Pasha to 
Redout Kaleh. The Turkish troops at Balaklava and Kertch not to be diminished in 
number. The Turkish force to go to Redout Kaleh under Omer Pasha, to be 
completed to its proper number by troops from Bulgaria or elsewhere, not from 
the Crimea." 
Here, then, we behold Clarendon again extending the circle 
of interdiction. Recollecting, from [Lieut.-]Colonel Simmons's 
despatch of July 15th, that Omer Pasha intended taking with him 
"the part of his army which is here (Balaklava) and at Kertch — 
25,000 infantry, 3,000 cavalry from Eupatoria and artillery," he 
now forbids the Porte to touch the garrison at Kertch, and extends 
Bonaparte's objection to the removal of Turkish troops from 
Sebastopol to the whole Crimea—save Eupatoria; and even the 
number of troops at the latter place dwindles down to 10,000 or 
12,000, instead of the 20,000 mentioned in his despatch to the 
French Government, dated August 1. With a sort of clownish 
humour he leaves the Porte at liberty to look out for troops 
"elsewhere." Having filled the bomb at London, he may now 
quietly await its bursting at Constantinople. 
In Clarendon's despatch to Redcliffe of July 16th, we were 
struck by this passage: "If, indeed, Omer Pasha, who, we 
understand, is about to proceed to Constantinople, should 
List of withheld troops.— Ed. 
22—3754 

=====第672页=====
642 Karl Marx 
determine  to take  any  part  of his own  army  to Redout Kaleh.  Her 
Majesty's Government have nothing  to say to  that proceeding." 
Now, from  a letter  of Fuad Effendi  to Redcliffe, dated July  31, 
from Redcliffe's answer  of August  4, and  from Redcliffe's letter  of 
August  8 (see No. 282 and  enclosures),  it results that Clarendon's 
despatch, dated July  16th, had not yet  reached Constantinople  on 
August  8. Fuad Pasha states  in his  letter that what  has  been begun 
of the  measures (relating  to the  Mingrelian expedition)  had  been 
suspended,  in consequence  of "the  official  and  categorical answer 
expected (from London) having  not yet  been received,"  and 
defends  the  Turkish plan  of a  Mingrelian expedition against  "the 
substance  of the  English despatches," according  to which  "the 
succours must  be sent through Erzeroum  by way of  Trebizond." 
Redcliffe,  in his  answer, dated  Aug. 4,  tells  us that 
"when latterly called upon  to declare  the  opinions  of his  Government,  he 
performed that duty with  a painful sense  of the  embarrassments which surrounded 
the Porte," 
increased  as they would  be by the  opinion  "he was  called upon 
to declare,"  and  adds: 
"Though  Her  Majesty's Government have declared their decided preference  for 
a more direct operation  by  Trebizond  and  Erzeroum, their objections  to a 
diversion  on the  side  of Circassia would  in all  likelihood  be modified  if the  force 
employed were  of a  compact  or reliable character." 
In his despatch  to Clarendon, dated August  8, he  complains that 
the Government 
"still leans with  all its  weight  on Trebizond  as the  only true chance  of relief.... 
The military authorities  are  decidedly  in favour  of it"(the Mingrelian expedition).... 
"Amidst  so many motives  to vigorous support  of the  only practicable scheme  of 
relief,  [...].  I made  no reserve  in communicating  the  adverse opinions  of Her 
Majesty  s Government  to the  Porte." 
Clarendon's answer  to this latter despatch  of Redcliffe's (August 
20) must  be considered from  a double point  of view—with respect 
to Redcliffe's assertion that  in his  opinion  the  English Government 
had resisted  the  Mingrelian expedition  up to  August  8, and  with 
respect  to the  plan which Clarendon forwarded  to Paris  on 
August  1 as the  Porte's  own  plan.  As to the  first point, Clarendon 
declares  (see No.  283):  — 
"My various messages  by telegraph,  and my  despatch  of the 4th  inst., which  you 
will have received since  the  date  of your despatch, will have shown  you  that  Her 
Majesty's Government,  in conjunction with that  of the  Emperor  of the  French, 
were willing that Omer Pasha should proceed  to Asia  to effect  a diversion  for the 
relief  of Kars,  and Her  Majesty's Government  in that case  no longer insists upon 

=====第673页=====
The Fall of Kars 643 
the view they had entertained at first, that the relief should be given by way of 
Trebizond." 
With the exception of the despatch of July 14, in which 
Clarendon protested against the Mingrelian expedition, and 
summoned the Turks to fall back from Erzeroum and Kars, and 
his despatch, dated August 9, which Redcliffe, of course, could not 
have received on August 8, Clarendon had, according to the Blue 
Book, sent no telegraphic despatch at all. It is therefore a palpable 
falsehood when he speaks of his "various messages by telegraph" 
withdrawing the veto of the British Government against the 
Mingrelian expedition. Why does he not refer to his despatch 
dated July 16? Because it figures only in the Blue Book, was 
written only for the Blue Book, and has never left the 
Foreign-office at Downing-street. Redcliffe, as if aware of the trap 
laid for him, writes to Clarendon, dated August 13 (No.  286):  — 
"I have just learnt the contents of your lordship's telegraphic message dated the 
9th inst. The sanction given by Her Majesty's Government to the experiment of a 
diversion on the side of Redout Kaleh will, I doubt not, afford the highest 
satisfaction as well to the Turkish Ministry as to Omer Pasha. The disappointment 
occasioned bv the terms of the preceding message, which appeared to favour 
exclusively an advance upon Kars bv Trebizond, was evident  |...]." 
Redcliffe knows nothing of Clarendon's various "despatches by 
telegraph;" he knows only of the preceding message being 
"exclusively" in favour of a Trebizond expedition. He means the 
message of the 13th, backed by the telegraphic message of the 
14th of July. He ignores altogether the existence of the message of 
the 16th of July. We insist upon this point for a simple reason. 
One glance at the Kars papers will satisfy everybody as to the 
constant efforts made by the British Government to thwart the 
projects of the Porte. But the falsifications, forgeries, and lies 
which we reveal, prove the British Government to have been 
conscious of foul play, and betray on its part a preconcerted plan, 
which it dares not openly confess. 
Let us now consider Clarendon's despatch of Aug. 20, from 
another point of view: — 
"Outer Pasha," he says, "as commander of the Sultan's troops, will be free to 
direct his movements in a manner most beneficial to the common cause; and the 
only limitation placed by the two governments on his proceedings is the condition 
that the movement in Asia shall not lead to any diminution of the Turkish force 
employed before Sebastopol and Yenikale, while the Turkish Contingent, under 
General Vivian, may be made available for filling up the room of the Turkish 
troops whom Omer Pasha may take with him from Eupatoria." 

=====第674页=====
644 Karl Marx 
According to Clarendon's despatch to Paris, dated August 1, the 
Porte had proposed to place the Eupatoria troops under Omer 
Pasha while not meddling with the Turkish army before Sebas-
topol. How can he call the simple acceptance of the Porte's own 
proposal, "putting a limitation on Omer Pasha's proceedings?" 
But, on the other hand, could he do otherwise? Since the very 
despatch of Redcliffe he is answering, reminds him that the Pasha 
reckons on "17,000 men from Balaklava," 3,000 from Kertch, etc. 
Thus,  what figured in his despatch to Paris as the Porte's own 
proposal, is now enjoined to the Porte, as the advice of its Western 
allies. 
Up to the 13th of August—just a month after Omer Pasha had 
proposed to the Allied commanders his Mingrelian expedition— 
the Porte was labouring under the painful conviction that the 
British Government objected to it, and all its preparations for the 
relief of Kars were consequently kept in deadly suspense. On the 
13th, at last, it is delivered from that nightmare, and has the 
satisfaction to understand that its Western allies have accepted the 
resolution it had come to on July 22nd. It would now, at last, be 
free to turn its energies against  Muravieff,  instead of against 
Clarendon. On the 15th of August, the Ottoman Council was 
assembled for deliberation as to the most effectual means of 
succouring Kars. The result of their deliberations is quite as 
startling as it is unexpected. 
"Omer Pasha," Redcliffe says in his despatch to Clarendon, dated August 16th 
(No.  294), "objects most positively to the plan transmitted from London by 
telegraph, of stationing the contingent at Eupatoria, and he is not prepared to 
assume the responsibility of commanding the expedition, unless the Turkish troops 
before Sebastopol be allowed to form part of it." 
Thus we see the Eupatoria plan, pretended to have been sent on 
the 23rd July to London, is now asserted to have been transmitted 
on August 9 from London to Constantinople. 
On the 16th of August, [Lieut.-]Colonel Simmons also addressed a 
despatch to Clarendon (No. 297): 
"I have to inform your Lordship that the Seraskier having received [...] a 
communication from Lord Stratford de Redcliffe, to the effect that her Majesty's 
Government had ordered the Turkish contingent to Eupatoria, placed the 
communication into the hands of his Highness Omer Pasha, who conceiving that 
this movement would not enable the Porte to provide the necessary force to make 
any operation in Asia to save the army of Kars, has drawn up a report for the 
Seraskier.... Omer Pasha, while insisting upon taking with him his troops [...] from 
Sebastopol, will hand over part of them and the Turkish troops at Kertch to the 
Anglo-Turkish contingent, such as are required to complete its full complement.... 
The proposal of the Pasha appears to me the only one which holds out any hope of 

=====第675页=====
The Fall of Kars 645 
saving the army of Kars, subject to the condition which His Highness understands 
has been imposed by the English and French Governments—that there is to be no 
material reduction of force in the Crimea, and therefore that the first proposal 
made by Omer to the Generals, reported in my despatch of July 15th, cannot be 
put in execution.[...] The Pasha doubts if the expedition will now be in time to save 
the garrison of Kars, but if not, it will at any rate prevent the enemy from 
establishing himself in the government of Erzeroum, and there organizing 
measures for another advance into the interior in the next campaign." 
Omer Pasha's memorandum to the Seraskier, alluded to in the 
above despatch of [Lieut.-]Colonel Simmons, is enclosed in 
Redcliffe's letter to Clarendon, dated August 16th. We extract 
from it the following considerations made by Omer Pasha: 
"The troops now at Eupatoria, are composed of different materials, Tunisians 
and Egyptians,3  and are deficient of the means of land transport.... They are not 
capable of taking the field or of manoeuvring.... If the Egyptians were to go to 
Asia, as it will be necessary to keep the field during the commencement of the 
winter, coming as they do from a hot climate [...], they could not perform the 
necessary manoeuvres, and the army being composed of different materials there 
would be but little chance of success. By the execution of this project the unity of 
the Ottoman as well as of the English army will be destroyed, and it is to be 
observed that much of the energy, if not the existence, of an army in warfare 
depends upon its unity.... The Pasha observes, that every general in warfare ought to 
consider beforehand the most difficult circumstances in which he may be placed by 
the events of war, and to provide as far as possible against misfortune. He supposes 
the case, that the army of Kars is destroyed before his arrival in Asia, and that the 
Russians had advanced beyond that place, and states that in such a case, being with an 
army composed of different materials, in which he could not place entire confidence, 
he would find himself in similar difficulties in which the army of Asia is now placed 
"Every general to whom an operation is confided, ought to consent to the 
operation, and its mode of execution, in order that he may be made responsible for 
its conduct [...]. The Anglo-Turkish contingent, if supplied with its full complement 
from the detachments about to be drafted from Bulgaria and from Kertch, will be 
almost equal in numbers to the divisions under his command. [...] As far as the 
numbers of the Allied armies are concerned, there need be no diminution, if his 
views were acceded to. On the contrary, if the plan, sent from London, were acted 
upon, the permanent arrangements made by the Seraskier for the supply of the 
garrison of Eupatoria [...] would be broken up, unavoidable delay must ensue, 
absolutely new establishments would have to be organized." 
The destruction of the last effective Turkish army, the loss of 
the unity of the English as well as the Ottoman army, the wilful 
sacrifice of the Egyptians and Tunisians, the breaking up of the 
permanent arrangements made for the supply of the Turkish 
troops at Eupatoria, the creation of unavoidable delay, the ruin of 
his own military representation, the exposure of the Mingrelian 
a In Kars Papers: "Turks and Egyptians".— Ed. 

=====第676页=====
646 Karl Marx 
army to the fate of the garrison of Kars —these are, according to 
Omer Pasha, the natural consequences of the plan sent from 
London. While communicating to Clarendon this strong protest, 
Lord Redcliffe evinces not the least suspicion of having himself 
been the channel through which the Porte is made to have 
transmitted the identical project to Lord Clarendon. 
We have, thus, new and irrefutable proof that the proposal of 
the Porte, as figuring in the despatch dated July 23rd, is a London 
forgery, and that Clarendon in submitting it to the acceptance of 
the French Government in his despatch of August 1st was fully 
aware of committing an atrocious fraud. 
His scheme worked exactly up to his intention, the Porte, at last 
informed that the British Government consents to the Turkish 
expedition in general, learns simultaneously, that it objects to all 
the details required for carrying it out. Having been compelled to 
waste one month with struggling against Clarendon's Erzeroum 
plan,  it has now to waste the still more precious month of August 
with resisting his Eupatoria scheme. 
In a despatch dated August 20, addressed by Redcliffe to 
Clarendon, he encloses another memorandum of Omer Pasha, 
similar in substance to the former one, but with the addition (see 
No. 296): 
"fiy general undertaking such an operation against all military rules, would 
sacrifice his military reputation, and he would, moreover, imperil the general 
alliance. Ï intend doing" neither. 
"If I were even to accept this service, it would not serve the object in view." 
He represents the troops at Eupatoria 'as undisciplined, mixed, 
and inexperienced soldiers." 
On the 20th of August (see No. 298, Simmons to Clarendon) 
Omer Pasha informs Simmons of the state of things at Kars as 
reported by an aide-de-camp of the Seraskier, who left Kars on 
the 5th, and arrived at Constantinople on August 19th, 
"At the time of his departure the stores within the town of Kars did not contain 
more than sufficient provisions for the garrison for one month or five weeks at the 
outside, and they were not well provided with ammunition. This, however, does 
not appear of much consequence, as General Muravieff had proclaimed to his 
army, which, by the reinforcement it has received, is stated now to number about 
50,000 men, to reduce the town of Kars by starvation, and to capture the town 
without firing a shot.... The Russians have caused the inhabitants to remove 
everything in the shape of provisions throughout a district within a radius of 8 
hours (28 miles) round Kars as a centre.... The forts at Erzeroum consist of 6,000 
regular troops, and 12,000 irregulars; but many of the latter are leaving and 
dispersing." "From Omer Pasha's conversations [...]," says Simmons, "it is evident 
that the Porte is deeply impressed with the deplorable state of affairs in Asia, and 

=====第677页=====
The Fall of Kars 647 
is almost in despair at the apparent certainty of losing, towards the end of this 
month or early in September, the garrison of Kars, sixteen thousand men with 
nearly two hundred pieces of artillery, of which about seventy are field guns.... 
They are very much grieved and disappointed at the time which has been lost 
[...] — and that the cabinets of Paris and London, as well as the military authorities 
in the Crimea, have not considered the subject in that serious aspect in which it 
presents itself to the Porte, but have objected to the propositions which have 
hitherto been made with a view to retrieving their position and their preventing the 
disaster." 
On August 21st, at a meeting of the Porte's council 
(No.  299 — Simmons to Clarendon, dated August 23), 
"a decision was arrived at to proceed with the utmost vigour and all the means 
at the disposal of the Porte to carry into execution the plan proposed by Omer 
Pasha.... A note was agreed upon, to be addressed to the ambassadors of France 
and England,'1  informing [hem of the decision of the Porte, and inviting them to 
obtain the assistance of the fleets of their respective Government to transport the 
Ottoman troops, with their artillery, baggage, and means of land-transport, to the 
coast of Asia.... Having done all in their power to effect a movement for the relief 
of the army of Kars, to recover their position in Asia, they" (the Porte) "considered 
themselves relieved from the responsibility of any disaster which might happen 
from the non-execution of any of the plans proposed with that view. The Turkish 
Government, in order to commence the movement, are now sending their ships to 
Sizopolis, to begin the embarkation of the troops, etc., but they evidently have 
entertained some doubt as to taking this decided course, in consequence of the 
Anglo-Turkish Contingent having received orders from London to proceed to 
Kupatoria." 
Thus the end of August was approaching, the Porte still finds 
itself clogged in its movements by Clarendon's Eupatoria plan, and 
its anxiety waxing with the dismal news from Kars, it extorts at last 
from Redcliffe, who in the meantime had made a trip to 
Sebastopol, the following telegraphic despatch (No.  290):  — 
"Lord Redcliffe to the Earl of Clarendon. 
"Before Sebastopol, Aug. 26.—  I request to be informed definitively and 
immediately here, whether Omer Pasha may take Turkish troops in whole or in 
part from Balaklava, provided they be replaced by others of the same numerical 
force, and whether General Vivian's Contingent is in that case at liberty to take 
position before Sebastopol, instead of going to Eupatoria. Omer Pasha is expected 
from day to day. He makes his expedition conditional on the power of acting as 
above. He has stated plausible reasons for this. If transport can be spared bv us 
the troops may land, it would seem, at Redout Kaleh in about a month. The 
Russians who threatened Erzeroum have retired by the road to Kars; the Turkish 
army there is stated to have nearly two months provisions earlv in August." 
a É. A. Thouvenel and Stratford de Redcliffe.— Ed. 

=====第678页=====
648 
[IV] 
[The People's Paper, No. 208, April 26, 1856] 
Clarendon had now succeeded in thwarting, by his Eupatoria 
plan, all action on the part of the Porte during the whole month 
of August. Redcliffe's despatch confirmed the statement of 
General Williams, that "the provisions of Kars will hardly last to 
the beginning of September." By what extraordinary devotion the 
Turkish garrison at Kars contrived to prolong its existence beyond 
the term assigned by Williams, will be seen from the following 
memorandum: — 
(Enclosure in No. 315.) 
Kars,  September 1st, 1855.— "The most is made of our provisions; the soldiers 
are reduced to half-allowances of bread and meat, or rice-butter. Sometimes 100 
drachmas of biscuit instead of bread; nothing besides. No money. Mussulman 
population, 3,000 rifles, will soon be reduced to starvation. Armenians are ordered 
to quit the town to-morrow. No barley, scarcely any forage. Cavalry reduced to 
walking skeletons, and sent out of garrison; artillery horses soon the same. How 
will the field pieces be moved after that?... What is being done for the relief of this 
army? 
(Signed) Williams. 
Clarendon having made sure that the provisions of Kars could 
not last beyond the first days of October, and being on the other 
hand assured by Redcliffe that even with the succour of the allied 
transports Omer Pasha's troops would not arrive at Redout Kaleh 
before the first days of October, thinks it no longer dangerous to 
press on the French Government the acceptance of the Turkish 
plan. He was informed besides that at the very moment he 
addressed that Government the assault of Sebastopol was immi­
nent, and Pélissier, therefore, had good reasons not to allow any 

=====第679页=====
The Fall of Kars 649 
change in the composition of the troops before Sebastopol. To 
hide this knowledge, the despatch of Redcliffe is given in the 
mutilated shape of an extract. The following is Clarendon's 
despatch to Lord Cowley: — 
Foreign Office, Aug. 28, 1855.— "Her Majesty's Government trusts that the 
Government of the Emperor will agree to the following answer to the despatch 
from Viscount Stratford de Redcliffe, dated Balaklava, Aug. 26th, in which case 
your excellency will send it on immediately from Lord Panmure to General 
Simpson, who will inform Viscount de Redcliffe, if he is still at Balaklava: 
'"Omer Pasha is to be at liberty to take such of his own troops as he pleases, 
from Balaklava to Asia. They must be replaced in equal numbers by General 
Vivian's Contingent, or by troops from Eupatoria, as the allied generals may 
decide; and instructions accordingly must be given in conjunction with the admirals 
as to transporting them.'" 
(Signed Clarendon.) 
Even in this despatch, Clarendon cannot abstain from playing a 
trick on the Porte. Informed as he was by Omer Pasha's various 
memoranda that the replacement of his troops before Sebastopol 
by troops from Eupatoria, would go a great length to spoil his 
whole plan, he proposes to the French Government, quite en 
passant, to replace the troops before Sebastopol by Vivian's 
contingent, or by troops from Eupatoria. The answer from Paris 
was this:  — 
"Telegraphic.— Lord Cowley to the Earl of 
Clarendon. 
"Paris,  Aug. 29, 1855.—The Emperor has no objection to the removal of the 
Turkish troops from Balaklava, and to their being replaced by others, provided 
that the allied commanders-in-chief have no objection; but he will not take the 
responsibility upon himself of saying more under these circumstances. I send the 
telegraphic despatch to General Simpson, inserting, after the word 'Asia,' 
'provided that General Pélissier and you have no objection'." 
Lord Clarendon's sincere anxiety to hasten the Mingrelian 
expedition at this supreme moment, shines in overpowering 
brightness in his despatch of September 7th, sent by ordinary mail 
to [Lieut.-]Colonel Simmons, so that it did not arrive till 
September 23rd. On September 5th he had received the following 
despatch from [Lieut.-JColonel Simmons. (No. 301.) 
"I have to inform your lordship that Omer Pasha has stated to me that he will 
not be able to leave Constantinople for five or six days, as he is occupied in making 
the necessary arrangements for the expedition to Asia, and his presence here is 
absolutely required to complete them." According to the arrangements accepted by 
the Porte "Omer Pasha hoped to land 50,000 men'1 and 3,400 horses in Asia, in 
In Kars Papers: "15,000 men".— Ed. 

=====第680页=====
650 Karl Marx 
two irips of the Turkish fleet alone, the operation occupying from three weeks to 
one month, or for each voyage from ten clays to a fortnight.... Omer Pasha is most 
desirous that assistance should be given by the allies in conveying the troops and 
their material from before Sebastopol, and baggage-horses from Sizopolis, and he 
considers the most practicable way in which this could be done, would be by 
allowing the English fleet to convey the troops from before Sebastopol to Asia, 
after having conveyed the Contingent to P>alaklava to replace them." 
To this despatch, Clarendon answers in the following strain: — 
"The Karl of Clarendon to Lieutenant-Colonel 
Simmons. 
"'Foreign Office, Sept. 7, 1855. 
"Sir,— The account of  I he arrangements proposed by Omer Pasha for the relief 
of she armv in Asia, which is contained in your despatch of the 26th ult., is 
inconsistent with subsequent statements which have reached her Majesty's 
Government. In your despatch you report that Omer Pasha reckons upon taking a 
portion of the Turkish troops from before Sebastopol, and replacing them by 
Genera! Vivian's Contingent. But it appears, by a despatch of a later date from 
General Simpson, that Omer Pasha has given it as his opinion that General Vivian's 
Contingent would not be fit to take up a position before Sebastopol until next 
spring; and, in consequence of that opinion, and by reason of General Simpson's 
protest against having the Contingent sent to him, which protest was founded upon 
that opinion, her Majesty's Government have determined that the Contingent shall 
not go to join the army before Sebastopol." 
Clarendon. 
Let it he remarked that Simpson's, the poor warrior's despatch, 
is omitted from the Blue Book, that Omer Pasha's "opinion" is a 
changeling, and that the "later date" when Omer expressed his 
new opinion contradicting his opinion of the 26th of August, 
happens to be the beginning of July—as will be seen from the 
following extract from [Lieut.-JColonel Simmons's despatch, 
dated, camp of Kamara, Sep. 23rd,  1855:  — 
"On this subject I beg to inform your lordship that this opinion was given by 
Omer Pasha in a letter to General Simpson early in the month of July ... and 
before he was aware of the critical position of the army in Asia. He then stated that 
he was strongly of opinion that General Simpson could not contemplate making 
use of the Contingent in the open field (en rase campagne) in front of the 
enemy.... Lord Raglan had, on several occasions, asked whether I thought it would 
be possible to make use of the Contingent to hold the lines of Balaklava, and upon 
consulting Omer Pasha upon the subject, he told me that he saw no objection to it, 
if his lordship considered it absolutely necessary." 
In excavating an opinion of Omer Pasha, given before the 
Mingrelian expedition was mooted, in falsifying that opinion and 
in founding upon this falsification a protest, Simpson's "obtuse 
mind" followed, of course, the secret instructions received from 
London. Poor Simpson was an invention of Palmerston, one of his 

=====第681页=====
The Fall of Kars 651 
golems. Golems, as the German poet Arnim has it, a are earth 
clods,  shaped in the human form and infused with a factitious life 
by the spell of capricious wizards. Supposing Simpson to have 
written exactly as he is represented to have done in Clarendon's 
despatch—a point that becomes questionable from the suppres­
sion of his despatch in the Blue Book, Clarendon could not be for 
a moment in doubt either as to the date or as to the substance of 
Omer Pasha's opinion. As early as July 15, Simmons had informed 
him that in Omer's opinion "the Contingent, although it might 
form a garrison, cannot yet be in a condition to march into the 
interior;" and in a later despatch that "in Balaklava and Kertch 
the troops of the Contingent will be within fortified lines" and, 
therefore, not "in the open field." 
The history of Omer Pasha's Mingrelian campaign is not given 
in the Blue Book, but enough transpires to denounce the obstacles 
thrown in its way by the allied governments even at the too late 
epoch, when they had reluctantly given their consent and captured 
the south side of Sebastopol. 
Simmons writes to Clarendon from the camp at Kamara on 
Sept. 21, 1855. 
"On the 18th inst. General Pélissier consented to the departure of three 
battalions of Turkish chasseurs hence for Asia. [...] They will be embarked in a 
àay or two for Batoum. Up to the present time General Pélissier has not signified 
his assent to the departure for Asia of any more of the Ottoman troops now 
stationed here." 
"In answer to my inquiries at the Porte," says Redcliffe on Sept. 26th, "I am 
assured [...] that the passage of troops and the conveyance of provisions are in 
progress, though slowly, in consequence of the limited command of transport for 
those purposes. It is impossible not to apprehend that the many changes of plan, 
the exigencies of our operations at Sebastopol, and heavy demands on the 
transport-service, concur to diminish the hope of relieving Kars." 
Now the many changes of plan were the work of the British 
ministry; the exigencies of the operations before Sebastopol a 
mere pretext, as the allies, after the capture of the town, confined 
themselves to guarding its ruins; and lastly the want of sufficient 
transport was produced by the orders issued from Downing-street 
for the useless transmissions of the Contingent from Varna to 
Yenikale, Kertch, Eupatoria, and back to the Bosphorus. 
The gloom of these forebodings was dispelled for a moment by 
the meteorlike flash of the victory gained by the Turks over the 
Russian assaulting columns before Kars on September 29th. In 
a L. A. Arnim, Isabella von Ägypten. Kaiser Karl des Fünften  erste  Jugendliebe. —Ed. 

=====第682页=====
652 Karl Marx 
his despatch of the same date General Williams calls it "a day 
glorious for the Turkish arms." In his despatch of October 3rd 
(No.  342), he tells Clarendon, 
"During the combat, which lasted nearly seven hours, the Turkish infantry, as 
well as artillery, fought with the most determined courage; and when it is 
recollected that they had worked on their entrenchments, and guarded them by 
night, throughout a period extending to nearly four months—when it is borne in 
mind that they were ill-clothed and received less than half a ration of bread — that 
they have remained without pay for 29 months, I think your lordship will admit 
that they have proved themselves worthy of the admiration of Europe, and 
established an undoubted claim to be placed among the most distinguished of its 
troops." 
On the receipt of these glad tidings the Porte issued an address 
to the defenders of Kars (No. 345), in which the following words 
occur: 
"We were conscious of the zeal and intrepidity which animated your excellency, 
and of the infinite mercy of God, and found consolation in this reflection. On the 
other hand, we worked day and night in devising means to oblige the enemy to 
raise the siege, and the joyful tidings of this victory have infused new life into us." 
And what an exuberance of life will they not infuse into 
Clarendon's breast? He who worked day and night in devising 
means to thwart the means devised by the Porte, how will he not 
at least profusedly scatter the cheap flowers of his rhetorical 
sympathy! Nothing of the sort. Rather disappointed in his 
calculations he vents his spleen upon the Porte, in the following 
short and provokingly ironical despatch (see No. 346)a: 
"...The neglected garrison of Kars will at least have the satisfaction of knowing 
that their sufferings troubled the ... repose of the Turkish ministers, who, in 
default of all ordinary means of  relief,  never ceased to pray for their safety and 
success." 
Clarendon, formerly the silent friend of Aberdeen, figures here 
as Palmerston's twanging mouthpiece. 
From the repulse of the Russians before Kars, on September 
29th, to the day of its capitulation, on November 24th, 434 there 
elapsed again nearly two months. How was this time improved by 
the British Government? First, by withholding from Omer Pasha 
the necessary transports. On October 6th Mr. Oliphant, the 
correspondent of the Times, writes from Omer Pasha's camp: 
"The Turkish army is gradually assuming a more imposing aspect, and the 
assent which the allied generals have at length reluctantly given to the despatch of 
The quotation that follows is from Clarendon's dispatch to Stratford de 
Redcliffe of November 21,  1855.—  Ed. 

=====第683页=====
The Fall of Kars 653 
10,000 Turks from Balaklava, will swell it to about 50,000 strong. The principal 
delay is caused by the slackness of our authorities in the Crimea, who do not 
provide transport for the conveyance of the troops here, nor seem to care in the 
least whether they ever get here or not. It is certainly unfortunate that the only 
serious cause of annoyance which Omer Pasha has felt with respect to this 
expedition [...], is to be attributed to the same source which has already been so 
fruitful of disaster.'"1 
But this was not all. As early as July, Lord Palmerston had 
stated in the Parliamentary debates on the Turkish loan, that the 
Porte was lamentably deficient in money, and that all its 
operations depended upon receiving a supply of it at once. The 
Parliament having consented to the loan, the British Government 
advertised it in August, 1855, but from a paper laid before 
Parliament it appears that out of the five millions sterling granted 
something short of two millions was but paid to the Porte on 
January 29th, 1856, and that even this sum had been sent in 
dribblets of one hundred thousand pounds. Still, on Nov. 24, 
1855,  the Porte declares (see No. 353, inclosure  4): — 
"In conclusion, his Excellency"(the Seraskier )"turned round to me, and said 
that I was as well aware as he of the continuous exertion, made by him to help the 
garrison of Kars[...]. That Omer Pasha had been delayed by causes over which he, 
unfortunately, could not exercise any control. It was an affair of the alliance. It had 
all along been understood that such measures as it was in their power to take 
without the army which had been retained in the Crimea, would not suffice for the 
object in view.... His Excellency then proceeded to tell me with much force that the 
Turks were absolutely debarred from executing what was necessary for the 
prosecution of the campaign by the delay in giving them the advantage of the loan. 
The grain to the amount of one million of kilos bought by them for the service of 
the army, was not forwarded, because they could not pay for it.... He had written 
to the Grand Vizier, 0 that if money was not forthcoming from that source (the 
loan) in a week from this date, he would resign his office." (Letter of General 
Mansfield to Lord de Redcliffe.) 
It is a rather curious coincidence that on the very day on which 
Kars surrendered, the Seraskier was forcibly stating to the British 
military commissioner the true reasons of that disaster—the delay 
of Omei Pasha's expedition by the Allies retaining from the Porte 
its own troops, and then the stoppage of all operations during 
October and November by the British Government retaining from 
the Porte its own money. 
Report from Sukum Kaleh published in The Times, No. 22195, October 26, 
1855.—Ed. 
Rushdi Pasha (Mehemet).— Ed. 
Ali Mehemet Pasha.— Ed. 

=====第684页=====
654 Karl Marx 
When the capitulation was resolved upon at Kars, on Nov. 24th, 
"the soldiers were dving by hundreds a day, of famine. They were mere 
skeletons, and were incapable of fighting or flying. The women brought their 
children to the general's3 house for food, and there they left them, and the city 
was strewed with dead and dying." (Xo. 366.) 3 
During the whole epoch that Clarendon systematically thwarts 
the plans of the Porte, paralyses its forces, and retains its own 
money, we behold him dinning the ears of the manacled man with 
the counsel to move on vigorously, and abusing him for his 
slackness. History exhibits, perhaps, no parallel more bitterly 
ludicrous than that between the British Government making 
England the laughing-stock of Europe by its adventures in the 
Crimea, the Baltic, and the Pacific, and the rewards lavished on 
the tools of its miscarriages—and the same Government upbraid­
ing the Porte in the severest tones of antique Catonism for the 
blunders of its military officers and administrators. The Govern­
ment of Sadleirism, morally indignant at pasha-corruption; the 
patrons of a Codrington and an Elliot, insisting on the punishment 
of a Selim Pasha and a Tahir Pasha; the imfrwvisatori of a Simpson 
sullenly frowning on the promoters of an Omer Pasha; "Take-
care-of-Dowb" Panmure doctoring the Seraskier; Downing-street 
with its doctors Smiths, its Filders, its Aireys, and its Gordons, 
during the very sittings of the Sebastopol Committee, censuring a 
pasha at Trebizond for a load of sponges and rammers not having 
been packed in bundles and covered with matting:—this is the 
true picture of the Oriental war. And, above all, the brave 
Clarendon's soul-stirring complaints of the Porte's apathy!—think 
of an official Thersites tasking the Danaides for not filling the 
sieve. 
W. F. Williams.— Ed. 
Message of J. Brant, British Consul in Erzeroum, to Clarendon of November 
27, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第685页=====
655 
Karl Marx 
SPEECH AT THE ANNIVERSARY 
OF THE PEOPLE'S PAPER 
435 DELIVERED IN LONDON, APRIL 14, 1856 
The so-called revolutions of 1848 were but poor incidents— 
small fractures and fissures in the dry crust of European society. 
However, they denounced the abyss. Beneath the apparently solid 
surface, they betrayed oceans of liquid matter, only needing 
expansion to rend into fragments continents of hard rock. Noisily 
And confusedlv they proclaimed the emancipation of the Pro­
letarian s  i.e. the secret of the 19th century, and of the revolution 
of that century. That social revolution, it is true, was no novelty 
invented in 1848. Steam, electricity, and the self-acting mule were 
revolutionists of a rather more dangerous character than even 
citizens Barbes, Raspail and Blanqui. But, although the atmo­
sphere in which we live, weighs upon every one with a 20,000 lb. 
force, do you feel it? No more than European society before 1848 
feit the revolutionary atmosphere enveloping and pressing it from 
all sides. There is one great fact, characteristic of this our 19th 
century, a fact which no party dares deny. On the one hand, there 
have started into life industrial and scientific forces, which no 
epoch of the former human history had ever suspected. On the 
other hand, there exist symptoms of decay, far surpassing the 
horrors recorded of the latter times of the Roman Empire. In our 
days,  everything seems pregnant with its contrary. Machinery, 
gifted with the wonderful power of shortening and fructifying 
human labour, we behold starving and overworking it. The 
new-fangled sources of wealth, by some strange weird spell, are 
turned into sources of want. The victories of art seem 
bought by the loss of character. At the same pace that mankind 
masters nature, man seems to become enslaved to other men or to 
his own infamy. Even the pure light of science seems unable to 

=====第686页=====
656 Karl Marx 
shine but on the dark background of ignorance. All our invention 
and progress seem to result in endowing material forces with 
intellectual life, and in stultifying human life into a material force. 
This antagonism between modern industry and science on the one 
hand, modern misery and dissolution on the other hand; this 
antagonism between the productive powers and the social 
relations of our epoch is a fact, palpable, overwhelming, and not 
to be controverted. Some parties may wail over it; others may wish 
to get rid of modern arts, in order to get rid of modern conflicts. 
Or they may imagine that so signal a progress in industry wants to 
be completed by as signal a regress in politics. On our part, we do 
not mistake the shape of the shrewd spirit that continues to mark 
all these contradictions. We know that to work well the new­
fangled forces of society, they only want to be mastered by 
new-fangled men—and such are the working men. They are as 
much the invention of modern time as machinery  itself.  In the 
signs that bewilder the middle class, the aristocracy and the poor 
prophets of regression, we do recognise our brave friend, Robin 
Goodfellow,3 the old mole that can work in the earth so fast, that 
worthy pioneer—the Revolution. The English working men are 
the first-born sons of modern industry. They will then, certainly, 
not be the last in aiding the social revolution produced by that 
industry, a revolution, which means the emancipation of their own 
class all over the world, which is as universal as capital-rule and 
wages-slavery. I know the heroic struggles the English working 
class have gone through since the middle of the last century— 
struggles less glorious, because they are shrouded in obscurity, 
and burked by the middle-class historian. To revenge the 
misdeeds of the ruling class, there existed in the middle ages, in 
Germany, a secret tribunal, called the "Vehmgericht."b If a red 
cross was seen marked on a house, people knew that its owner was 
doomed by the "Vehm." All the houses of Europe are now 
marked with the mysterious red cross. History is the judge—its 
executioner, the proletarian. 
First published in The People's Paper, Reproduced from the newspaper 
No. 207, April 19, 1856 
A character in Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream.—Ed. 
The Vehmgericht, derived from Vehme (judgment, punishment) and Gericht 
(court),  was a secret tribunal which exercised great power in Westphalia from the 
end of the twelfth to the middle of the sixteenth century.— Ed. 

=====第687页=====
657 
Karl Marx 
PRUSSIA 436 
The strange frenzy which has converted France into a' gambling-
house, and identified the Napoleonic Empire with the Bourse, has 
by no means been confined within Gallic boundaries. That plague, 
unrestrained by political frontiers, has crossed the Pyrenees, the 
Alps,  and the Rhine, and, wonderful to say, has seized upon solid 
Germany, where speculation in ideas has given way to speculation 
in stocks, the summum bonum* to the bonus, the mysterious jargon 
of dialectics to the no less mysterious jargon of the Exchange, and 
the aspiration for unity to the passion for dividends. Rhenish 
Prussia, from its proximity to France, as well as from the high 
development of its industry and commerce, was the first to catch 
the disease. Not only did the Cologne bankers enter into a formal 
alliance with the great swindlers at Paris, by purchasing with them 
the Indépendance belge as their common organ, and establishing an 
international bank at Luxemburg; not only did they drag into the 
whirlpool of the Crédit Mobilier 437 all South-Western Germany, 
but in the limits of Rhenish Prussia and in the Duchy of 
Westphalia they succeeded so well that at this moment every layer 
of society, except that formed by the working classes and smaller 
peasantry, is permeated by die gold mania, so that even the capital 
of the small middle class, diverted from its customary channels, 
seeks for wild adventure, and every shopkeeper is turned into an 
alchemist. That the rest of Prussia has not escaped the contagion 
will be seen by the following extract from the Preussische 
Correspondenz, a ministerial paper. 
Supreme good.— Ed. 

=====第688页=====
658 Karl Marx 
"Observations recently made on the money market justify the assumption that 
there is again approaching one of those frightful commercial crises which return 
periodically. The feverish movement of an immoderate spirit of speculation, first 
prompted abroad, has, since last year, pervaded Germany to a great extent, and 
not only the Berlin Bourse and the Prussian capitalists have been dragged into this 
whirlpool, but also whole classes of society, which, at every former time, 
endeavored to shun any immediate participation in the hazards of the stock 
market." 
On this apprehension of an imminent financial crisis, the 
Prussian Government grounded its refusal to allow the establish­
ment of a Crédit Mobilier, the dazzling colors of which were 
suspected to conceal a swindling purpose. But what is not 
permitted under one form may be allowed in another; and what is 
not permitted at Berlin will be tolerated at Leipsic and Hanover. 
The latest phase of the speculative mania has set in at the close of 
the war, a which, apart from the commercial excitement inseparable 
from any conclusion of peace—as witnessed in 1802 and 1815—is 
this time marked by the peculiar feature that Prussia has formally 
expressed her wish to throw open her markets to the importation 
of western capital and speculation. We shall, accordingly, soon 
hear of the grand Irkutsk trunk-line with branches to Pekin, and 
other not less monstrous schemes, the question being not what is 
really designed for execution, but what fresh material may be 
offered for the spirit of speculation to feed upon. There was 
nothing wanting but the peace to hurry the great crash 
apprehended by the Prussian Government. 
This uncommon participation by Prussia in the speculative 
movement of Europe would have been impossible but for the 
great strides made by its industry of late years. The capital 
invested in railways alone has been increased from 19,000,000 to 
154,000,000 Prussian thalers, in the interval from 1840 to 
1854-55.  Other railroads at an estimated cost of 54,000,000, are in 
progress; and the Government have further authorized the 
construction of new lines at a cost of 57,000,000. Eighty-seven 
joint-stock companies, with a capital of 83,000,000, have sprung 
into life since 1849. From 1854-56, nine insurance companies, with 
a capital of 22,000,000, have been registered. In these last two 
years,  likewise, six joint-stock companies, with a capital of 
10,500,000, have commenced to run spinning-mills. From the 
Cotton Report it will be seen that the quantity of cotton received 
by the different ports of Europe, has, from 1853-56, varied in the 
The Crimean war (1853-56).— Ed. 

=====第689页=====
Prussia 659 
following proportions, according to the return of the first seven 
months of the year the export of bales being as follows: 
1853 1854 1855 1856 
To England  1,100,000  840,000 963,000  1,131,000 
France  255,000 229,000 249,000 354,000 
Other European ports 204,000 179,000 167,000 346,000 
Hence it follows that the Continent, which in 1853 received only 
about one third of the cotton exported to England, received in 
1856 as much as five eighths of it. To this must be added the 
cotton rcshipped by England to the Continent. The great export 
to France is only so in appearance, considerable quantities being 
transported from Havre to Switzerland, Baden, Frankfort and 
Antwerp. The development of Continental industry as exhibited 
by the above figures denotes therefore, above all, the increase of 
German, and chiefly of Prussian industry. The wealth accumulated 
by the industrial middle classes of late years, is nearlv rivaled by 
the appreciation of land-owners' profits during the war period of 
dearth and high price. Horses, cattle, üve-stock in general, and not 
least corn, have kept so high in Germany  itself,  that the influence 
of foreign markets has hardly been needed to enable the great 
landholders to roll in gold. It is wealth—the rapid increase of 
wealth never before experienced by these two classes—which has 
furnished the basis for the present speculative murrain in Prussia. 
The bursting of the bubble will put the Prussian State to a 
severe test. The different counter-revolutions it has undergone 
since 1849 have ended in placing the Government in the power of 
the narrow class of noble landowners, with respect to whom the 
King, who has done everything to create their supremacy, now 
finds himself in the same situation as did Louis XVIII toward the 
Chambre introuvable. 438 Frederick William had never the sense to 
put up with the dry bureaucratic machinery of Government 
bequeathed him by his father. He has all his life been dreaming of 
beautifying the Prussian State edifice by some romantico-gothic 
decoration. The short experience which he has had of his 
Herrenhaus, 3 however, must have satisfied him that in reality the 
landocracy or Krautjunkers, as they are called in Prussia, so far 
from deeming themselves happy in serving as a mediaeval 
ornament to the bureaucracy, are striving with all their might to 
degrade the bureaucracy and make it the simple executor of their 
class-interests. Hence the split between the Junkers and the 
a The First Chamber of the Prussian Diet.— Ed. 

=====第690页=====
660 Karl Marx 
Administration; between the King and the Prince of Prussia. 3 To 
show the Government how much they are in earnest, they have 
just refused to renew the grant of an additional tax which had 
been levied during the war—a thing unheard of in constitutional 
Prussia. They have coolly and deliberately proclaimed the doctrine 
that they are as much kings over their little estates as the King 
himself is over the country at large. They insist that the 
Constitution, while it is to remain a sham for all other 
classes, must be a reality for themselves. Emancipating themselves 
from all control of the bureaucracy, they wish to see it weigh with 
double force on the classes below. 
The middle class, who betrayed the revolution of 1848, have 
now the satisfaction, even while they are accomplishing their 
social triumph by the unrestrained accumulation of capital, of 
seeing themselves politically annihilated. Moreover, the Krautjunkers 
delight in every day finding fresh occasions to make them feel their 
humiliation, even setting aside the common laws of etiquette. 
When the middle-class spokesmen get up in the House of Deputies, 
the Junkers leave their benches en  masse,  and when requested at least 
to listen to opinions contrary to their own, they laugh in the faces of 
the gentlemen of the Left. When the latter complain of the 
obstructions put in the way of elections, they are informed that it is 
simply the duty of the Government to protect the masses from 
seduction. When they contrast the licentiousness of the aristocratic, 
with the shackled condition of the liberal press, they are reminded 
that liberty in a Christian State is not to do as one pleases, but as 
pleases God and the authorities. One day they are given to 
understand that "honor" is the monopoly of an aristocracy; the next 
day they are stung to the quick by a practical illustration of the 
exploded theories of a Haller, a de Bonald and a de Maistre. Proud 
of his philosophical enlightenment, the Prussian citizen has the 
mortification of seeing the first scientific men driven from the 
universities, education handed over to a gang of obscurants, 
ecclesiastical courts meddling with his family concerns, and the 
police taking him to church on a Sunday. Not content with 
exempting themselves from taxes so far as they could, the Junkers 
have packed the middle class in guilds and corporations, adul­
terated their municipal institutions, abolished the independence 
and immovability of their Judges, cancelled the religious equality 
of the different sects, and so forth. If at times their choking anger 
breaks through their fears, if they occasionally muster enough 
a William.— Ed. 

=====第691页=====
Prussia 661 
courage to threaten, from their seats in the Chamber, the Junkers 
with a coming revolution, they are sneeringly answered that the 
revolution has as heavy an account to settle with them as with 
the nobility. 
Indeed, the higher middle class is not likely to find itself again, 
as in 1848, at the head of a Prussian revolution. The peasantry in 
Eastern Prussia have lost not only all that the revolution of 1848 
had brought them in the shape of emancipation, but have been 
reduced once more, both administratively and judicially, under the 
direct yoke of the nobility. In Rhenish Prussia, by the attraction of 
capital toward industrial enterprise, they have sunk deeper into 
the bondage of the mortgagee, at the same rate at which the 
interest on loans has risen. While in Austria something, at least, 
has been done to conciliate the peasantry, in Prussia nothing has 
been left undone to exasperate them. As to the working classes, 
the Government has prevented them from participating in the 
profits of their masters by punishing them for strikes, and has 
systematically excluded them from taking part in political affairs. 
A disunited dynasty, a Government broken up into hostile camps, 
the bureaucracy quarreling with the aristocracy, the aristocracy 
with the middle class—a general commercial crisis, and the 
disinherited classes brooding in the spirit of rebellion against all 
the upper layers of society: such is the aspect of Prussia at this 
hour. 
Written on April 15, 1856 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4694, May 5, 1856 as a 
leading article 

=====第692页=====
662 
Karl Marx 
THE HOUSE OF LORDS AND THE DUKE 
OF YORK'S MONUMENT 439 
At the very time that Lord John Russell 
"The minimus of hind'ring knot-grass made," 
amused the House of Commons with one of his dwarfish 
~ o< k-schemes for the education of that giant called the people, his 
u-'lows in the House of Lords were exhibiting a practical specimen 
me education enjoyed by the heaven-born rulers of Great 
ZwvAn. The subject of their debates was a report of the 
C'><nmittee of the House of Commons, recommending for local 
: >.n  poses; the removal of the Duke of York's monument from 
V* a'.erloo Place. b On that occasion the Marquis of Clanricarde said, 
"The Di,:ke of York was not only eminent from his illustrious birth, but he had 
performed great professional services to the Crown and the country.... The regret 
for his death was not confined merely to the circle of his friends^ but was 
universally teit. All parties concurred in bearing testimony to the zeal which he had 
displayed in the discharge of the duties committed to him."c 
According to the Marquis of Lansdowne 
"a memorial erected some years ago to the memory of an illustrious individual 
whom they ail respected, should not be lightly disposed of or set away." 
Aberdeen, the travelled Thane, called the monument "in a 
certain manner sanctified." The Earl of Malmesbury 
"concurred entirely in what had fallen from the noble earl with respect to what 
might be called the sentimental view of the case." 
Shakespeare, A Midsummer Night's Dream, Act III, Scene 2.— Ed. 
A road was to be built across St. James's Park.— Ed. 
The speeches of Clanricarde, Lansdowne, Aberdeen and Malmesbury in the 
House of Lords on April 10, 1856 were reported in The Times, No. 22339, April 11, 
1856.—  Ed. 

=====第693页=====
The House of Lords and the Duke of York's Monument 663 
Let us cast a retrospective view at the life of the royal hero thus 
canonized by the Lords. 
The most memorable event in the Duke of York's lifetime—his 
birth — happened to occur in 1763. Twenty-six years later he 
contrived to draw the attention of the world to his person by 
renouncing the state of single blessedness, and getting a married 
man. The Anti-Jacobin war afforded the royal prince an 
opportunity of becoming a royal captain. If, during his ever-famed 
campaign of Flanders, and his no less famed campaign of the 
Heldei, the English army was regularly beaten, it had the constant 
satisfaction of beholding its royal commander returning to his 
home again in a whole skin. It is known how cleverly he ran away 
before Houchard at Hondscho, and how his siege of Dunkirk in 
some sort outjested the siege of Troy.440  Such was the distin­
guished celebrity he won in his Flanders campaigning that Pitt, 
growing jealous of his renown, caused the war-minister Dundas, to 
send despatches to his Royal Highness with the urgent intimation 
to come home, to reserve the display of his personal bravery to 
times of greater hazard, and to remember the old Fabian maxim: 
jamae ctiam jactura facienda est pro patriae An officer of the name of 
Cochrane Johnstone, to whom by and by we shall return, was the 
person selected to be the bearer of these despatches and—says an 
author of those bygone times— 
"Johnstone performed this service with a degree of celerity and resolution that 
entitled him to the admiration of the army." 
Greater still than the Duke's military exploits during this same 
campaign, turned out his financial ones, a convenient fire at every 
depot, settling for ever the accounts of all his commissaries, 
contractors, and in-supers. These successes notwithstanding, we 
find his Royal Highness again in 1799 at the head of the Helder 
expedition which, in the British papers under Pitt's avowed 
patronage, was represented as a mere holiday march, it being 
thought a rather preposterous idea that an army of 45,000 men, 
with the squadron commanding the Zuyder Zee at its back, with 
an offspring of the royal house of Brunswick at its head, was not 
by its mere appearance to scatter to the winds a rabble of about 
20,000 Frenchmen, 
"commanded by a printer's boy of Limousin, one Brune, who had received his 
military and political education in the Tennis Courts of the French Revolution." 
Even glory should be sacrificed for the Fatherland.— Ed. 
h [W. Cobbett.] "Mr. Cochrane Johnstone" [I], Cobbett's Weekly Political Register, 
Vol. X, No. 1, July 5, 1806.— Ed. 

=====第694页=====
664 Karl Marx 
However, with that blunt cynicism peculiar to those Jacobin 
generals, the printer's boy of Limousin had the impudence to beat 
his Royal Highness hollow, whenever he happened to board him, 
and when his Royal Highness, considering it still more meritorious 
to live for one's country than to die for it, strove to get back to the 
Helder, Brune was so discourteous as not to let him before he had 
signed the famous capitulation of Alkmaar, 441 stipulating the 
surrender of eight thousand French and Dutch seamen then 
prisoners of war in England. 
The Duke of York had now had enough in the shape of 
campaigns, and wisely condescended for a while to shroud his 
name in the obscurity naturally enveloping the commander-in-
chief at the Horse-Guards.3 Yet in that position he found himself 
placed over a department costing the nation £23,000,000 a year, 
and entrusting to him, under the King's sole control, the absolute 
power of promoting or cashiering any number of about 12,000 
commissioned and staff officers. 
His Royal Highness did not fail to engross a very large portion 
of public gratitude by his enlightened general orders regarding 
the cashiering the queues of all the privates and non-commissioned 
officers; the addition of a sponge to their appointments, for the 
purpose of keeping their heads clean, the dressing right and left, 
the quick and slow step; the locking up and the opening of ranks, 
the wheeling and facing, the tossing of the firelock, the 
hair-cutting and the black-legging, and the polishing of arms and 
accoutrements; the screwing up of John Bull's broad chest in tight 
jerkins, and the crowning his blockhead with an Austrian cap, and 
the covering his large back with a faceless coat—and all that sort 
of important affairs, making up the drill-serjeant's science. At the 
same time he exhibited the higher qualities of a strategist and a 
tactician in his domestic campaign against Colonel Cochrane 
Johnstone, the officer who had been commissioned by Pitt to cut 
short his victorious campaigns in Flanders. Johnstone, in the year 
1801,  Colonel of the 8th West India regiment (blacks) and 
Governor of the island of Dominica, was called home in 
consequence of a mutiny that had broken out in the regiment. He 
preferred charges against John Gordon, the major of his 
regiment, who was in immediate command of it at the time of the 
mutiny. This Major Gordon, as well as a Colonel Gordon, the 
Duke's secretary, belonged to that distinguished family that has 
stocked the world with great men—such as Gordon, the Ad­
le., the headquarters of the British army.— Ed. 

=====第695页=====
The House of Lords and the Duke of York's Monument 665 
rianople treaty-monger,442 the travelled Thane Aberdeen, and his 
no less illustrious son, Colonel Gordon, of Crimean memory. The 
Duke of York, then, had to wreak his vengeance, not only on a 
slanderer of the Gordons, but above all on the bearer of the 
delicate despatch. Notwithstanding Colonel Johnstone's impor­
tunities, John Gordon was not brought to a court-martial till the 
month of January 1804. Although the court pronounced his conduct 
to have been irregular, culpably negligent, and highly censurable, 
the Duke of York maintained him in full possession of his rank and 
pay, while he omitted from a promotion of brevet-major-generals 
in Oct. 1803, the name of Colonel Johnstone, who saw the names 
of officers, his juniors, preferred to him. On his complaints to the 
Duke, Johnstone, at the end of nine weeks, on Dec. 10, 1803, 
received the answer from his Royal Highness that he was not 
included in the general brevet-promotion because 
"there existed charges against him, the merit of which had not been decided.""1 
He failed to obtain any further satisfaction until 28th of May, 
1804,  when he became informed that Major Gordon was his 
accuser. His trial was put off from one term to the other; the 
court-martial which was to try him being ordered now to 
Canterbury, now to Chelsea, and it only took place in March 1805. 
Johnstone being fully and honourably acquitted by the court, 
applied for restoration to his rank, but met with a refusal from his 
Royal Highness on May 16, 1805. On June 28th General 
Fitzpatrick, one of the Fox coterie,443 announced in Parliament that 
in the interest of Johnstone, the injuries inflicted upon whom 
"had spread the greatest alarm throughout the whole army," he 
should propose a specific proceeding at the commencement of the 
next session of parliament.b The next session came, but having in 
the meantime been transformed into a war-minister, Fitzpatrick 
stated from the Treasury-bench that he should not bring forward 
the threatened motion. Some time afterwards this Secretary of 
war—a carpet-knight who had never seen an enemy, who had 
sold his company in the guards twenty years before, and never 
served a single day since—had a regiment given to him by the 
Duke of York; Fitzpatrick, the war-minister, having thus to audit 
the account of Fitzpatrick the Colonel. By dint of such stratagems 
[W. Cobbett,] "Mr. Cochrane Johnstone" [I], Cobbett's Weekly Political Register, 
Vol. X, No. 1, Tulv 5. 1806.— Ed. 
b 
Fitzpatrick's speech in the House of Commons, June 28, 1805. Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates [First Series), Vol. V, London, 1812.— Ed. 

=====第696页=====
666 Karl Marx 
the Duke of York succeeded in crushing Colonel Johnstone and 
thus asserted his strategical talents. 
That notwithstanding a certain dullness, hereditary in the 
illustrious house of Brunswick, the Duke was a sharp fellow in his 
own way, is sufficiently shown by the fact that he figured as the 
chief of George Ill's "domestic cabinet," the closet and family-
council, and as the head of the court-party, called the King's 
friends.444 It is not less shown by the fact that, with an annual 
income of £61,000 he contrived to squeeze £54,000 as a loan out 
of the ministry, and in spite of this public credit not to pay his 
private debts. To perform such feats, a man must needs be of 
nimble spirits. As it is generally known how "upon place and 
greatness many eyes are stuck,"a  it will be easily understood that 
the Gren ville Administration was not ashamed to propose to his 
Royal Highness to relieve him from some subordinate duties of his 
office—which  relief,  as is complained in a pamphlet paid by the 
duke, b would have reduced the commander-in-chief to a mere 
cipher. Lansdowne, be it remarked, served in the same cabinet, 
under the name of Lord Henry Petty. That same administration 
threatened to clog the illustrious warrior with a military council, 
falsely pretending that "the nation" would be lost, unless the 
inexperience of the commander-in-chief was assisted by a body of 
officers. Thus far was the duke pressed by this unworthy cabal as 
to demand an inquiry into his conduct at the Horse Guards. 
Happily this intrigue of the Grenville party was defeated by the 
immediate interposition, or rather command, of George III who, 
although a notorious idiot, had wit enough to understand the 
genius of his son. 
In the year 1808 the brave and patriotic sentiments of the royal 
captain induced him to solicit the command of the British armies 
in Spain and Portugal, but then the general dread of the masses to 
behold England bereft of such a home-commander, at so critical a 
moment, burst out in most noisy, indiscreet, and almost indecent 
demonstrations. He was warned to remember his former ill-
fortune abroad, to keep him in reserve for the enemy at home, 
and to beware of public execration. Nothing daunted, the 
magnanimous duke had a pamphlet published, to prove his 
hereditary claim to be beaten in Portugal and Spain, as he had 
Shakespeare, Measure for Measure, Act IV, Scene 2 (paraphrased).— Ed. 
This refers to the anonymous pamphlet, A Plain Statement of the Conduct of the 
Ministry and the Opposition, towards His Royal Highness the Duke of York, London, 
1808.—Erf. 

=====第697页=====
The House of Lords and the Duke of York's Monument 667 
been in Flanders and Holland. But, alas! the Morning Chronicle of 
that period states that, 
"in the present instance it is notorious that ministers and people, ins and outs, 
are fully agreed in opinion." 
Yea, the talked-of appointment of the duke seemed to threaten 
England with a regular row. Thus, one may read in a London 
weekly paper of that time: — 
"Not to the inns, the coffee-houses, the marts, the malls, and the settled 
gossiping-shops, has the conversation upon the subject been confined. It has 
entered into all private circles; it has been a standing dish at the dinner and 
tea-table; men stop each other to talk about the Duke of York's going to Spain; the 
eager Londoner stops even on his way to Change, to ask whether it be really true 
that the Duke of York is going to Spain; nay, in the very church porches of the 
country, among the smock-frocked politicians, whose conversation as to the public 
matters seldom went beyond the assessed taxes, you see half a score faces thrust 
almost to the point of contact, in order to know for 'zarten if the Duke of York be 
a goocn to be zent to Spain.'" 
If is evident, then, in spite of the numerous efforts of his 
envious deprecators, that it was impossible to keep the past deeds 
of the Duke hidden from the world. What a satisfaction for one 
single man, this unanimous anxiety of a whole people to keep him 
at heme. The Duke, of course, could not. but give his gailant mind 
the extreme pain of chilling his martial ardour, and quietly staying 
at the Horse Guards. 
Before passing to the brightest period of this monumental life, 
we must stop a moment and show that as early as 1806, the Duke 
was fully and publicly appraised by his fathers loyal subjects. In 
his Political Register of that year, Cobbett savs: 
"He rendered himself famous for nothing but running away, and bringing 
irsfamy upon the arms of England [...]; [...] at once half an idiot, and yet master of 
the utmost degree of low cunning; [...] equally conspicuous for feminine weakness 
and fiendlike cruelty, for pride and for abjection, for prodigality and rapacious-
ness.  ,...] While he had the command of the soldiers, h'e made a vile job of his 
trust, and, through the means  thereof,  shamefully robbed the people whom he was 
amply paid to defend. [...] Having previously bribed or intimidated every one, from 
whom he might apprehend exposure, he gave way to his numerous and conflicting 
vices,  and rendered himself the object of universal, though whispering, execra­
tion."1' 
a [W. Cobbett,] "Duke of York", Cobbett's Weekly Political Register, Vol. XIV, 
No. 8, August 20, 1808.— Ed. 
[W. Cobbety"Mr. Cochrane Johnstone" [II], Cobbett's Weekly Political Register, 
Vol. X, No. 8, August 23, 1806.— Ed. 

=====第698页=====
668 Karl Marx 
On the 27th January, 1809, Colonel Wardle rose in the House 
of Commons, to make a motion "for the appointment of a 
Committee to inquire into the conduct of the Commander-in-
chief,  with regard to promotions and exchanges in the army."3 In 
a speech lacking all sense of delicacy, detailing all the cases he had 
to bring forward in support of his motion, and giving the names 
of all the witnesses he was to call upon for substantiating his cases, 
he accused the pet hero of the present House of Lords that his 
concubine, a certain Mrs. Clarke, possessed the power of military 
promotion, that the military exchanges also were at her disposal, 
that her influence extended to appointments in the staff of the 
army, that she was endowed with the privilege of augmenting the 
military force of the country, that she received pecuniary 
consideration from all these sources, that the Commander-in-chief 
was not only a secret party to all her transactions, did not only 
save his own purse by her supplies, but had even endeavoured to 
derive  himself,  through her means, pecuniary accommodations, 
independently of Mrs. Clarke's advantages. In one word, he 
contended that the royal captain not only kept his mistress at the 
expense of the British army, but allowed himself to be kept by her 
in return. Upon this motion the house resolvedb to have an 
examination of the witnesses at the bar. The examination having 
lasted to the 22nd Feb., confirmed point for point the ungracious 
slander of Colonel Wardle. It was proved that the real office of 
the Horse Guards did not exist at Whitehall0 but at Mrs. Clarke's 
establishment in Gloucester Street, consisting of a splendid house, 
with a variety of carriages, and a long retinue of footmen, 
musicians, singers, players, dancers, parasites, pimps, and bawds. 
This Horse Guard of his own, the Royal captain had mounted in 
1803.  Although such a house could not be maintained for £20,000 
a year—and there was besides a country establishment at 
Wybridge—it was proved from the witnesses' evidence that Mrs. 
Clarke never got from the duke's own pocket, more than £12,000 
a year, a sum scarcely sufficient to pay wages and purchase 
liveries. The rest was procured from the wholesale traffic in 
petticoat commissions. There was produced before the House a 
Hansard's Parliamentary Debates [First Series], Vol. XII, London, 1812. This 
volume also contains material of the House of Commons inquiry proposed by Wardle 
and held in February 1809. Excerpts from it are quoted below in this article.— Ed. 
b On January 31, 1809.— Ed. 
The seat of a number of government offices in London, including the army 
headquarters, the Admiralty and various ministries.— Ed. 

=====第699页=====
The House of Lords and the Duke of York's Monument 669 
written scale of Mrs. Clarke's prices. The regular price for a 
majority being £2,600, Mrs. Clarke sold it at 900; a company for 
£700,  instead of the regulation price of £1,500, etc. Nay there 
existed actually in the city, a public office for the sale of 
Commissions at the same reduced prices, and the managing agents 
of that office stated to be the commissioners of the favourite 
mistress. Whenever she complained of pecuniary embarrassments, 
the duke told her "she had greater interest than the queen, and 
she ought to use it." In one case the zealous commander-in-chief 
punished an individual by reducing him to half-pay for non­
performance of a nefarious contract with his mistress; in another 
he reserved to himself a bonus of £5,000; in another case, he 
appointed on her interference boys actually at school to lieutenan­
cies, and surgeons who were never called upon to leave their 
shops to join their companies. One Colonel French obtained from 
Mrs.  Clarke a letter of service, i.e. an authority for raising  5,000 
men for the army. On this occasion the following dialogue 
between the Duke and his mistress was stated before the house to 
have taken place. 
The Duke.—  I am continually worried by Mr. French about this levy. He is 
always wanting something more to be done in his favour. [...] How does he behave 
to you darling? 
Mrs. Clarke.—  Middling, not very well. 
The Duke.— Master French must mind what he is about, else I will soon cut up 
him and his levy too. 
There were also produced some love letters of the illustrious 
duke mixed up with mercantile-military transactions. One of them 
dated Aug. 4, 1803 commences thus. 
"How can I sufficiently express to my sweetest, my darling love, the delight 
which her dear, her pretty letter gave me, or how much I feel all the kind things 
she says to me in it; millions and millions of thanks for it my angel." 
After this sample of the Duke's style it is not to be wondered at 
that the learned gentlemen of St. John's College, Oxford, presen­
ted his Royal Highness with the diploma of an L.L.D. Not content 
with military commission, the lovers also hit upon trafficking 
in bishoprics and deaneries. 
Other points turned up not less honourable to the illustrious 
scion of the House of Brunswick; for instance that an officer, 
named Dowler, had for years been Mrs. Clarke's paramour, and 
that in his company she sought for a compensation for the 
grudgery, the disgust, and loathing experienced in the duke's 
society. 

=====第700页=====
670 Karl Marx 
The Duke's friends scolding his angel "an infamous woman, an 
impudent baggage,"3 pleaded for their tender juvenile of about 
50, for the husband of twenty years' standing, the paramount 
power of passion. Which passion, by the by, did not prevent the 
duke, 7 months after his separation from Mrs. Clarke, withholding 
from her the annuity convened between them, and on her 
demands becoming urgent, threatening her with the pillory and 
the bastile. This very threat became the next cause of Mrs. 
Clarke's disclosures to Colonel Wardle. 
It would be tedious to wade through the whole proceedings of 
the Commons, with all its sordid incidents, or to expostulate on 
the gallant duke's begging letter dated 23rd February (1809) in 
which he solemnly declared, to the House of Commons "on the 
honour of a prince," that he knew of nothing, even of what was 
proved by letters in his own handwriting. It may suffice to say that 
General Ferguson declared in the House "that it was not for the 
honour of the army that the duke should remain in command;" 
that the Chancellor of Exchequer, Mr. Perceval, announced on 
March 20th, the Duke's resignation of his office, and that upon 
this announcement the House accepted Lord Althorp's motion 
that "his Royal Highness the Duke of York, having resigned the 
command of the army, the House did not now think it necessary 
to proceed any further," etc. Lord Althorp grounded his motion 
on his wish 
"to place the duke's resignation on the journal of the House, in order to record 
that the Duke had forfeited the confidence of the country for ever, and in 
consequence he must abandon all hopes of ever returning again to that situation." 
As a tribute for his bold proceedings against the duke, Colonel 
Wardle was deluged with thanks—addresses transmitted from 
every county, city, town and borough of Great Britain. 
One of the first acts of the Regency of the Prince of 
Wales—afterwards George the Fourth—in 1811, was York's 
restoration to his position as commander-in-chief—an initiatory 
step quite in keeping with the whole reign of that royal Caliban b 
who,  because the last of mankind, was called the first gentleman of 
Europe. 
From Beresford's speech in the House of Commons on February 3, 1809. 
Excerpts from it and also from the speeches of Ferguson on March 17, 1809 and 
Perceval and Althorp on March 20, 1809 are quoted according to Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates [First Series], Vols. XII and XIII, London, 1812.— Ed. 
A character in Shakespeare's The Tempest.—Ed. 

=====第701页=====
The House of Lords and the Duke of York's Monument 671 
This Duke of York, then, whose monument would grace a 
dung-hill, is the Marquis of Clanricarde's "eminent commander-in-
chief,"  Lord Lansdowne's "illustrious and all-respected individu­
al;" and the very same personage represented by the Earl of 
Aberdeen's "sanctified monument"—in one word the guardian 
angel of the House of Lords. The worshippers are worthy of the 
saint. 
Written about April 25, 1856 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The People's Paper, 
No. 208, April 26, 1856 

=====第702页=====
lit 3ttt  fShtt 
Karl Marx 
TO THE EDITOR a OF THE FREE PRESS 
Sir,— I have the honour to enclose a copy of a paper b which you 
may perhaps think proper to communicate to your readers. 
Your obedient Servant, 
Dr. Karl Marx 
London, 26th April, 
28, Dean street, Soho 
Written on April 26, 1856 
First published in The Free Press and 
The Sheffield Free Press, May 3, 1856 Reproduced from The Free Press 
G. Crawshay.— Ed. 
See this volume, pp. 673-80.— Ed. 

=====第703页=====
673 
Karl Marx 
KARS PAPERS CURIOSITIES 
1. Falsification.— In a telegraphic despatch dated Constan­
tinople, July 12, 1855, Lord Redcliffe summons the Foreign 
Office, "in order to save much valuable time," to send "by 
telegraph" its decision as to the Mingrelian expedition which the 
Porte had proposed to undertake with the Anglo-Turkish contin­
gent, under General Vivian's command. In No. 249 of the Blue 
Book, 3 we find Lord Clarendon's answer, a despatch dated 
"London, July 14, 1855," bearing on its frontispiece the sacramen­
tal word "telegraphic," rejecting the Porte's proposal, and inviting 
the Turkish army to fall back from Kars and Erzeroum on 
Trebizond. Lord Redcliffe's telegraphic question being dated 
Constantinople, July 12th, and Lord Clarendon's telegraphic 
answer, London, July 14th, it appears that to run between 
Constantinople and London a telegraphic message wants at the 
most, two days. Accordingly, Lord Clarendon's telegraphic de­
spatch, dated London, July 14th, should have reached Constan­
tinople on July 16. However, in a despatch dated July 19th, Lord 
Redcliffe complains of the silence of his Government which he 
had entreated "to lose no time in making known his pleasure." 
From Lord Redcliffe's later despatch dated July 23rd, it results 
that he had received no answer even then. In fact, the receipt of 
any answer from the Foreign Office, is not acknowledged before 
July 30th. (See No. 277.) One is thus reduced to the dilemma 
either that the way from London to Constantinople is about seven 
times longer than the way from Constantinople to London, or that 
Papers Relative to Military Affairs in Asiatic Turkey, and the Defence and 
Capitulation of Kars, London, 1856.— Ed. 
23—3754 

=====第704页=====
674 Karl Marx 
the London date of Lord Clarendon's despatch, as given in the 
Blue Book, is false. The delay in Lord Clarendon's answer caused 
time of precious value to be wasted. The falsification of the Blue 
Book date of that answer would denote, that delay was intended. 
To conceal that intention, a spurious date had to be prefixed to 
the despatch, instead of the true one. 
2. Suppression.—  I do not allude to the numerous mutilations 
pointed at in the Blue Book under the convenient term of 
"Extract"; nor to the total suppression of the whole correspon­
dence between General Beatson and the British Government, but 
rather to a telegraphic despatch sent from Sebastopol, on July 14, 
1855,  and received in London on July 16, 1855. On July 14th, in a 
conference held at the English head-quarters with the Allied 
Commanders-in-Chief and the Admirals, Omer Pasha proposed to 
make an incursion from Redout Kaleh, via Kutais, into Georgia, 
at the head of that part of the Turkish army then 
"at Balaklava or at Kertch — 25,000 infantry, 3000 cavalry from Eupatoria, and 
a proportional artillery." 
The allied commanders, refusing to give any opinion on the 
subject—(see [Lieut.-]Colonel Simmons' despatch to Clarendon, 
dated July 15)—Omer Pasha broke up the conference by 
declaring that "under these circumstances, he felt it his duty to 
proceed to Constantinople;" and so he did. On the very same day 
when Omer Pasha left the Crimea—on July 16th—Lord Claren­
don, according to the Blue Book, wrote a despatch to Lord 
Redcliffe, stating that 
"we"(the Government) "understand that Omer Pasha is about to proceed to 
Constantinople." 
This intelligence Lord Clarendon could only have derived from 
a telegraphic despatch dated Balaklava, July 14. Where is this 
despatch? Certainly, not in the Blue Book. The same electric wire 
which informed Lord Clarendon of Omer Pasha's intended 
departure, must have informed him of the cause of that 
departure, viz., the resistance he met with on the part of Pélissier, 
i.e., on the part of the French Government. Thus the question 
would naturally arise why Lord Clarendon quietly waited from 
July 16th to August 1st, a fact shown by the Blue Book, to break 
the matter to the French Government, and to commence 
negotiations with it, on a point on which the whole campaign 
depended. To prevent this question, the telegraphic despatch has 
disappeared. 

=====第705页=====
Kars Papers Curiosities 675 
3. Fraud.—  In Lord Clarendon's above-mentioned despatch to 
Lord Redcliffe, dated July 16th, the following passage occurs: 
"Her Majesty's3  Government would still recommend that whatever force is sent 
for the relief of the army of Kars, should proceed to Trebizond. If, indeed, Omer 
Pasha [...] should determine to take any part of his own army, with Tunisians and 
Albanians, to Redout Kaleh, her Majesty's Government would have nothing to say to 
that proceeding." 
Now, Omer Pasha having just determined to take a certain part 
of his own army to Redout Kaleh, the unconditional sanction 
given to such a plan, in Lord Clarendon's despatch, must have 
removed all difficulties; or, if new ones arose, at all events prove 
them to have not originated with the British Government. 
Unfortunately, this despatch, dated London, July 16th, figures 
only in the Blue Book, was written only for the Blue Book, and 
has never left the shelves of the Foreign Office. No trace of its 
ever having reached Constantinople is to be discovered. On the 
contrary, it results from Lord Redcliffe's despatch, dated Constan­
tinople, July 30th, that he had not received it on that date, when 
he complained of "the most serious dilemma" in which "the 
unfavourable judgment passed by her Majesty's Government" on 
the Turkish plans had placed the Porte. Nor had Lord Claren­
don's despatch, dated July 16th, arrived on July 31st, when Fuad 
Effendi, in a letter to Lord Redcliffe, defended the plan of a 
Mingrelian expedition against "the substance of the English 
despatches," according to which "the succours must be sent 
through Erzeroum by way of Trebizond." Nor had it arrived on 
August 4th, when Lord Redcliffe, in answer to Fuad Effendi, told 
him that 
"when latterly called upon to declare the opinions of his Government, he 
performed that duty with the painful sense of the embarrassments which 
surrounded the Porte," 
increased as they would be by the opinion "he was called upon to 
declare;" and added, 
"though her Majesty's Government have declared their decided preference for 
a more distinct operation by Trebizond and Erzeroum, their objections to a 
diversion on the side of Circassia, would in all likelihood be modified, if the force 
employed were of a compact or reliable character." 
Lord Redcliffe was, then, on Aug. 4th, not possessed of Lord 
Clarendon's despatch dated July 16th, in which her Majesty's 
Government had already modified its objections to a diversion on 
the side of Circassia, "if' Omer Pasha himself should undertake it 
a Queen Victoria's.— Ed. 
23* 

=====第706页=====
676 Karl Marx 
with "any part of his own army." On August 8th, Lord Redcliffe 
was not yet blessed with the mysterious despatch, as we find him 
again complaining to Lord Clarendon—(see No. 282 and enclos­
ures)—that the British Government "still leans with all its weight 
to Trebizond, as the only true channel of  relief;"  and bewailing his 
own ambiguous position. 
"Amidst so many motives," says he, "to vigorous support of the only practicable 
scheme of  relief,  I made no reserve in communicating the adverse opinions of her 
Majesty's Government to the Porte." 
Yea, still, on August 13th, Lord Redcliffe did not even suspect 
the existence of the London despatch, dated July 16th, as he 
informs Lord Clarendon that "the disappointment occasioned by 
the terms of the preceding despatch"—according to the Blue 
Book, the despatch dated July 16th, should have been the preceding 
despatch—"which appeared to favour exclusively an advance upon 
Kars by Trebizond, was evident." Now, however Blue Book time 
and space may be allowed to differ from common time and space, 
nobody will venture to believe that the despatch leaving London 
on July 16th, should not have reached Constantinople on August 
13th. But that Lord Clarendon's despatch, dated London, July 
16th, has actually never left London, and was never intended to do 
so, results from a despatch of his own, dated London, 20th 
August. In this despatch (No. 283), purporting to answer Lord 
Redcliffe's complaints, dated August 8th, Lord Clarendon en­
deavours to show that her Majesty's Government, in different 
previous despatches had renounced its resistance to the Porte's 
proposal, and 
"were willing that Omer Pasha should proceed to Asia to effect a diversion for 
the relief of Kars." 
But, strange to say, while the various messages which the noble 
lord refers to, in proof of his assertion, have left no trace whatever 
in the Kars papers, his despatch, dated July 16th, so ostentatiously 
paraded in the Blue Book, is most discreetly ignored in his 
justification to Lord Redcliffe. Thus, while baffling every Turkish 
attempt for the relief of Kars, the British Foreign Office was 
carefully preparing its pièces justificatives for the fall of Kars. 
4. Forgery and Shuffle.—According to Lord Redcliffe's despatch, 
addressed to the Foreign Office, and dated Constantinople, July 
23rd, 
"Omer Pasha [...] had proposed [...] to the Porte to make himself an incursion 
towards Georgia, starting from Redout Kaleh, and turning Kutais to good 
account." 

=====第707页=====
Kars Papers Curiosities 677 
This idea had been debated on the night of July 22nd, in a 
council at the Grand Vizier's3 [...], and the result of the 
deliberation had been, 
"that the troops to be employed in the above-mentioned manner, under the 
command of Omer, should be taken from Eupatoria, to the amount of 20,000, and 
from Bulgaria to the amount of 5500, and that the (Anglo-Turkish) contingent, 
with its numbers completed, should occupy the vacant place at Eupatoria." 
Lord Clarendon having received this despatch on August 1st, 
instantly forwarded it to Lord Cowley. Pointing at the just quoted 
"passage," he states "Her Majesty's Government to be favourably 
disposed to it," and expresses "his hope that the Government of 
the Emperor will concur in it." Here, at last, one is forced to 
acknowledge bonne foib  zeal and expedition on the part of Lord 
Palmerston's Cabinet. But, alas! while exhibiting itself as the 
patron of Omer Pasha's project before the French Government, by 
a mere shuffling of words, it substituted for the Porte's own 
proposal one directly hostile to it. This tour de passe-passe c was 
played off by the simple substitution in Lord Redcliffe's despatch, 
dated July 23rd, of the word Eupatoria, in the place of the word 
Balaklava. 
From the despatch of [Lieut.-JColonel Simmons, dated July 
15th, it will be seen that Omer Pasha, in his memoranda to the 
allied generals, and in the war council at the English head­
quarters, insisted upon taking with him that part of the Turkish 
infantry which was then stationed at Balaklava, which he had 
brought from Eupatoria, and which he declared the only fit one 
for the Asiatic campaign. Did Omer Pasha, after his arrival at 
Constantinople, alter his opinion? The contrary is shown by a 
despatch, dated Constantinople, August 2nd, in which [Lieut.-] 
Colonel Simmons states: 
"His Highness, Omer Pasha, informed me that he should be happy to give over, 
to complete the contingent, any of the Turkish troops under his command, except 
the division which is now at the camp before Sebastopol, which being composed of 
his best troops, he is naturally desirous to have with him if he make the proposed 
movement to Asia." 
Will it be asserted that the Porte, at the council of the night of 
July 22nd, arrived at a resolution contrary to Omer Pasha's 
proposal? In the very despatch of July 23rd, in which Lord 
AH Mehemet Pasha.— Ed 
Honest.— Ed. 
c Trick.— Ed 

=====第708页=====
678 Karl Marx 
Redcliffe reports the Porte's resolution, he tells Lord Clarendon 
that 
"Omer Pasha has been most graciously received and most generously rewarded 
by the Sultan3 ;" and adds: "I need not add that he is on excellent terms with His 
Majesty's ministers, and particularly with the Seraskier Pasha." 
Any discrepancy, therefore, between the Porte and its command­
er-in-chief is out of the question. The false play of Lord 
Palmerston's cabinet is apparent even from the arrangement of 
the Blue Book. To confound the reader, Lord Clarendon's 
despatch to Lord Cowley, dated August 1st, figures on page 248, 
followed up, from 248 to 252, by an extract from Lord Redcliffe's 
despatch of July 19th, General Simpson's letter to Lord Redcliffe 
of July 16th, Omer Pasha's letters and memoranda, and only in 
the last place by Lord Redcliffe's despatch of July 23rd, of which 
the instruction to Lord Cowley pretends to be the sequel. On 
August 4th, Lord Clarendon received the acceptance by the 
French Government of the proposal he had made on August 1st, 
in the name of the Porte, according to which 20,000 men were to 
be withdrawn from Eupatoria, to be placed under the command 
of Omer Pasha, and to be replaced at Eupatoria by General 
Vivian's contingent. On August 13th the Porte is at last informed 
of the acceptance of its own proposal by its Western Allies. 
Accordingly, on August 15th the Ottoman council is assembled for 
deliberation, and what was the result of that deliberation? 
"Omer Pasha," writes Lord Redcliffe to Lord Clarendon, dated August 16th 
(No.  294), "objects most positively to the plan transmitted from London by telegraph, of 
stationing the contingent at Eupatoria, and he is not prepared to assume the 
responsibility of commanding the expedition, unless the Turkish troops before 
Sebastopol be allowed to form part of it." 
Thus,  then, it oozes out that the Eupatoria plan, pretended to 
have been forwarded on July 23rd from Constantinople to 
London, has, on the contrary, been transmitted on August 9th 
from London to Constantinople. 
In the same despatch of Lord Redcliffe is enclosed a memoran­
dum of Omer Pasha. The destruction of the last effective Turkish 
army, the loss of the unity of the English as well as the Ottoman 
army, the wilful sacrifice of the Egyptians and Tunisians, the 
breaking up of the permanent arrangements made for the supply 
of the Turkish troops at Eupatoria, the creation of unavoidable 
delay, the ruin of his own military reputation, and the exposure of 
a Abdul Mejid.— Ed. 

=====第709页=====
Kars Papers Curiosities 679 
his Mingrelian army to the fate of the garrison of Kars —such 
were, according to Omer Pasha, the natural consequences of "the 
plan trasmitted from London." While communicating to Lord 
Clarendon this strange protest, Lord Redcliffe evinces not the 
slightest suspicion of having ever been himself the channel 
through which the Porte had transmitted that identical plan to 
Lord Clarendon; a sufficient proof this that the forgery, the 
interpolation of Eupatoria for Balaklava, was committed at 
London and not at Constantinople. During the whole month of 
August and part of September, we behold the Porte struggling 
against the spurious proposition Lord Clarendon had pressed in its 
own name on the French Government. 
5. Falsehoods.—Under this head we can, of course, only give a 
few examples, as the whole Blue Book is sprinkled with them. In 
answer to Lord Redcliffe's despatch, dated August 8th, Lord 
Clarendon addressed him a despatch, dated August 20th (No. 283); 
in which he declares 
"my various messages by telegraph, and my despatch of the 4th inst. ... will have 
shown you that her Majesty's Government ... were willing that Omer Pasha should 
proceed to Asia,"&c. 
With the exception of his despatch of July 14th, in which Lord 
Clarendon protested against the Mingrelian expedition, and 
summoned the Turks to fall back from Kars and Erzeroum on 
Trebizond, and of his despatch dated August 9th, which Lord 
Redcliffe could, of course, not have received on August 8th, Lord 
Clarendon had, according to the Blue Book, sent no telegraphic 
despatch at all to Constantinople. He would be sure not to put his 
own light under a bushel. His various messages by telegraph, 
withdrawing the veto of the British Government against the 
Mingrelian expedition, are only so many lying phantoms. 
In a despatch dated August 26th, [Lieut.-jColonel Simmons 
informs Lord Clarendon that Omer Pasha reckoned upon taking a 
portion of the Turkish troops from before Sebastopol, and 
replacing them by General Vivian's contingent. In his answer to 
[Lieut.-] Col. Simmons, dated September 7th (No. 302), Lord 
Clarendon  writes:  — 
"It appears by a despatch, of a later date, from General Simpson, that Omer 
Pasha had given it as his opinion that Gen. Vivian's contingent would not be fit to 
take a position before Sebastopol, until next spring; and, in consequence of that 
opinion, and by reason of Gen. Simpson's protest against having the contingent sent 
to him, which protest was founded upon Omer Pasha's opinion, her Majesty's 
Government have determined that the contingent shall not go to join the army 
before Sebastopol." 

=====第710页=====
680 Karl Marx 
Now, from a despatch of [Lieut.-]Col. Simmons, dated 
September 23rd (No. 307), it may be seen that Omer Pasha's 
opinion "of a later date," refers to an opinion given by him 
"in a letter to Gen. Simpson, early in the month of July, [...] before he was 
aware of the critical position of the army in Asia;" and that he had not declared 
Gen. Vivian's contingent to be unfit "to take up a position before Sebastopol," but 
only "to make use of it in the open field (en rase campagne) in front of the enemy." 
In excavating at the beginning of September an opinion 
tendered by Omer Pasha at the beginning of July, in perverting 
the substance of that opinion, and in founding on this perversion, 
and that anachronism a protest against Omer Pasha's project, Gen. 
Simpson, the lucky warrior, would, of course, only have acted up 
to secret instructions received from London. Supposing Gen. 
Simpson's despatch to have been exactly, such as it is represented 
by Lord Clarendon—a fact that becomes rather doubtful from the 
suppression of that despatch in the Blue Book—the noble lord 
could not have one moment hesitated as to the true date or 
substance of Omer Pasha's "opinion." He was fully informed of it 
on July 30, the day when he received [Lieut.-]Col. Simmons's 
despatch, dated Balaklava, July 15. His quibble then, about Omer 
Pasha's "inconsistency;" his making Omer Pasha's "own opinion" 
the reason for rejecting his proposal, were ludicrously false 
pretences. In point of fact, Lord Palmerston and his subordinates 
carried to the last their system of bullying the Porte for its want of 
activity, and baffling all its attempts at action. From the very 
beginning, we behold them devising—not means for the relief of 
Kars,  but objections to the means devised by the Porte, carefully 
preparing subjects of dispute, anxiously bent on embroiling 
matters, huddling imbroglio upon imbroglio in this tragic comedy 
of errors—all their proceedings tending to one and the same 
end—to kill time, and thus to ensure the fall of Kars. 
Written about April 26, 1856 Reproduced from The Free Press 
First published in The Free Press and 
The Sheffield Free Press, May 3, 1856 
Signed: Karl Marx 

=====第711页=====
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 

=====第712页=====

=====第713页=====
s$£#p* 
ve*v.* 
•v.v'i^s.rW^ 
Engels' summary "Crimean War" 

=====第714页=====

=====第715页=====
685 
Frederick Engels 
CRIMEAN WAR 446 
1854 
September 14. Landing at Old Fort [near Eupatoria]. 
20. Battle of the Alma. 
25. Allies march on Sevastopol (south side). 
26. Balaklava taken. 
28. South side blockaded. (Apart from bluejack­
ets only 8 battalions on the south side at that 
time.) 
October 1. Reconnaissance; decision taken to bombard 
prior to the assault. 
9-10. First parallel 4-600 sagenes in front of the 
fortifications. 
17. Bombardment of Sevastopol (the shelling of 
the Russians on land is superior, 200 heavy 
guns against the attackers' 126), simultane­
ously bombarded by the fleet. French guns 
silenced.—Now too late for assault. 
25• Battle of Balaklava. 
" 26. Russian sortie against British with 9 battal­
ions. 
November 4. Russians superior in strength to Allies. 
Attack. 
5. Battle of Inkerman. Construction of British 
siege-works now virtually at a standstill. The 
circumvallation against a relieving force alone 
going ahead. 
December 11. Osten-Sacken in command. Successful and 
more frequent sorties. 

=====第716页=====
686 Frederick Engels 
[1855] 
January. Beginning 
27. 
February  22-23. 
28 [Feb.]-1 March 
March 11-12. 
" 22-23. 
April 
" 19-20. 
" 20-21. 
May 
23. 
June 7. 
l; 
August 16. 
September 8. British construct 2nd parallel 400 sagenes in 
front of the works. Sorties continue. 
Niel arrives. Main French attack switched to 
the Malakhov; British abandon half their 
approach trenches—one mile in all! 
Selenghinsk constructed; assault on it on the 
23rd beaten off. 1,100 yards from main 
rampart. 
Volhynsk constructed, 1,450 yards from main 
rampart. 
Kamchatka lunette 770 yards, i.e. 470 sagenes 
in front of the fortress the enemy had to use 
the zigzag sap. Further entrenchments for 
riflemen in front of this work. 
Attacks on the entrenchments repulsed; these 
linked by trenches to form a whole; similarly 
before Bastion 3—Quarry3 430 yards from 
the main rampart. 
Assault on the entrenchments established by 
the Russians up to 200 paces before Bastions 
4-6, and 
[attack] by the British on the Quarry; 
[both] repulsed. 
Reinforcement for the Allies (French and 
Sardinians) and Pélissier. 
New offensive in strength. 
Battle for the counterapproaches in front of 
Bastion 5; fortune favoured Russians. 
Assault before Kamchatka and the Quarry, 
Selenghinsk and Volhynsk. 
First assault, repulsed. 
Chernaya. 
Assault. 
Written after September 8, 1855 
First published in facsimile in: Marx and 
Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, 
Vol. 11, Moscow, 1958 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 
Here and below the English word is used. Towards the end Engels uses the 
German equivalent: "Steinbruch". — Ed. 

=====第717页=====
APPENDICES 

=====第718页=====

=====第719页=====
689 
AUSTRIA'S WEAKNESS 
The great points of weakness in Austria are usually supposed to 
be her bankrupt treasury and the revolutionary elements of Italy 
and Hungary. It is true that in a war with France and England 
those elements might be employed with great effect against her; 
but in a war with Russia her vulnerable point lies in another 
quarter. Though this point was always plain to be seen, and, 
indeed, has been indicated by Austrian statesmen themselves, we 
had, during the life of the Emperor Nicholas, no menace to show 
that he had firmly resolved, in any contingency, to take advantage 
of it. His successor,3 however, appears to be less scrupulous, or at 
any rate less reserved. He has clearly announced to Austria that in 
the event of her finally joining the Allies he shall put himself 
officially at the head of the great Slavonic brotherhood, and call to 
his aid all the slumbering sympathies of race or religion which 
naturally impel the Slavonians of Austria and Turkey to Russia, as 
well as all the deep-seated animosities they cherish against the 
nations and governments that now hold them in more or less 
complete subjugation. 
Panslavism as a political theory has had its most lucid and 
philosophic expression in the writings of Count Gurowski. But that 
learned and distinguished publicist, while regarding Russia as the 
natural pivot around which the destinies of this numerous and 
vigorous branch of the human family can alone find a large 
historical development, did not conceive of Panslavism as a 
league against Europe and European civilization. In his view the 
legitimate outlet for the expansive force of Slavonic energies was 
Asia. As compared with the stagnant desolation of that old con­
tinent, Russia is a civilizing power, and her contact could not be 
Alexander II.— Ed. 

=====第720页=====
690 Appendices 
other than beneficial. This manly and imposing generalization 
has, however, not been accepted by all the inferior minds which 
have adopted its fundamental idea. Panslavism has assumed a 
variety of aspects; and now, at last, we find it employed in a new 
form, and with great apparent effect, as a warlike threat. As such, 
its use certainly does credit to the boldness and decision of the 
new Czar. And how just the fear with which the threat has inspired 
Austria, we now propose to show. 
Of the seventy millions of Slavonians living east of the 
Bohemian forest and the Karnic Alps, about fifteen millions are 
subject to the Austrian Emperor, comprising representatives of 
almost every variety of Slavonic speech. The Bohemian, or Tshekh 
branch (six millions), falls exclusively in the Austrian dominions; 
the Polish branch is represented by about three millions of 
Galicians; the Russian by three millions of Malo-Russians (Red 
Russians, Ruthenes448) in Galicia and the north-east of Hungary— 
the only Russian tribe out of the pale of the Russian Empire; the 
South Slavonic branch by about three millions of Slovenes 
(Carinthians and Croats)449 and Serbians, including some stray 
Bulgarians. These Austrian Slavonians are of two different kinds. 
One part of them consists of the remnants of tribes whose history 
belongs to the past, and whose present historical development is 
attached to that of nations of different race and speech; and to 
complete their unfortunate position, these hapless relics of former 
greatness have not even a national organization within Austria, but 
are divided among different provinces. Thus the Slovenes, 
although scarcely  1,500,000  in number, are spread over the 
different provinces of Krain, Carinthia, Styria, Croatia, and 
South-western Hungary. The Bohemians (Tshekhs), though the 
most numerous tribe of Austrian Slavonians, reside partly in 
Bohemia, partly in Moravia, and partly (the Slovak branch) in 
North-western Hungary. These tribes, therefore, though living 
exclusively on Austrian soil, are far from being recognized as 
constituting separate nations. They are considered as appendages, 
either to the German or the Hungarian nation, and in reality they 
are nothing else. 
The second portion of Austrian Slavonians is composed of 
fragments of different tribes, which, in the course of history, have 
become separated from the great body of their nation, and which, 
therefore, have their center of gravity out of Austria. Thus the 
Poles have their natural center of gravity in Russian-Poland; the 
Ruthenes in the other Malo-Russian provinces united with Russia; 
the Serbians in the Serbian principality. That these fragments, 

=====第721页=====
Appendices 691 
torn from their respective nationalities, will continue to gravitate, 
each toward its natural center, is a matter of course, and becomes 
more and more evident as civilization, and with it the want of 
historical, national activity, is spread among them. In either case, 
the Austrian Slavonians are disjecta membra,3 seeking their reunion 
either among each other, or with the main body of their separate 
nationalities. 
This is the cause which formerly rendered Panslavism so active 
in Austria. In order to secure the restoration of each Slavonian 
nationality, the different tribes of Slavonians in Austria long since 
began to work for a union of all the Slavonic tribes. The first 
appearance of Austrian Panslavism was merely literary. Dobrows-
ky, a Bohemian, the founder of the scientific philology of the 
Slavonic dialects, and Kollâr, a Slovak poet from the Hungarian 
Carpathians, were its originators. With Dobrowsky it was the 
enthusiasm of a scientific discoverer; with Kollâr, political ideas 
soon became predominant; but still he ventured to complain only; 
the greatness of the past, the disgrace, the misfortune and foreign 
oppression of the present, were the themes of his poetry. The 
dream of the Panslavic Empire dictating laws to Europe was at 
that time hardly hinted at. 
But the lamenting period soon passed away, and historical 
research upon the political, literary and linguistic development of 
the Slavonic race, made great progress. Safarfk, Kopitar and 
Miklosich as linguists, Palacky as a historian, took the lead, 
followed by a host of lesser men like Hanka and Gaj. The glorious 
epochs of Bohemian and Serbian history were glowingly depicted 
in their contrast to the present degraded and broken state of those 
nations. While in Germany philosophy formed the pretext under 
the protection of which the most revolutionary doctrines in politics 
or theology were propounded, in Austria, and under the very 
nose of Metternich, historical and philological science was used by 
the Panslavists as a cloak to teach the doctrine of Slavonic unity, 
and to create a political party with the unmistakable aim of 
upsetting Austria, and instituting a vast Slavonian empire in its 
place. 
Austrian Panslavism was destitute of the most essential elements 
of success. It wanted both force and unity; force, because the 
Panslavic party consisted of a portion of the educated classes only, 
had no hold upon the masses, and withal no strength capable of 
Scattered limbs, dismembered parts—paraphrase of Horace's expression 
"disjecti membra poetae".— Ed. 

=====第722页=====
692 Appendices 
resisting both the Austrian Government and the German and 
Hungarian nationalities against which it entered the list; unity, 
because its uniting principle was a mere ideal one, which, at the 
very first attempt at realization, was broken up by the fact of 
diversity of language. Of this diversity, a ludicrous illustration was 
afforded by the famous Slavonian Congress at Prague, in 1848.450 
There, after various attempts to make out a Slavonic language 
that should be intelligible to all the members, they were ob­
liged to resort to the tongue most hated by them all—the 
German. 
In fact, so long as the movement was limited to Austria it 
offered no great danger, but that very center of unity and 
strength which it wanted, was very soon found for it. The national 
uprising of the Turkish Serbians, in the beginning of this 
century,451 had called the attention of the Russian Government to 
the fact that there were some seven millions of Slavonians in 
Turkey, whose speech, of all other Slavonic dialects, most 
resembled the Russian. Their religion too, and their ecclesiastic 
language—old Slavonic or Church-Slavonic—were exactly the 
same as in Russia. It was among these Serbians and Bulgarians 
that the Czar for the first time began an agitation supported by 
appeals to his position as the protector of the Eastern Church. It 
was therefore only natural that as soon as this Panslavist 
movement in Austria had gained consistency, Russia should 
extend thither the ramifications of her agencies. Where Roman 
Catholic Slavonians were met with the religious side of the 
question was dropped; Russia was merely held up as the proper 
head of the Slavonic race, and the strong and united people which 
was to realize the great Slavonic Empire from the Elbe to China, 
and from the Adriatic to the frozen ocean. 
Metternich, in the latter years of his power, very well 
appreciated the danger and saw through the Russian intrigues. He 
opposed the movement with all the means in his power. But the 
only proper means—general freedom of expansion—did not 
belong to his system of policy. Accordingly, on Metternich's 
downfall in 1848, the Slavonic movement broke out stronger than 
ever, and embraced a large proportion of the population. But 
here its reactionary character at once came to light. While the 
German, Hungarian and Italian movements were decidedly 
progressive and revolutionary, the Slavonic party turned to the 
conservative side. It was the Slavonians that saved Austria from 
destruction, and enabled Radetzky to advance on the Mincio, and 
Windischgrätz to conquer Vienna. And to complete the drama, in 

=====第723页=====
Appendices 693 
1849 the Russian army had to descend into Hungary and settle 
the war for Austria there. 
While thus driven by her own want of vitality to depend on 
Slavonic aid for her very existence, Austria seized the first 
moment of security to react against the Slavonians in her own 
territory. For this purpose she had to adopt a policy at least 
partially progressive. The special privileges of the Provinces were 
broken down; a centralized empire took the place of a federal 
one;  and instead of all the different nationalities a fictitious 
Austrian nationality was created. Though these changes were in 
some degree against the German, Italian and Hungarian 
nationalities, they yet fell with far greater weight on the less 
compact Slavonian tribes, and more especially gave the German 
element a considerable preponderance. 
But the sentiment of race and of attachment to Russia has been 
strengthened rather than weakened by this process. Austrian 
Panslavism possesses, perhaps, at this moment a greater latent 
force than ever. It represents the only element in Austria which 
was not broken down in the late revolutionary struggle. The 
Italians, the Hungarians, the Germans even, all came debilitated 
and discouraged out of that vehement convulsion. The Slavonians 
alone felt themselves unconquered and unreduced. Is it surprising 
that Francis Joseph should hesitate before setting on foot a war in 
which Russia would find millions of devoted and fanatical allies 
within his own Empire? 
Written about April 17, 1855 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No.  4383,  May 7, 1855 as a 
leading article; reprinted in the New-York 
Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1038, May 8, 
1855 and the New-York Weekly Tribune, 
No. 713, May 12, 1855 

=====第724页=====
694 
PROGRESS OF THE WAR 
The news from the war is abundant. We have the official 
accounts of the cavalry action at Kurulu, near Eupatoria, before 
reported — the intelligence of an unsuccessful assault of the 
Russians on Kars, of the destruction by the Allies of Taman and 
Phanagoria, and of the capture of Kinburn at the mouth of the 
Dnieper. 
The cavalry action near Eupatoria was fought by twelve French 
squadrons (fourth hussars, sixth and seventh dragoons). According 
to Gen. d'Allonville's report,3 which is plain and intelligible, the 
French and Turks made an extensive reconnaissance toward the 
interior on three different roads—one to the south and two to the 
north of Lake Sasik. The two latter columns met at a village called 
Dolshak, where they discovered the approach of the Russian 
cavalry. Here the reports begin to disagree. Gen. d'Allonville 
maintains that eighteen squadrons of Russians—while the French 
were dismounted, baiting their horses—tried to turn them by the 
south and cut off their retreat to Eupatoria; that he then ordered 
his men to mount, fell upon the flank of the Russians, routed and 
pursued them for two leagues. Gorchakoff says that the Russians 
were only one regiment (eighteenth lancers) or eight squadrons; 
that they were surprised by the French after having dismounted in 
order to unlimber a battery of artillery, and that under these 
circumstances they had to run for their lives. He makes Gen. 
Korff responsible for this mistake. Now what business a whole 
regiment of lancers had to dismount and assist in unlimbering a 
A. Pélissier, "Grand quartier général à Sébastopol, le 1er  octobre 1855", Le 
Moniteur universel, No. 289, October 16, 1855.— Ed. 

=====第725页=====
Appendices 695 
battery of eight guns, and how it was that the gunners, whose 
business it was to do this work, were not at hand, we are left to 
guess for ourselves. The whole report of Gorchakoff is so 
confused, so unmilitary, so impregnated with the desire to palliate 
this first cavalry disaster, that it is impossible to treat it as a serious 
statement of facts. At the same time we see Gen. Korff made 
responsible for this defeat, as Selvan was made responsible for 
Silistria, Soimonoff for Inkermann, Read for the Chernaya.453 
Gorchakoff, though defeated in every action, is still invincible. It is 
not he who is beaten, far from it; it is some unlucky subaltern who 
upsets the general's wise plans by some clumsy mistake, and who 
generally gets killed in action in punishment for this crime. In this 
instance, however, the blunderer is unfortunate enough to 
preserve his life. Perhaps he may, hereafter, have something to 
say to Gorchakoff's dispatch. In the mean time he has the 
satisfaction that his opponent represents him in a far better light 
than his infallible commander-in-chief does. Since then, the British 
light cavalry division has been sent to Eupatoria to reenforce the 
French. 
The defeat of the Russians before Kars will very probably prove 
to be the crowning event of the campaign in Armenia. The Turks, 
badly organized and short of every requisite, had played but a 
poor part in this portion of the seat of war. Unable to hold the 
field, they confined themselves to the occupation of Kars, 
Erzeroum and the country immediately under the command of 
these fortresses. Gen. Williams, who had entered the Turkish 
service, commanded at Kars and superintended the construction 
of proper defensive works. For the greater part of the Summer 
the whole campaign on either side was confined to skirmishes, 
forays and foraging expeditions in the hill country; the general 
and first result of which was that the Russians, gradually gaining 
ground, succeeded in blockading Kars and even in cutting off its 
communications with Erzeroum. Kars is situated in a lateral valley 
of the Upper Araxes; Erzeroum at the sources of the Euphrates; 
Batoum on the mouth of the Churuk Su (Bathys), the upper 
course of which passes near both to Kars and to Erzeroum, so that 
one of the roads between these two places follows the basin of the 
Churuk Su as far as Olti, whence it strikes off across the hills 
toward Kars. Olti was, therefore, the central point for the Turks, 
as a road from Batoum there joins the one mentioned above; and 
Batoum was the place from which the nearest and strongest 
reenforcements were to be expected. Had the Russians succeeded 
in taking Kars, their first step would have been to establish 

=====第726页=====
696 Appendices 
themselves at Olti, thereby cutting off Erzeroum from its nearest 
and best communication with the Black Sea and Constantinople. 
The Turks, however, were so dispirited that they retired as far as 
Erzeroum, merely occupying the mountain pass between the 
Upper Euphrates and the sources of the Araxes, while Olti was all 
but completely neglected. 
At last, when Kars was more closely hemmed in, they attempted 
to form a convoy of provisions at Olti, and with a strong escort to 
force an entrance into Kars. Part of the cavalry from Kars, having 
been sent away, as it was useless there, actually fought its way 
through the Russians as far as Olti, and the convoy started shortly 
afterward; but this time the Russians were better on the alert—the 
Turks were completely defeated, and the convoy was captured by 
the Russians. Kars, in the mean time, began to run short of 
provisions; Omer Pasha was, indeed, sent to take the command in 
Asia and to organize at Batoum an army fit to act in the field; but 
this creation of a new army takes a deal of time, and a march 
direct to the relief of Kars by Olti would not have been the best 
course he could take, as Kars might any day be compelled to 
surrender from want of provisions before relief could arrive. 
In this difficult position the Turks stood at the end of 
September; Kars was considered as good as lost, and the Russians 
were sure, by merely blockading the town, to starve it out. But the 
Russians themselves appear not to have been willing to wait until 
the last flour was baked and the last horse cooked in Kars. 
Whether from the fear of approaching Winter, the state of the 
roads,  shortness of provisions, superior orders, or the fear of 
Omer Pasha's relieving corps, they at once made up their minds to 
act vigorously. Siege-guns arrived from Alexandropol, a fortress 
on the frontier but a few leagues from Kars, and after a few days 
of open trenches and cannonading, Kars was assaulted by the 
concentrated main body of the Russian army under  Muravieff. 
The combat was desperate, and lasted eight hours. The Bashi-
bazouks and foot irregulars, who had so often run before the 
Russians in the field, here fought on more congenial ground. 
Though the attacking forces must have been from four to six 
times more numerous than the garrison, yet all attempts to get 
into the place were in vain. The Turks had here at last recovered 
their courage and intelligence. Though the Russians more than 
once succeeded in entering the Turkish batteries (very likely 
lunettes open at the gorge, so as to be commanded by the fire of 
the second line of defense), they could no where establish 
themselves. Their loss is said to have been immense; four 

=====第727页=====
Appendices 697 
thousand killed are stated to have been buried by the Turks; but 
before crediting this we must have more detailed and precise 
information.3 
The capture of Kinburn was effected by the same fleet which 
made a demonstration before Odessa, whence, however, they 
sailed away without firing a shot, on their real errand, which was 
the reduction of Kinburn. This place is situated near the extremity 
of a tongue of land which on the south incloses the estuary of the 
Dnieper and Bug. At this point, the estuary is about three miles 
wide; a bar with fifteen feet of water (according to the Russian 
charts) hinders its entrance. On the north side of this entrance is 
situated  Otshakoff,  on the south side of Kinburn. Both these 
places first came into notoriety during the Russo-Turkish cam­
paign of 1787, when the Bug formed the frontier of the two 
empires, and consequently Otshakoff belonged to the Turks and 
Kinburn to the Russians. At that time, Suvaroff commanded the 
left wing of the Russian army (under Potemkin), and was stationed 
at Kinburn. The Turks, then masters of the Black Sea, crossed 
over from  Otshakoff.  They first made a diversion by landing 
behind the town of Kinburn, to the south-east; but when they saw 
that Suvaroff was not to be led astray by this false maneuver, they 
landed with their main body at the north-western extremity of the 
spit, exactly opposite  Otshakoff.  Here they intrenched themselves, 
and attacked the fortress; but Suvaroff sallied forth with a far 
inferior number of men, engaged them, and, with the help of 
reenforcements, drove them into the sea. Their loss was enormous. 
Suvaroff  himself,  however, was wounded during this action, which 
was followed up in the following year, 1788, by the storming of 
Otshakoff. 
The few details yet known respecting the taking of Kinburn 
confirm the experience of former episodes in this war, while they 
again tend to prove the intentional incorrectness of the Russian 
charts. On all their best charts there is no water of sufficient depth 
for ships-of-the-line or heavy frigates to be found anywhere within 
some miles of Kinburn. Yet when the allied fleets sent out 
gun-boats to take soundings within easy range of Kinburn, they 
found fully four and a half fathoms at sixteen hundred yards 
from the walls—at least, so it appears—on the north side within 
the estuary. Nine heavy steam-frigates could approach to that 
distance and shell the place; and while the mortar-boats did the 
a For an account of the further fighting in the Kars area after the abortive 
Russian assault on the fortress on September 29, 1855, and of the fall of Kars see 
this volume, pp. 588-94 and 595-98.— Ed. 

=====第728页=====
698 Appendices 
same from much nearer stations, the gun-boats enfiladed the faces 
of the bastions, and the floating batteries—which must have 
approached to some six hundred or seven hundred yards, if not 
closer—succeeded in making several breaches in the sea-walls. 
What the precise nature of the defenses of Kinburn was, we 
cannot as yet make out very distinctly. The small town stretching 
right across the narrow spit was defended by a sort of continuous 
rampart of masonry, something like a bastioned pentagon or 
square, with guns firing on barbette, or through masonry 
embrasures. The guns for the most part stood uncovered, but on 
the points where their fire was to act with the greatest force there 
were two tiers, the lower one casemated, the upper one firing 
through masonry embrasures in a wall erected on the flat roof of 
the casemates. As at Bomarsund,454  the masonry, as soon as it was 
acted upon by a vastly superior fire from the ships, crumbled 
away, and three breaches, it appears, were formed by the floating 
batteries in from six to eight hours. This is explained by the very 
small number of guns in the fortress, of which there were only 
seventy; and, as the attack could be expected from any side, every 
front of the fortress had to be armed, so that against the main 
attack no more than from sixteen to twenty guns could be brought 
to bear. That their fire should soon have been silenced by the 
vertical fire of the mortar-boats, the enfilading shots of the 
gun-boats, the shell-storm of the steam-frigates, and the breaching 
front fire of the floating batteries, bringing into action at least 
eight to tenfold their number of guns, is not to be wondered at. 
And as the day was exceedingly calm, the fire from the floating 
batteries was as steady as it would have been from any shore 
battery; it therefore could really act as breaching fire. These 
unwieldy, floating masses, helpless and useless as soon as the least 
amount of swell destroys their steadiness, must necessarily be able 
to do great execution in perfectly calm weather, and in situations 
where the large vessels can approach within range and thereby 
draw upon themselves the principal fire of the enemy. Such 
favorable circumstances, however, occur but seldom; and where 
fortresses like Kronstadt, Sweaborg, or the sea-forts of Sevastopol, 
were the objects of their attack, the floating batteries would prove 
more cumbersome than useful. Thus on the whole, the affair at 
Kinburn cannot be said to have proved anything in favor of these 
clumsy sea-monsters. 
The allied troops who landed to the south-east of Kinburn must 
have amounted to a couple of thousand: for of the English alone 
there were six battalions on board the fleet numbering, with 

=====第729页=====
Appendices 699 
artillery, nearly four thousand men, of which but a portion, 
however, was landed; while the French had another brigade on 
board their ships. The part taken by the troops in this action was 
very inconsiderable; they sent skirmishers and field guns against 
the place, but as there was a broad wet ditch in front of it, the 
Russians appear to have treated this impotent demonstration with 
sovereign contempt, not even opening a heavy fire on them, for 
we do not hear that the allied troops lost anything to speak of. It 
was the overwhelming fire of the fleets alone which forced the 
place to surrender, and as soon as its guns had been silenced, the 
fleets offered a capitulation, which was accepted. The garrison 
marched out with the honors of war and surrendered themselves 
prisoners. Then it was found that the whole force in the fortress 
consisted of thirteen hundred or fourteen hundred men; and this 
at once proves what sort of a fortress Kinburn was. In bastioned 
fortresses, especially small ones, it is generally considered that one 
weak battalion, or from five hundred to six hundred men, is 
required for every bastion; a bastioned square, the smallest 
fortification possible in the bastioned system, requiring from two 
thousand to two thousand five hundred men for its defense. Here 
a little over one-half of that number only were present, and yet 
they had to defend not only plain ramparts, but also to serve the 
guns in the casemates. Thus, either the fortifications, then, must 
have been very insignificant indeed, or else very weakly defended; 
and in either case, the success of the allied fleets before Kinburn 
does not in any way affect the generally adopted opinion that one 
gun ashore, well sheltered behind earth ramparts, is worth more 
than six on board ship coming to attack it. 
The entrance to the estuary of the Dnieper once having been 
forced by the Allies, and the pretended existence of a bar of great 
shallowness at that point having been proved to be a mere Russian 
stratagem, the whole estuary is opened to the action of the French 
and English fleets. The interior of the estuary is known to have a 
great depth of water, at least in the central channel, though nearer 
to the shores it abounds in sand-banks, none of which, however, 
are formidable to gun-boats and other light vessels. Thus 
Otshakoff,  Glubokoye and other points on the shores of the 
estuary are exposed to the attacks of the Allies and very likely will 
have to suffer from them. 
That the entrance to the estuary is not the shallow channel 
indicated on the charts, the allied admirals might have inferred 
from the history of the campaign of 1788. And here we may be 
allowed to refer again to that campaign, not only because it gives 

=====第730页=====
700 Appendices 
us a clear insight into what the nature of this estuary is with 
reference to naval warfare, but also because it was then the scene 
of some of the exploits of our Revolutionary hero, Paul Jones. 
At that time, Kinburn and the south shore were held by the 
Russians, and Otshakoff and the north shore, by the Turks. The 
Russians had a fleet at Glubokoye, between the mouths of the 
Dnieper and the Bug; its sailing vessels of deep draught were 
commanded by Rear-Admiral Paul Jones, and consisted of five 
ships of the line of eighty guns, and eight frigates, while the 
rowing flotilla of sixty-five light vessels was under the orders of 
the Prince of Nassau-Siegen. The Turks had about  Otshakoff, 
under Hassan-Pasha, ten ships of the line, six frigates and 
fifty-three vessels of light draught. A second Turkish fleet of eight 
sail of the line, eight frigates, and twenty-four smaller sail was 
cruising in the offing. After a few preliminary engagements, 
Hassan-Pasha, on the 27th of June, entered the estuary with the 
whole of his first fleet, sailed up as far as Glubokoye (thus proving 
that ships of the line, with their full armament on board, could 
come up so far), and formed in order of battle, the large vessels in 
the first line. The Russians, on the contrary, covered their liners 
and frigates with the row-boats. On the morning of the 28th the 
battle began. The Turkish line advanced, and soon came up 
within range of the Russian liners. Within an hour a Turkish ship 
of seventy guns was aground; the admiral's flag-ship, carrying 
eighty guns, was ashore a few moments after. Two frigates of 
forty guns went to succor them, but one of them struck on a shoal 
almost immediately; while Paul Jones's large vessels kept the 
remainder of the Turkish vessels engaged, the row-boats closed up 
with the stranded vessels, boarded and set fire to them. The 
remainder of the Turkish fleet soon retired in no enviable state; 
but still their large ships made such a bold front that their retreat 
was pretty nearly unmolested by the Russian gun-boats and 
galleys. 
But the measure of their disaster was not yet filled. Hassan-
Pasha, having collected the remains of his fleet at  Otshakoff, 
resolved to join the fleet cruising in the Black Sea, and to effect 
this, he had to pass round the point of the Kinburn spit. Here 
Suvaroff,  who commanded in the peninsula, had constructed a 
masked battery of twenty-four guns; and when the Turks, on the 
night of the 30th of June, 1788, attempted to double that cape, 
the battery opened upon them with great effect. Before daybreak, 
the fire of the Russians, favored by a bright moonlight, had 
brought the Turkish fleet into great distress, whose ships had to 

=====第731页=====
Appendices 701 
pass one after the other through the narrow channel, and were all 
the while within easy range of the battery. Several vessels got 
ashore, others showed signals of distress, some went down or were 
in flames; and as day broke the Russian fleet bore down upon 
them. Paul Jones very wisely kept his large ships back, as there was 
no room for them to maneuver; and indeed the liner Vladimir, 
venturing too much forward, was lost on a shoal. But the rowing 
flotilla closed with the Turks, and destroyed a great many of their 
ships,  so that before noon the whole action was at an end. Three sail 
of the line, five frigates, and seventeen smaller sail were destroyed, 
and one liner and two frigates were taken by the Russians. Of the two 
sail of the line which were saved by the Turks, one went down before 
it could reach Constantinople, and a frigate sank as soon as she had 
reached the island of Poresan. A portion of the Turkish fleet sought 
shelter under the guns of  Otshakoff,  but even here Prince 
Nassau-Siegen attacked and destroyed them on the 1st and 2d 
August. 
This campaign shows clearly what sort of a naval battle-field the 
Dnieper estuary is. The smaller sort of ships of the line, or at least 
the large fifty and sixty gun frigates, can enter it; but whether 
they will be able to maneuver in it with any degree of safety, 
though they be propelled by steam, remains doubtful. But that 
corvettes, sloops and vessels of lighter draught, especially steamers, 
can easily maneuver in these waters, while the larger vessels may 
serve, when once moored, as stationary batteries, there is not the 
slightest doubt whatever. And with the means of naval warfare 
now in the possession of the Allies, with due activity they should 
be able to scour the estuary from Otshakoff to the mouth of the 
Dnieper and the Bug. 
But it is not only with a view to naval operations alone that the 
possession of this place is of great importance to the Allies. It gives 
them an unassailable position on the peninsula between the 
Dnieper and the Crimea; a position commanding the entrance of 
the estuary of that river and menacing at the same time the 
communications between Perekop and Kherson. There is a rumor 
mentioned in the Vienna papers that the Allies had landed thirty 
thousand men on the spit of Tendra, a long, narrow island 
stretching within a few miles distance along the southern shore of 
the peninsula of Kinburn. If the fact of the landing be true, the 
numbers are evidently exaggerated. But if even a small body only 
of the allied troops had occupied this spit, it would show their 
intention of establishing themselves on the peninsula, and of 
seriously menacing the Russian lines of communications. They 

=====第732页=====
702 Appendices 
might from this position prove as troublesome to Russian convoys 
as the corps of Gens. d'Allonville and Paget, from Eupatoria, 
might to the convoys coming down from Perekop to Sympheropol. 
They might even, by rapidly concentrating a strong force on this 
peninsula, make a dash at Kherson, and burn everything with the 
exception of the small citadel—unless, indeed, the Russians have 
fortified that town too, and can spare a strong garrison to defend 
it. Anyhow, Kinburn and the long, flat sandy islands along the 
shore of the gulf leading to Perekop, form a series of positions 
which the Allies can easily hold with small bodies of troops, and 
each of which they can turn at any moment into a base for ulterior 
and rapid operation. The Russians may thus be obliged, by a few 
battalions, to disseminate a great number of their troops in order 
to secure most important points from sudden irruptions; and so 
long as the allied fleets hold command of the sea, these newly 
gained possessions cannot be attacked by any Russian land force. 
Written in the second half of October Reproduced from the newspaper 
1855 
This version of the article was first 
published in the New-York Weekly 
Tribune, No. 739, November 10, 1855 as 
a leading article 

=====第733页=====
NOTES 
AND 
INDEXES 

=====第734页=====

=====第735页=====
705 
NOTES 
"The Struggle in the Crimea" is one of the many articles on the Crimean War 
written by Engels at Marx's request for the New-York Daily Tribune. 
Marx contributed to this newspaper from August 1851 to March 1862, but 
not until August 1852 did he begin sending articles of his own. His first were 
written in German and translated into English by his friends, mostly Engels. By 
late January 1853, his knowledge of English had improved sufficiently for him 
to begin writing them in English. 
Marx's and Engels' articles in the New-York Daily Tribune dealt with key 
issues of foreign and domestic policy, the working-class movement, the 
economic development of European countries, colonial expansion and the 
national liberation movement in colonial and dependent countries. They 
immediately attracted attention by their profundity, political insight and literary 
merits. The New-York Daily Tribune editors publicly acknowledged their high 
quality. For instance, in a leading article on April 7, 1853, they saw fit to "pay a 
tribute to the remarkable ability of the correspondent... Mr. Marx has very 
decided opinions of his own, with some of which we are far from agreeing; but 
those who do not read his letters neglect one of the most instructive sources of 
information on the great questions of current European politics." In a letter to 
Jenny Marx of July 1, 1853, Charles Dana, one of the editors, wrote that the 
owners of the Tribune arid the reading public had a high opinion of her 
husband's articles. 
Many articles by Marx and Engels were reprinted in the Tribune's special 
issues—the New-York Weekly Tribune and New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, and 
some were reproduced in the Chartist People's Paper. Other newspapers, 
including the New-York Times, quoted from them. Their articles reached 
Europe too. For example, in his speech in the House of Commons on July 1, 
1853,  John Bright, leader of the Free Traders, specially noted Marx's article on 
Gladstone's budget published in the Tribune (see present edition, Volume 12, 
p. 176). 
The Tribune editors sometimes took liberties with the articles, printing them 
unsigned, in the form of editorials, especially from September 1854 onwards. 
In some cases they tampered with the text, making insertions, some of which 
were in direct contradiction to the content of the articles. Marx repeatedly 
protested against these practices. In the autumn of 1857 he was forced to 
24-3754 

=====第736页=====
706 Notes 
reduce the number of his contributions in view of the Tribune's weak financial 
position, the result of the economic crisis in the U.S.A. He ceased contributing 
to the paper altogether after the outbreak of the American Civil War, mainly 
because the Tribune had come under the sway of people advocating a 
compromise with the slave-owning states. 
"The Struggle in the Crimea" is one of the series of reviews of the Crimean 
War of 1853-56 which Engels began to write for the New-York Daily Tribune in 
the autumn of 1853 and the Neue Oder-Zeitung in January 1855 (in the latter 
case the reviews were either German versions of articles written for the Tribune 
or special reports included by Marx in his articles for the Neue Oder-Zeitung). 
The New-York Daily Tribune published these reviews as leading articles without 
giving the name of the author (see present edition, Vols. 12 and 13). p. 3 
9 
The battle of the Alma took place on September 20, 1854. The Russian forces 
were commanded by A. S. Menshikov, and the numerically superior forces of 
the French, British and Turks by Saint-Arnaud and Raglan. It was the first 
battle after the Allies' landing in the Crimea (at Eupatoria) on September 14. 
The defeat and withdrawal of the Russian troops opened up the way to 
Sevastopol for the Allies. Later Engels also described this battle in his article 
"Alma" written for the New Americana (see present edition, Vol. 18). p. 3 
Piedmont (the Kingdom of Sardinia) joined the anti-Russian coalition at 
Napoleon Ill's insistence in January 1855 and sent a corps of 15,000 troops to 
the Crimea. Count Camillo Cavour, the head of the Piedmontese government, 
who wanted to unite Italy under the aegis of the Savoy dynasty that ruled 
Piedmont, hoped thus to win France's support in the future struggle of the 
Kingdom of Sardinia for the North Italian provinces of Lombardy and Venice, 
which had been captured by Austria. This support was to help him avenge 
Piedmont's defeat in the war against Austria in 1848-49. p. 4 
On May 4, 1811, in the course of the Peninsular War (1808-14) British, Spanish 
and Portuguese forces commanded by Wellington laid siege to the French-held 
fortress of Badajoz (south-western Spain). However, on May 14 Wellington was 
forced to lift the siege in order to engage the French army sent to relieve the 
besieged garrison. The siege was resumed on May 25, but lifted again for the 
same reason on June 17. The fortress was captured by Wellington's troops on 
April 6, 1812, after a new siege which began on March 16. p. 6 
This article belongs to the series written by Marx for the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
which gave a systematic coverage of the home- and foreign-policy debates in 
the British Parliament in 1855. It includes material from Engels' review "The 
Struggle in the Crimea" written for the New-York Daily Tribune. The series 
began with the article "The Opening of Parliament" (see present edition, Vol. 
13, pp. 600-02). 
The Neue Oder-Zeitung was a democratic daily published in Breslau 
(Wroclaw) from 1849 to 1855. In the autumn of 1854 Marx was invited to 
contribute to it by Ferdinand Lassalle, whose cousin, Max Friedländer, 
published the newspaper. Originally Marx was very critical of the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung. During the revolution of 1848-49 he criticised the Breslau 
democrats grouped round it for their vacillations and conciliatory policy, and 
the "Address of the Central Authority to the League" (March 1850) stressed 
the hostility of the Neue Oder-Zeitung towards the working-class movement (see 
present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 277-87). However, Marx's attitude to the 

=====第737页=====
Notes 707 
newspaper changed in later years, when it became the most radical opposition 
organ in Germany and was persecuted by the censorship and the Prussian 
government. At that time, the editorial board was headed by the bourgeois 
democrats Temme, Stein and Eisner. In September 1855 Eisner became 
Editor-in-Chief. 
In a letter to Eisner of November 8, 1855, Marx noted that the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung was publishing "the maximum of what is possible under the 
present condition of the press". In these circumstances he considered it 
necessary to give the newspaper every possible support. When its financial 
position deteriorated in the autumn of 1855, he offered to write for it without 
payment. 
Marx began to contribute to the Neue Oder-Zeitung as its London 
correspondent at the end of December 1854, sending two or three reports a 
week. His articles were marked with the sign X. Given the almost total absence 
of a working-class press in Germany during the years of reaction Marx and 
Engels thought it important to use the bourgeois-democratic press for the 
struggle against reaction. Marx's work for the Neue Oder-Zeitung enabled him 
to keep in touch with Germany and familiarise German readers with key issues 
of foreign and domestic policy, the working-class and democratic movement 
and the economic development of capitalist countries, above all Britain and 
France. He regularly sent reports on the progress of the Crimean War. 
Sometimes he used for this purpose Engels' military reviews written for the 
New-York Daily Tribune, translating them into German (in the present edition 
both Marx and Engels are given as their authors). Sometimes Marx abridged 
Engels' articles or introduced changes and additions. In October 1855 the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung found itself almost without means to pay its correspondents. At 
the end of the year the paper closed down. The last article definitely known to 
have been written by Marx appeared in the Neue Oder-Zeitung on November 16, 
1855.  p. 8 
The Peelites were a group of moderate Tories supporting Robert Peel, who 
advocated economic concessions to the commercial and industrial bourgeoisie as 
a means of maintaining the political rule of the big landowners and financiers. 
In 1846, he secured the repeal of the Corn Laws (see Note 14). This move, 
favouring the industrial bourgeoisie, was bitterly resented by the Protectionist 
Tories and led to a split in the Tory party and the emergence of the Peelites as 
an independent group. The Peelites were represented in Aberdeen's coalition 
government (1852-55) and joined the Liberal party in the late 1850s and early 
1860s. p. 8 
The Manchester School—a trend in political economy reflecting the interests of 
the industrial bourgeoisie. It favoured free trade and non-interference by the 
state in the economy. The Free Traders' stronghold was Manchester, where the 
movement was led by Cobden and Bright, two textile manufacturers who 
founded the Anti-Corn Law League in 1838. In the 1840s and 1850s the Free 
Traders were an independent political group which later formed the Left wing 
of the Liberal Party. p. 8 
The Mayfair Radicals were a group of aristocratic politicians (Molesworth, 
Bernai Osborne and others) who flirted with democratic circles. The name 
derives from Mayfair, an aristocratic district on the edge of Hyde Park in 
London. p. 8 6 

=====第738页=====
708 Notes 
Palmerston's resignation from the post of Foreign Secretary in Russell's Whig 
Cabinet occurred on December 19, 1851, and was caused by his approving, in a 
conversation with the French Ambassador, of the Bonapartist coup d'état of 
December 2, 1851, without consulting other Cabinet members. On the whole, 
however, the British government shared Palmerston's attitude and was the first 
in Europe to recognise the Bonapartist regime. p. 9 
The battle of Balaklava took place on October 25, 1854. Units of the Russian 
army tried to cut off the British and Turkish troops taking part in the siege of 
Sevastopol from their base in Balaklava. They succeeded in inflicting serious 
losses on the enemy, especially on the British cavalry, but failed to achieve their 
main objective. For a description of this battle see Engels' article "The War in 
the East" (see present edition, Vol. 13, pp. 518-27). p. 12 
The articles "Lord Palmerston" were written by Marx for the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung in connection with the formation of the Palmerston government 
on February 6, 1855, and are essentially a résumé of Marx's well-known 
pamphlet Lord Palmerston written for the New-York Daily Tribune in the autumn 
of 1853 and also published, in fuller form, in the Chartist People's Paper (see 
present edition, Vol. 12, pp. 341-406). p. 14 
Carbonari—members of secret political societies in Italy and France in the first 
half of the nineteenth century. In Italy they fought for national independence, 
the unification of the country and liberal constitutional reforms. In France the 
movement was above all directed against the restored monarchy of the 
Bourbons (1815-30). In the first half of the nineteenth century the word 
"carbonari" was synonymous with "revolutionary". , p. 15 
In 1847 in Athens the house of the merchant Pacifico, a Portuguese Jew and 
British citizen, was burnt down. Palmerston used this as a pretext for sending 
units of the British Navy to Greece and presenting the Greek government with 
an ultimatum. The actual purpose of this move was to force Greece to cede 
several strategic islands in the Aegean. During the discussion of the 
Anglo-Greek conflict in the British Parliament in June 1850 the government's 
foreign policy was approved by the House of Commons. The House of Lords, 
on the contrary, rejected Palmerston's policy by a majority of 37. France and 
Russia indicated their displeasure through their ambassadors in London: the 
French Ambassador left the British capital, the Russian Ambassador failed to 
attend a dinner given by Palmerston. p. 15 
The Corn Laws, the first of which were passed as early as the fifteenth century, 
imposed high import duties on agricultural products in order to maintain high 
prices for these products on the domestic market. The Corn Laws served the 
interests of the big landowners. The struggle between the industrial bourgeoisie 
and the landed aristocracy over the Corn Laws ended in their repeal in June 
1846.  p. 16 
The blockade of the River Scheldt and the Dutch coast by the British and French 
navies was undertaken in 1832 with a view to forcing Holland to cease 
hostilities it had resumed in 1831 against Belgium, which had overthrown 
Dutch rule. As a result, both Holland and Belgium were compelled to agree to 
a compromise peace treaty (1833) drawn up by Britain, France, Russia, Prussia 
and Austria. 

=====第739页=====
Notes 709 
The blockade of the mouths of the rivers Tagus and Douro was undertaken by 
Britain during the civil war in Portugal (1828-34). In this war the feudal-clerical 
party led by the pretender to the Portuguese throne, Dom Miguel, fought 
against the liberal bourgeois party of Constitutionalists. In an attempt to 
strengthen its influence in the Iberian Peninsula, the British government sent 
its navy to the Portuguese coast and thereby tipped the scales in favour of the 
Constitutionalists. p. 16 
The blockade of Mexico—under the pretext of protecting French citizens in 
Mexico a French squadron blockaded several Mexican ports on April 16, 1838. 
The blockade affected British commercial interests. Despite numerous petitions 
from the commercial bourgeoisie urging the British government to intervene 
and ensure the free passage of British ships, in the Parliamentary debate of 
March 19, 1839, Palmerston defended the position of the government, which 
did not want a conflict with France. 
The blockade of Buenos Aires and the Argentine coast by the British and 
French navies (1845-50) aimed at forcing the Argentine government to open 
the rivers Parana and Uruguay to foreign ships (they had been closed to 
foreign shipping in 1841 in connection with the war between Argentina and 
Uruguay) and recognise Uruguay's independence. These demands were 
granted in 1850 and 1851. p. 17 
In 1838 the King of Naples granted a French company a monopoly to mine 
sulphur in Sicily. This move evoked a sharp protest from the British 
government, which regarded it as an infringement of Britain's commercial 
interests, guaranteed by the Anglo-Neapolitan treaty of 1816. In 1840 the 
British Navy in the Mediterranean was ordered to open hostilities. Naples was 
forced to comply with Britain's demands. 
For details of the Pacifico affair see Note 13. 
In 1837 Mohammed Shah of Persia laid siege to the Afghan fortress of 
Herat, a junction of important trade routes. In 1838 the British government 
declared his actions to be hostile to Britain and demanded an end to the siege. 
Later it dispatched a naval squadron to the Persian  Gulf,  threatening war. The 
Shah was compelled to lift the siege and conclude an unequal trade agreement 
with Britain (1841). p. 17 
A reference to Britain's intervention in the Carlist War in Spain (1833-40) in 
which the feudal Catholic forces, led by pretender to the throne Don Carlos, 
fought against the bourgeois liberals who supported the government of Regent 
Maria Cristina. Britain sent its navy and a legion of volunteers to Spain. The 
latter took part in the fighting on Maria Cristina's side in 1835-37. These 
moves were designed to consolidate Britain's influence in the Iberian Peninsula. 
The war with China for the importation of opium—a reference to the so-called 
First Opium War (1839-42), Britain's war against China which marked the 
beginning of the latter's transformation into a semi-colony. Britain used as a 
pretext for this war the confiscation by the Chinese authorities in Canton of 
opium stocks owned by foreign merchants. As a result of this war the Treaty of 
Nanking was imposed on China (August 29, 1842) which obliged it to open five 
ports (Canton, Amoy, Foochow, Ningpo and Shanghai) to British trade, cede 
the island of Hongkong to Britain "in perpetuity" and pay Britain a huge 
indemnity. Under a supplementary treaty signed in 1843 China was forced to 
grant extraterritoriality to foreigners. In 1844 unequal treaties were imposed 
on China by the USA and France. p. 17 

=====第740页=====
710 Notes 
This refers to Anglo-American clashes on the US-Canadian border over 
disputed territories, one to the north of the American State of Maine, the 
other—Oregon—on the Pacific coast. These clashes became especially sharp in 
the late 1830s and early 1840s. p. 17 
The Afghanistan campaigns—during the first Anglo-Afghan war (1838-42) in 
which Britain strove to establish colonial rule in Afghanistan, British troops 
invaded Afghan territory twice (in 1838 and 1842). Both invasions failed to 
achieve their purpose. 
At the insistence of the British government, Britain, Russia, Austria and 
Prussia signed a convention in London on July 15, 1840, on military assistance 
to Turkey in its war against Egypt (1839-41). In the autumn of 1840 British 
and Austrian warships bombarded Beirut, Saint-Jean-d'Acre and other for­
tresses on the Syrian coast, which had been captured by Mehemet Ali, the ruler of 
Egypt, between 1831 and 1833. Eventually Mehemet Ali was forced to 
relinquish his possessions outside Egypt and submit to the supreme authority of 
the Sultan. p. 17 
Evidently a reference to the inspection of ships by the British in connection 
with the slave trade. At the beginning of the nineteenth century Britain, in its 
drive against the slave trade, claimed the right to inspect all suspect ships even 
in peacetime. This was strongly opposed by the U.S. government because many 
ships carrying slaves from West Africa sailed under the U.S. flag. 
Britain's right to inspect Portuguese ships was recognised by the Anglo-
Portuguese treaties of 1810, 1815 and 1817. In return for Britain's waiving of 
Portugal's debts the latter undertook to allow her own ships to carry only a 
limited number of African slaves and only to Brazil, then a Portuguese colony, 
and to ban the use of her flag by slavers of other countries. This agreement 
was often violated, especially after Brazil won independence in 1822. In 1839 
the British Parliament passed a law allowing British ships to detain ships 
engaged in the slave traffic. p. 17 
The Treaty of Adrianople was concluded by Turkey and Russia in September 
1829 following the war of 1828-29. Under the treaty Russia obtained the 
Danube delta including the islands, and a considerable part of the eastern Black 
Sea coast south of the Kuban estuary. Turkey was to recognise the autonomy of 
Moldavia and Wallachia, granting them the right to elect their own hospodars 
(rulers). Their autonomy was to be guaranteed by Russia. The Turkish 
government also undertook to recognise the independence of Greece, whose 
only obligation to Turkey was to pay an annual tribute to the Sultan, and abide 
by all the previous treaties relating to the autonomy of Serbia, which was to be 
formalised by a special firman. 
The Balta-Liman Treaty, concluded by Russia and Turkey on May 1, 1849, 
laid down conditions for the continued presence of their troops in Moldavia 
and Wallachia, which had been occupied to suppress the revolutionary 
movement. Under the treaty, the occupation was to continue until the threat of 
revolution had been fully eliminated (the foreign troops were not withdrawn 
until 1851), for a certain period the hospodars were to be appointed by the 
Sultan in agreement with the Tsar. A series of measures by Russia and Turkey, 
including another occupation, were envisaged to provide for the eventuality of 
another revolution. p. 17 
23 
On May 8, 1852, Russia, Austria, Britain, France, Prussia, Sweden and 
Denmark signed the London Protocol on the integrity of the Kingdom of 

=====第741页=====
Notes 711 
Denmark. It was based on the protocol adopted by the same states (except 
Prussia) at a conference in London on July 4, 1850 and signed on August 2, 
1850,  which established the principle of the indivisibility of the Danish Crown 
possessions, including the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein. The London 
Protocol mentioned the Russian Emperor among the lawful claimants to the 
Danish Crown who had renounced their rights in favour of Duke Christian of 
Glücksburg, proclaimed successor to King Frederick VII (the Russian Emperor 
descended from Duke Charles Peter Ulrich of Holstein-Gottorp, who was 
Russian Tsar as Peter III). This created a precedent for Russian claims to the 
Danish Crown in the event of the Glücksburg dynasty dying out. p. 17 
Under an agreement signed by Russia, Britain and the Netherlands in London 
on May 19, 1815, Britain and the Netherlands had undertaken to compensate 
Russia's military expenses connected with the expulsion of Napoleonic troops 
from the Dutch and Belgian provinces by gradually repaying part of Russia's 
debt to the Dutch bankers Hope & Co. and.the interest on that debt. A special 
clause stipulated that the payments would be discontinued in the event of a 
secession of the Belgian provinces from the Netherlands. After the 1830 
revolution and the establishment of an independent Belgian state, the 
Netherlands stopped its payments. However, Palmerston signed a new 
agreement with Russia on November 16, 1831, confirming Britain's financial 
commitments. p. 18 
The Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi was signed by Russia and Turkey on July 8, 1833. 
Prior to that, in the spring of the same year, Russian troops had landed in 
Unkiar-Skelessi, on the Bosphorus, to help protect the Turkish capital from the 
army of Ibrahim Pasha, son of Mehemet Ali, the ruler of Egypt who had 
rebelled against the Turkish Sultan. In May 1833, the Porte concluded peace 
with Mehemet Ali through the mediation of Britain and France, ceding Syria 
and Palestine to Egypt. However, the Tsarist government, taking advantage of 
the tense situation and the presence of Russian troops in Turkey, induced the 
Porte to conclude a defence treaty with Russia which contained a secret clause 
obliging Turkey to close the Straits to all foreign warships except Russian 
vessels. This clause remained in force until the Turko-Egyptian war of  1839-41, 
when Nicholas I reached agreement with Britain and other Powers on joint 
action against Mehemet Ali, but was compelled to agree to the closure of the 
Straits to the warships of all states in peacetime. p. 18 
A reference to the attempt by Mohammed Shah of Persia to gain possession of 
Herat in 1837-38 (see Note 17). Russia gave him diplomatic support in that 
campaign. p. 19 
27 
The Treaty of Adrianople (1829) (see Note 22) gave Russia control of the 
islands in the Danube delta but guaranteed freedom of navigation on the 
Danube to the merchant ships of all countries. However, in the spring of 1836 
a Russian quarantine post was set up in the Sulina arm of the Danube which in 
effect acted as a customs office controlling passing vessels. When the question 
was discussed in the British Parliament in April 1836, Palmerston declared that 
Russia's actions were not prejudicial to Anglo-Turkish trade and therefore he 
saw no grounds for diplomatic intervention by Britain. p. 19 
~ A reference to the national liberation insurrection in Poland in  1830-31.  It started 
on November 29, 1830, when Polish patriots occupied the Belvedere Palace in 
Warsaw, the residence of Grand Duke Constantine, the Tsarist Commander-in-

=====第742页=====
2 Notes 
Chief (virtually vice-regent) in the Kingdom of Poland. By November 30 the whole 
of Warsaw was in the hands of the insurgents. p. 19 
On February 14, 1855, The Times (No. 21977) published a letter signed 
"A Colonial Reformer" which asked why Sidney Herbert was not being allowed 
to continue as Secretary of War if he really possessed the merits attributed to 
him by his supporters, and was, instead, being offered a high post in the 
Colonial Office if he really was responsible for the plight of the British 
wounded in the Crimea, as claimed by his opponents. p. 22 
See Note 8. p. 25 
This refers to the Great Exhibition held in London in 1851. A special building 
of metal and glass, known as the Crystal Palace, was erected for it in Hyde 
Park. p. 29 
A reference to the lawsuit over the inheritance of Eliza Josephine Handcock, 
the mistress of the Earl of Clanricarde, that took place in the Irish Court of 
Chancery in January 1855. The action had been brought by John Stratford 
Handcock, the rightful heir of Josephine's daughter Honoria who died on 
December 12, 1853. His rights were contested by John de Burgh, son of 
Josephine and the Earl of Clanricarde. In the course of the proceedings 
public attention was drawn to the mysterious circumstances attending the death of 
Josephine's husband, William Handcock, and of their three daughters, none of 
whom had come of age. Some witnesses hinted that the Earl of Clanricarde was 
implicated in these events. 
Marx draws a parallel between this case and that of Altarice-Rosalba-Fanny, 
the Duchess of Praslin, who was found murdered in her home in August 1847. 
Suspicion fell on her husband, the Duke of Praslin, who was arrested and 
poisoned himself during the investigation. p. 31 
This article was written by Engels for the New-York Daily Tribune. The section 
relating to the British army was included by Marx, in free translation and with 
a number of alterations, in his report "Parliamentary and Military Affairs" 
(February 20, 1855) written for the Neue Oder-Zeitung (see this volume, 
pp. 40-42; the corresponding passage is indicated in Engels' article by a 
footnote). Both Marx and Engels are therefore given as the authors of this 
report in the present edition. A considerable part of Engels' article was 
reproduced by Marx, with cuts and minor alterations, in another report for the 
Neue Oder-Zeitung entitled "Zustand der Armeen" ("The State of the Armies"), 
dated by him February 21 and published on February 24, 1855. As it entirely 
consists of material taken from the article "The War That Looms on Europe", this 
report has not been included in the present edition. The most significant 
alterations made by Marx have been indicated in footnotes. p. 32 
A reference to the talks between the British, French and Russian Ambassadors 
and Austrian Foreign Minister Buol sponsored by Emperor Francis Joseph, 
which opened in December 1854. Their official purpose was to work out a basis 
for peace negotiations between the belligerents in the Crimean War. They were 
a sequel to an earlier round of talks between diplomats of the Western Powers, 
the Prussian Ambassador and the Austrian Minister (the Russian Ambassador 
refused to participate) held in Vienna in 1853-54 by way of mediation in the 
Russo-Turkish conflict. The second round failed to resolve the differences 
between the belligerents in the Crimean War. In mid-March 1855 representa­
tives of Austria, Britain, France, Turkey and Russia met at a higher level at the 

=====第743页=====
Notes 713 
Vienna Conference (Britain was represented by Special Envoy Lord John 
Russell, France by Foreign Minister Drouyn de Lhuys). That conference also 
produced no results (see Note 88). p. 32 
In the battle of Inkerman in the Crimea (November 5, 1854) the Anglo-French 
forces defeated the Russian army, but the Russians' vigorous action compelled 
the enemy to refrain from storming Sevastopol and instead lay siege to the city. 
Engels described the battle in detail in his article "The Battle of Inkerman" 
(see present edition, Vol. 13, pp. 528-35). p. 34 
On January 29, 1855, Nicholas I issued a manifesto calling for the formation of 
a people's militia. It was to be recruited in 18 gubernias of Central Russia (not 
Southern Russia, as the article says) after the regular levy. p. 38 
See Note 10. p. 40 
Blue Books—periodically published collections of documents of the British 
Parliament and Foreign Office. Their publication began in the seventeenth 
century. p. 40 
See Note 88. p. 41 
At the end of January 1855, John Roebuck submitted a motion in the House 
of Commons calling for the establishment of a committee to inquire into the 
condition of the British army in the Crimea and the work of the government 
departments responsible for its maintenance. Discussion of the motion led to a 
government crisis and the resignation of Aberdeen's Cabinet (see Marx's article 
"Comments on the Cabinet Crisis", present edition, Vol. 13, pp. 603-04). After 
forming a new ministry in February 1855 Palmerston approved Roebuck's 
motion, but the Peelites Graham, Gladstone and Herbert, who had belonged to 
the former coalition government, resigned their posts in the new cabinet. As a 
result, Palmerston's government in its final form consisted mainly of Whigs. 
p/43 
See Note 7. p. 43 
This remark shows that Marx may have attended the sitting of the House of 
Commons on February 23, 1855. This would have enabled him to compare the 
speeches made there with the reports on the sitting published in The Times, No. 
21986,  February 24, 1855, and in other newspapers. p. 44 
The Four Points—demands made by the Western Powers on Russia as preli­
minary conditions for peace talks in their Note of August 8, 1854. Russia was 
required to renounce her protectorate over Moldavia, Wallachia and Serbia, 
which was to be replaced by an all-European guarantee; to grant freedom of 
navigation on the Danube; to agree to a revision of the London Convention of 
1841 on the closure of the Bosphorus and Dardanelles to the warships of all 
nations in peacetime, and to renounce its protection of Christians in Turkey. 
The Tsarist government at first rejected the Four Points but in November 1854 
was forced to accept them as the basis for future peace talks. The Four Points 
were discussed at the Vienna conferences of Ambassadors (see Note 34) but the 
attempts of the Western Powers to link the question of the Straits with demands 
for a reduction of the Russian Navy in the Black Sea caused the Russian 
Ambassador in Vienna, A. M. Gorchakov, to walk out of the talks. p. 44 
This refers to the debates in the British Parliament in 1845 on proposals to 
raise subsidies to the Catholic College in Maynooth (Ireland) which was 

=====第744页=====
714 Notes 
49 founded in 1795 with the assistance of Pitt the Younger. By supporting this 
college the British government sought to ingratiate itself with the Irish 
landlords, certain sections of the bourgeoisie and the clergy and thus split the 
Irish national movement. p. 45 
This refers to the Reform Bill, passed by the British House of Commons in 
1831 and finally approved by the House of Lords in June 1832. It gave the 
vote to owners and tenants of houses rated at £10 or over. The working class 
and the petty bourgeoisie—the main force in the struggle for reform—were 
denied suffrage. p. 47 
The People's Charter, which contained the demands of the Chartists, was 
published in the form of a Parliamentary Bill on May 8, 1838. It contained six 
points: universal suffrage (for men of 21 and over), annual parliaments, vote by 
ballot, equal electoral districts, abolition of the property qualification of MPs 
and payment of MPs. Petitions urging the adoption of the People's Charter 
were turned down by Parliament in 1839, 1842 and 1848. p. 47 
A reference to a radical political trend among the Free Traders which in 1849 
founded the National Parliamentary and Financial Reform Association. Its 
purpose was to agitate for the "Little Charter", a reform bill repeatedly 
submitted to Parliament by Joseph Hume between 1849 and 1851. In contrast 
to the People's Charter, it contained three points: voting rights for every tenant 
of a house or part of a house (Household Suffrage), triennial parliaments, and 
vote by ballot. By counterposing this programme to the demands of the 
Chartists while at the same time adopting, in an extremely curtailed form, some 
of these demands, the bourgeois radicals hoped to gain control of the working 
masses at a time when the Chartist movement was declining. However, most of 
the politically active workers, except for the reformist elements in the Chartist 
movement, including O'Connor's supporters, refused to support the Little 
Charter. In 1855 the National Parliamentary and Financial Reform Association 
disintegrated. p. 47 
This article was first published in English in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, 
On Britain, Moscow, 1953 under the title "Palmerston and the English 
Oligarchy". The title was provided by the editors. p. 49 
The Roman Emperor Caligula (A.D. 12-41) bestowed the consulship on his 
favourite horse. 
The Grand Moguls was the name given by Europeans to the rulers of an 
empire founded in Northern India in 1526 by Turkic conquerors then 
considered to be descendants of Genghis Khan's Mongolian warriors (hence the 
name "Moguls"). Although the empire fell into decline in the eighteenth 
century and came under British domination, its rulers retained nominal 
sovereignty until 1858. p. 49 
This refers to Russell's appointment as Britain's representative at the Vienna 
Conference, which was to open in March 1855 (see Note 88). p. 50 
Emancipation of the Catholics—in 1829 the British Parliament, under pressure of 
a mass movement in Ireland, lifted some of the restrictions curtailing the 
political rights of the Catholic population. Catholics were granted the right to 
be elected to Parliament and hold certain government posts. Simultaneously the 
property qualification for electors was increased fivefold. With the aid of this 
manoeuvre the British ruling classes hoped to win over to their side the upper 

=====第745页=====
Notes 715 
57 crust of the Irish bourgeoisie and Catholic landowners and thus split the Irish 
national movement. 
Repeal of the Corn Laws—see Note 14. 
The mass movement for Parliamentary reform in Britain (see Note. 45) 
developed in the late 1820s and early 1830s during Wellington's Tory Ministry. 
The reform was carried out by Grey's Whig Government (November 1830 to 
July 1834). p. 51 
Court of Queen's (King's) Bench—Britain's oldest judicial institution. In the 
nineteenth century (up to 1873) it was an independent high court for criminal 
and civil cases and also supervised the lower courts. Subsequently its 
competence was limited to civil disputes. p. 51 
This version of the article first appeared in English translation in Karl Marx 
and Frederick Engels, Articles on Britain, Moscow, 1971. The other version 
entitled "The Crisis in England" was written by Marx for the New-York Daily 
Tribune in English. It is reproduced in this volume in its original form. 
p. 53 
A reference to the overthrow of the Stuart dynasty and the enthronement, 
together with his wife Mary, daughter of the deposed Stuart King James II, of 
William III of Orange, after which constitutional monarchy was consolidated in 
Britain on the basis of a compromise between the landed aristocracy and the 
finance bourgeoisie. p. 54 
The term "millocracy" (mi// + the Greek kratia) was first used by Thomas 
Carlyle in his work Past and Present, published in 1843. 
Reform Bill of 1831—see Note 45. p. 54 
The 1834 Poor Law (an Act for the amendment and better administration of 
the laws relating to the poor in England and Wales) permitted only one form of 
aid to needy able-bodied persons—their enrolment in prison-type workhouses 
where they were engaged in monotonous and exhausting unproductive labour. 
The people nicknamed them Bastilles for the Poor. The law aimed at making 
the poor accept hard working conditions in industry, thus increasing the supply 
of cheap labour. 
Repeal of the Corn Laws—see Note 14. p. 54 
A reference to one of the biggest strikes by British workers in the 1850s. In 
August 1853, the weavers and spinners at the cotton mills of Preston and its 
environs walked out demanding a 10 per cent increase in wages. They were 
supported by workers in other trades. In September the Associated Masters 
retaliated by organising a lockout. About 25,000 of Preston's 30,000 workers 
stayed away from work. Thanks to the relief given them by workers in other 
cities,  they were able to hold out for more than 36 weeks. In February 1854, 
the lockout was lifted but the strike continued. To bring it to an end the 
Associated Masters began importing workers from Ireland and the English 
workhouses. In March, the leaders of the strike were arrested. As their funds 
ran out, workers were forced to return to the mills. The strike ended in May. 
p. 55 
The Irish Brigade was the name given to the Irish faction in the British 
Parliament from the 1830s to 1850s. Up to 1847, the Irish Brigade was led by 
Daniel O'Connell. As neither the Tories nor the Whigs had a decisive majority 
the Brigade was able to tip the balance in Parliament and sometimes even 
decide the fate of the government. 

=====第746页=====
716 Notes 
In the early fifties, a number of MPs belonging to this faction formed an 
alliance with the radical Irish Tenant-Right League and set up what they called 
an Independent Opposition in the House of Commons. However, the leaders 
of the Irish Brigade soon made a deal with the British ruling circles, securing 
some secondary posts in Aberdeen's Coalition Government and refusing to 
support the League's demands. This demoralised the Independent Opposition 
and ultimately led to its collapse (1859). p. 58 
By altering the beginning of this article the editors of the New-York Daily 
Tribune gave the impression that it had been written in America. Some other 
contributions by Marx and Engels published as leading articles in this 
newspaper were also edited in this way. p. 59 
See Note 32. p. 62 
The sale of commissions in the English army dated back to the late seventeenth 
century and was maintained up to 1871. It ensured that members of the 
English aristocracy held a dominant position in the army. p. 63 
The Mutiny Act was passed by Parliament annually from 1689 to 1881, 
empowering the Crown to maintain a standing army and navy of a fixed size, 
prescribe manuals and regulations for the army and navy, set up courts martial 
and establish a system of punishment for mutiny, refusal to obey orders, 
infringements of discipline, etc. The first Mutiny Act was passed in connection 
with riots in the British Army. p. 63 
Simony (from Simon Magus, an allusion to his offer of money to the Apostles, 
Acts 8, 9:24)—the practice of selling or buying ecclesiastical preferments, etc. 
in the Middle Ages. Advocates of ecclesiastical reform challenged it as early as 
the twelfth century. p. 64 
Revolutionary action by gold-diggers took place in Victoria in November and 
December 1854. On November 29, licences were burnt at a gold-diggers' 
meeting. On December 2, an armed clash occurred between the insurgents and 
troops. Also in December the Ballarat Reform League was set up which 
formulated the insurgents' demands: abolition of gold-digging licences, release 
of the gold-diggers arrested for setting fire to the hotel, and political reforms 
including four of the six Chartist points. Although the uprising was suppressed 
and martial law introduced, some of the insurgents' demands had to be 
granted. p. 64 
An allusion to the system of extortionate taxes levied by the British Parliament 
and Government on the North American colonies — the high tariff on sugar 
imports (introduced in 1764), the stamp duty (1765), the exorbitant customs 
duties on imports from England, etc. It was bitterly resented by the local 
bourgeoisie and the masses in the colonies and was one of the factors that led 
to the War of Independence (1775-83) in the course of which the United States 
of America was formed. p. 65 
The Riot Act—an Act passed in 1715 on the maintenance of public peace and 
order. It empowered the local authorities to disperse assemblages of "trouble­
makers" by force and charge them with felony. The Act obliged the authorities 
to read part of it to those assembled and to open fire if the latter refused to 
disperse within an hour. p. 66 
On March 5, 1855, The Times published a letter by the English doctor 
Augustus Bozzi Granville (later reprinted by other London newspapers) in 

=====第747页=====
Notes 717 
70 
71 which he maintained that he had predicted the imminent death of the Tsar in a 
conversation with Palmerston as early as July 6, 1853. The letter was reported 
in the Neue Oder-Zeitung on March 9, 1855. p. 68 
The Pythia—a priestess and prophetess of Apollo at Delphi. p. 68 
A reference to the aggravation of Anglo-French differences in the Middle East 
during the Turko-Egyptian war of  1839-41.  The conclusion, without French 
participation, of the London Convention of July 15, 1840 (see Note 20) on aid 
by the Western Powers to the Sultan in his struggle against the Egyptian ruler 
Mehemet Ali created the danger of war breaking out between Britain and 
France. Fearing the formation of an anti-French coalition, France was forced to 
discontinue its support for Egypt. p. 71 
In 1846 the Guizot Government managed to arrange the marriage of the 
Spanish infanta Maria Luisa Fernanda to Louis Philippe's youngest son, the 
Duke of Montpensier, and thwart Britain's plans to marry Leopold of Coburg 
to Queen Isabella II of Spain. The tension between the British and French 
governments over these marriage projects became very acute and after the 
failure of British diplomacy Palmerston sought a pretext to take revenge. 
p. 71 
The Treaty of Utrecht of 1713 was one of a series of peace treaties concluding 
the war of the Spanish succession, which had been waged from 1701 between 
France and Spain, on the one hand, and the countries of the anti-French 
coalition (Britain, the Netherlands, Portugal, Prussia, Savoy and Habsburg 
Austria), on the other. Austria did not sign the treaty and made peace with 
France at Rastatt in 1714. Under the terms of the treaty, Philip V, the Bourbon 
King of Spain and Louis XIV's grandson, retained the Spanish crown. The 
King of France was to renounce his right and that of his successors from the 
Bourbon dynasty to the Spanish crown. Several French and Spanish possessions 
in the West Indies and North America, as well as Gibraltar, passed into 
Britain's hands. 
When he accused France in 1846 of violating the treaty of Utrecht, 
Palmerston had in mind Louis Philippe's plans for uniting the two monarchies 
through the marriage of his youngest son and the Spanish infanta. p. 71 
This article was first published in English in Marx, Engels, Ireland and the Irish 
Question, Moscow, 1971. p. 78 
See Note 58. p. 78 
A reference to the agreement concluded in February 1835 by Daniel O'Connell, 
leader of the liberal wing of the Irish national movement, with the leaders of 
the Whig party. The negotiations had been held in the house of Lord Lichfield 
in London. Under the agreement, Irish liberals were to get certain 
administrative posts. O'Connell, for his part, promised to call off the mass 
campaign for the repeal of the Anglo-Irish Union of 1801 which abolished the 
autonomy of the Irish Parliament, and to support the Whigs in the British 
Parliament. p. 78 
The repeal of the Anglo-Irish Union of 1801. In the 1820s repeal became the 
most popular slogan in Ireland. In 1840 the Repeal Association was set up. Its 
leader, Daniel O'Connell, sought a compromise with the British ruling circles. 
In January 1847 a group of radicals broke away from the Association and 

=====第748页=====
718 Notes 
formed the Irish Confederation. Its left, revolutionary wing led the national 
liberation movement and became the target of severe reprisals in 1848. 
Eventually, the Repeal Association broke up completely. p. 78 
See Note 7. p. 78 
See Note 51. p. 79 
Between 1845 and 1847 potato blight was the occasion of widespread famine in 
Ireland. The poverty of the small tenants ruthlessly exploited by the big 
landowners made the mass of the population almost entirely dependent on a 
diet of potatoes grown on their own little patches. Meanwhile the British 
Government not only withheld any effective form of  relief,  but exported large 
quantities of grain and other agricultural products from Ireland to England. 
About one million people starved to death, and the wave of emigration caused 
by the famine swept away another million. Large areas of Ireland were 
depopulated. The abandoned land was turned by English and Irish landlords 
into pasture. 
In 1848 a popular national liberation uprising was being prepared in 
Ireland by the revolutionary wing of the Irish Confederation (Mitchel, Lalor, 
Reilly and others). In May 1848 the British authorities took severe reprisals 
against the movement, leaving it virtually leaderless. The vacillating Confedera­
tion leaders (Smith O'Brien and others) missed the right moment for action. 
Instead of a country-wide insurrection, isolated and often unprepared uprisings 
occurred in a number of towns and agricultural areas in late July 1848, which 
were quickly put down by troops. 
In 1849 Parliament passed the Encumbered Estates Act for Ireland, which 
was supplemented by a series of other Acts in 1852 and 1853. The 1849 Act 
provided for the sale of mortgaged estates by auction if their owners were 
proved to be insolvent. As a result, the lands of many ruined landlords passed 
into the hands of usurers, middlemen and rich tenants. p. 80 
A version of this article headlined "Krimsche Angelegenheiten" ("Crimean 
Affairs") and dated March 16, 1855 appeared in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 131, 
on March 19, 1855. It was marked with the sign X, In translating Engels' article 
into German Marx abridged it slightly and made a few changes (the more 
important ones are indicated in the footnotes). p. 81 
This refers to the landing in Eupatoria on February 9, 1855 of Turkish troops 
transferred from Bulgaria and commanded by Omer Pasha. They comprised 
two Turkish and one Egyptian divisions, two squadrons and two field batteries 
with a total strength of 21,600. p. 83 
The text of this article, written by Engels for the New-York Daily Tribune, was 
included by Marx, in his own translation and with a number of alterations and 
additions, in his report "Criticism of the French Conduct of the War" 
published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung on March 20, 1855. Marx's version is 
published in this volume on pages  90-93. 
The New-York Daily Tribune version was reproduced in full by Marx's 
daughter, Eleanor Marx-Aveling, and Edward Aveling in the collection The 
Eastern Question. A Reprint of Letters written 1853-1856 dealing with the events of 
the Crimean War, London, 1897. Marx was given as the author of all the articles 
in the collection as they were published in the New-York Daily Tribune either 
with his signature or unsigned. The publication of the Marx-Engels correspon­
dence in 1913 (Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Stuttgart, 

=====第749页=====
Notes 719 
87 1913) revealed that a considerable number of the articles sent by Marx to the 
Tribune had been written by Engels. 
The first sentence in this article was supplied by the editors of the New-York 
Daily Tribune. The reference is to the extracts from the pamphlet De la conduite 
de la guerre d'Orient which were reprinted in English translation in the New-York 
Daily Tribune, No. 4350, on March 29, 1855 under the heading "Secret History 
of the Crimean Expedition. Its Origin and Blunders. Revelations of Prince 
Napoleon". p. 86 
Engels is referring to the battles of Balaklava and Inkerman (see notes 10 
and 35). p. 87 
On May 21 and 22, 1809 at Aspern, on the left bank of the Danube near 
Vienna, Napoleon I's troops lost a battle to the Austrian army commanded by 
Archduke Charles. However, Napoleon succeeded in saving his troops from 
destruction by withdrawing from the left bank. On July 5 and 6 he defeated 
the Austrians at Wagram. Napoleonic France won the war against the Fifth 
Coalition (Austria, Britain, Spain and Portugal). p. 88 
In a full-scale battle fought at Leipzig from October 16 to 19, 1813, the forces 
of the coalition of European Powers formed after Napoleon's expulsion from 
Russia in 1812 (Russia, Austria, Prussia, Britain, Sweden and others) inflicted a 
decisive defeat on the army of Napoleonic France and her allies. p. 88 
An allusion to Louis Bonaparte's abortive putsch in Strasbourg on October 30, 
1836.  Aided by several Bonapartist officers he succeeded in persuading two 
artillery regiments of the Strasbourg garrison to mutiny. The mutineers were 
disarmed in a matter of hours. p. 88 
On the Eighteenth Brumaire (November 9) 1799 a coup d'état was staged in 
France which resulted in the establishment of Napoleon Bonaparte's military 
dictatorship. On June 14, 1800 Napoleon's troops defeated an Austrian army at 
Marengo (Northern Italy). This first major victory by Napoleon after the coup 
consolidated his power. 
The second edition of the Eighteenth Brumaire —Louis Bonaparte's 
counter-revolutionary coup d'état of December 2, 1851—led to the establish­
ment of the Bonapartist Second Empire in France. p. 91 
The memorandum handed by Britain, France and Austria to Russia's 
Ambassador in Vienna, Prince Alexander Gorchakov, during the Vienna 
Conference on the terms for peace negotiations (see Note 34). p. 94 
The Vienna Conference was to work out the terms for peace between the 
participants in the Crimean War. It was attended by Russia, Britain, France, 
Austria and Turkey and lasted, with intervals, from March 15 to June 4, 1855. 
The negotiations centred on the Four Points (see Note 43). While agreeing, 
with certain reservations, to Points 1, 2 and 4, Russia emphatically rejected 
Point 3 which, as interpreted by the Western Powers, called for a reduction of 
the Russian Navy in the Black Sea. Britain and France insisted on its acceptance 
and turned down Austria's compromise proposal that Russia and Turkey 
should be allowed to agree between themselves on the size of their naval forces 
in the Black Sea. The Conference ended without adopting any decisions. 
p. 94 
The Peace Society (the Society for Promoting Permanent and Universal 
Peace)—an organisation founded by the Quakers in London in 1816. It was 

=====第750页=====
720 Notes 
90 
93 
97 strongly supported by the Free Traders, who believed that, given peace, free 
trade would enable Britain to make full use of her industrial superiority and 
thus gain economic and political supremacy. p. 96 
The Ten Hours Bill, passed by the British Parliament on June 8, 1847, applied 
only to adolescents and women and was ignored by many manufacturers. 
In February 1850 the Court of Chancery (one of Britain's high courts) 
acquitted a number of manufacturers accused of infringing the Ten Hours Bill. 
This ruling caused protests from the workers. On August 5, 1850 Parliament 
passed a new Bill which stipulated a ten-and-a-half-hour working day for 
women and adolescents and fixed the beginning and end of the working day. 
p. 97 
This article was first published in English in the collection Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles on Britain, Moscow, Progress Publishers, 1971, pp. 
229-32.  p. 98 
For details on the People's Charter see Note 46. Echoing the Chartist speakers at 
the meeting, Marx further mentions the Charter's five basic demands, omitting 
the sixth — payment of MPs. p. 99 
See Note 10. p. 102 
See Note 35. p. 102 
See Note 88. p. 102 
See Note 7. p. 103 
A reference to the protocols signed by Britain, France, Austria and Prussia at 
the Vienna Conferences. 
The protocol of December 5, 1853 proposed that Turkey enter into peace 
talks with Russia through the mediation of the four Powers (for details see Note 
170). 
The protocol of January 13, 1854 urged Russia to settle its military conflict 
with Turkey and informed the Russian government of the Porte's readiness for 
peace talks. 
The protocol of April 9, 1854 demanded from Russia the immediate 
evacuation of its troops from the Danùbian Principalities and a guarantee of 
the continued existence of the Ottoman Empire. p. 104 
This refers to the London conventions of 1840 (see Note 20) and 1841. The 
latter was signed, on July 13, 1841, by Britain, Russia, Austria, Prussia and 
Turkey, and also by France which, faced with the prospect of an anti-French 
coalition, was forced to withdraw its support for the Egyptian ruler Mehemet 
Ali, who had attacked the Sultan, and join the Powers in backing the latter. 
The convention also stipulated that the Bosphorus and Dardanelles were to be 
closed to the warships of all Powers in peacetime. p. 105 
See Note 43. p. 106 
The treaty of alliance between Britain, France and Austria signed in Vienna on 
December 2, 1854. The signatories undertook not to enter into any agreements 
with Russia without preliminary consent between themselves and not to allow 
the occupation of the Danubian Principalities by Russian troops. Negotiations 
with Russia were to be based on the Four Points. By means of this treaty 
Britain and France sought to draw Austria into the war against Russia. Austria, 

=====第751页=====
Notes 721 
for its part, hoped to use the alliance to strengthen its influence in the Balkans 
and subjugate the Danubian Principalities. p. 106 
An extract from this article by Engels, and his next article, "The Battle at 
Sevastopol", were included by Marx, in abridged form, in the report "Ueber die 
letzten Vorgänge in der Krim" ("On the Latest Events in the Crimea"), which was 
dated March 23, 1855 and published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 143, on 
March 26. The more important different readings in the English and German 
versions are indicated in the footnotes. 
The present article was included in The Eastern Question. 
p. 109 
"Les singes", which means "monkeys" and also "buffoons" and "superiors", 
was the name given to pro-Napoleonic generals. Marx mentioned the fact in a 
letter to Engels of September 13, 1854 and in several articles for the New-York 
Daily Tribune (see present edition, Vols. 13 and 39). p. 109 
Prince Jerome Bonaparte, Junior, commanded a division in the Crimea in 
1854.  Disapproving of the Crimean expedition, lacking military talent and 
unpopular with the army, he feigned sickness to stay away from directing 
military operations and later returned to Paris without permission. p. 109 
On the German version of this article see Note 101. The first paragraph was 
presumably supplied by the editors of the New-York Daily Tribune. p. 113 
Marx is presumably referring to the visit of Lord Malmesbury, the former 
Foreign Secretary in Derby's Tory Cabinet, to Paris in March 1853 during 
which he was invited to dinner by Napoleon III and had a confidential talk 
with him on strengthening Anglo-French relations. p. 118 
St. James's Palace—royal residence in London since the late seventeenth 
century. Festive ceremonies and receptions were frequently held there. 
p. 121 
The Kuchuk-Kainarji peace treaty was concluded by Russia and Turkey on July 
21, 1774, following the former's victories in the Russo-Turkish war of 1768-74. 
Russia obtained part of the Northern shore of the Black Sea between the South 
Bug and the Dnieper with the fortress of Kinburn; she also got Azov, Kerch 
and Yenikale and compelled Turkey to recognise the independence of the 
Crimea, which facilitated its eventual incorporation into Russia. The Sultan 
undertook to grant a number of privileges to the Greek Orthodox Church. 
Article 14, in particular, provided for the building of an Orthodox church in 
Constantinople. p. 122 
See Note 6. p. 122 
The Demagogues were members of an opposition movement of German 
intellectuals. The word gained wide currency following the Carlsbad conference 
of Ministers of German states in August 1849, which adopted a special 
resolution against the intrigues of "demagogues". Here the reference is to the 
opponents of the counter-revolutionary monarchies restored in Europe after 
Napoleon's fall. p. 123 
Exeter Hall—a building in London, meeting place of religious and philan­
thropic societies. 
Puseyism—a trend within the Anglican Church between the 1830s and 
1860s. It was named after the Oxford theologian E. B. Pusey, who called for 

=====第752页=====
722 Notes 
the restoration of certain Catholic rites and dogmas. The Puseyites represented 
the interests of the aristocracy, which strove to retain its influence in opposition 
to the industrial bourgeoisie, which was on the whole Protestant. In particular, 
the Puseyites upheld the Catholic view of the Eucharist as the "transubstantia-
tion" of bread and wine into the true body and blood of Christ. In contrast to 
this, the other Anglican and Protestant trends regarded the bread and wine 
merely as symbols of the "true presence" of Christ's body and blood. 
p. 126 
See Note 35. p. 126 
This is an altered English version of Marx's article "The Committee of 
Inquiry" written for the Neue Oder-Zeitung (see this volume, pp. 124-27). 
p. 128 
A reference to Aberdeen's coalition ministry of 1852-55. This "Cabinet of All 
the Talents" included Whigs, Peelites (see Note 6) and representatives of the 
Irish faction in the British Parliament. p. 130 
This paragraph, especially its concluding part, shows signs of interference by 
the editors of the New-York Daily Tribune. p. 132 
The siege of Silistria (Silistra)—a fortress on the south bank of the Danube in 
Bulgaria—by Russian troops was one of the major operations in the Danubian 
theatre during the Crimean War. The siege began in the first half of May 
1854,  but in the fourth week of June the Russian troops withdrew beyond the 
Danube in view of the hostile attitude of Austria, which had concentrated 
considerable forces behind the Russian lines. A description of the fighting in 
this area was given in the articles "The Russian Retreat" by Marx and Engels 
and "The Siege of Silistria" by Engels (see present edition, Vol. 13, pp. 253-57 
and 234-45). p. 134 
This is an altered German version of Engels' article "Progress of the War". 
The text was translated and edited by Marx. p. 136 
This would seem to refer to the fighting between the Turkish and Russian 
forces that took place at Kalafat, in the Danubian theatre of war, in 
mid-January 1854. p. 136 
Bashi-bazouks—irregular detachments of the Turkish army in the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries; the name was also given to troops noted for their 
lack of discipline and for their cruelty and looting. p. 136 
The system of recruitment in force in France until 1872 (abolished by the 
French Revolution but reintroduced by Napoleon I) enabled members of the 
propertied classes called up for the army to hire substitutes. In an attempt to 
tighten its control over the armed forces the Bonapartist government in April 
1855 introduced the law of "dotation", under which substitutes, unless close 
relations of the draftee, were to be provided by the state. In return the person 
exempted from service was to contribute a fixed sum to the "army dotation" 
fund p. 139 
Under the heading "Prospect in France and England" this article (minus the 
first sentence) was included in The Eastern Question. 
The opening sentence was presumably contributed by the editors of the 
New-York Daily Tribune in an attempt to provide some sort of explanation for 
the long absence of articles signed by Marx. At the time, most of Marx's articles 

=====第753页=====
Notes 723 
122 
126 
127 were published as editorials. It may be assumed that in this particular case the 
editors printed the article under Marx's name as they did not want to be 
identified with the revolutionary proletarian attitude clearly expressed in the 
article. p. 141 
See Note 88. p. 141 
See Note 6. p. 143 
The Peace Society—see Note 89. By "peace party" Marx means the Free 
Traders or the Manchester School (see Note 7). p. 143 
See Notes 2, 35 and 10. p. 144 
A reference to the heroic uprising of Paris workers in June 1848. It was the 
first civil war between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie in history. The defeat 
of the uprising was followed by a counter-revolutionary offensive in many 
European countries, including France  itself.  p. 145 
A German version of this article dated April 14, 1855 was published in the 
Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 177, on April 17 under the heading "Kritik des 
napoleonischen 'Moniteur'-Artikels" ("A Critique of Napoleon's Article in Le 
Moniteur").  The article was translated into German and edited-by Marx. The more 
important changes are indicated in the footnotes. 
Under the heading "Napoleon's Apology" the English version was included 
in The Eastern Question. 
The first sentence of the article in the New-York Daily Tribune shows 
editorial interference. It was evidently the editors who added the lines 
concerning the reprinting in the Tribune of passages from the Moniteur leading 
article (actually there was only a brief summary of the article in the "Letters 
from Europe" column of the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1035, April 
27, 1855). p. 146 
See Notes 22 and 107. p. 147 
In the battle of Baylen on July 20, 1808, during the Spanish war of 
independence (1808-14), the French troops commanded by General Dupont 
were encircled by the Spaniards and laid down their arms. 
At Culm (Bohemia) on August 29 and 30, 1813, during the war of the 
coalition of European Powers against Napoleonic France, the Austrian troops 
encircled and captured the French forces commanded by General Vandamme. 
p. 147 
A reference to Mivart's (Claridge's) Hotel, 42 Brook Street, London, where 
Louis Napoleon stayed from 1838 to 1840, during his banishment from France 
after the abortive coup in Strasbourg on October 30, 1836. p. 148 
A German version of this article dated April 15, 1855 appeared in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, No. 179, on April 18 under the heading "Die Affäre vom 23. März" 
("The March 23 Affair"). The text was translated and edited by Marx. Footnotes 
indicate the passages where the German version differs from the English. 
The reference to the publication of the French and English reports on the 
events of March 23, 1855 (second paragraph of the English version) was added 
by the editors of the New-York Daily Tribune. p. 151 
This article was written by Engels at Marx's request for simultaneous 
publication in the Neue Oder-Zeitung and New-York Daily Tribune. It was based 

=====第754页=====
724 Notes 
on Engels' studies of the language, literature and history of many Slav peoples, 
which he began after moving to Manchester in 1850. He read Pushkin's Eugene 
Onegin and Bronze Horseman and Griboyedov's Wit Works Woe in the original. 
His notes on the vocabulary of these works are extant, together with the 
passages he copied from a reader in Russian literature, and his notes on the 
history of Russia and Serbia. These preparatory materials and the references in 
Engels' articles to the works of many noted Slavists  — Dobrowsky, Kollâr, 
Mikloszic, Palacky, Safafik and others — bear witness to the intensity and 
fruitfulness of his studies, which enabled him to draw on numerous sources, 
including some in Slavic languages, in his analysis of the history, culture and 
national movements of the Slavs. 
As can be seen from the closing sentence of the second instalment of this 
article, Engels intended to continue his discussion of the subject, laying special 
emphasis on exposing the reactionary character of the Pan-Slavist ideas. He 
regarded them as an instrument of the great-power policies of the Habsburgs 
(Austro-Slavism) and a means of vindicating the aggressive tendencies of 
Russian Tsarism. In sending Engels' article to Eisner, the editor of the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, Marx wrote on April 17, 1855 that it was "the beginning of a 
polemic against Pan-Slavism" (see present edition, Vol. 39). However, no 
further articles on this subject appeared in the newspaper. 
Marx attached particular importance to publishing a critique of Pan-Slavist 
ideas in the New-York Daily Tribune because he considered it vital to counteract 
the influence of A. Gurowski, a propagandist of Pan-Slavism and apologist for 
Tsarist Russia, who contributed to the Tribune and had published several 
pamphlets on the subject, including the brochure Russia as It Is (1854). The 
two instalments of the present article were published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune on May 5 and 7 as separate articles under the headings "The 
European Struggle" (for this version, which differs considerably from that of 
the Neue Oder-Zeitung, see pp. 163-65 of this volume) and "Austria's 
Weakness". In the second English article several unwarranted changes were 
made by the Tribune editors who, among other things, inserted a whole 
paragraph extolling Gurowski's ideas. This version is therefore published in the 
Appendices, with the necessary explanations given in the notes (see pp. 689-93 
and Note 447). 
Between January and April 1856 Engels wrote fifteen articles on Pan-
Slavism for the New-York Daily Tribune, but the editorial board turned them 
down and in September sent them back to Marx. The manuscripts have not 
been preserved. Engels' plan for a pamphlet on Pan-Slavism, to be published in 
Germany, was not realised. p. 156 
The Ruthenians—the name given in nineteenth-century Western ethno­
graphical and historical literature to the Ukrainians of Galicia, the Eastern 
Carpathians and Bukovina, who were cut off at the time from the rest of the 
Ukrainian people. p. 157 
In listing the Carinthians and Croats with the Slovenes, Engels was basing 
himself on the then current system of classification of the South Slav peoples, 
which singled out an "Illyrian branch", comprising the Slavs who inhabited the 
north-western part of the Adriatic coast of the Balkan Peninsula and the 
adjoining areas captured in the Middle Ages by the Austrian Habsburgs (Styria, 
Carinthia, Carniola and others). A considerable section of the Slav population 
of these areas, including the Carinthians, does belong to the Slovenes, but the 
Croats are a Slav people in their own right. p. 157 

=====第755页=====
Notes 725 
The Slav Congress met in Prague on June 2, 1848. It was attended by 
representatives of the Slav countries forming part of the Austrian Empire. The 
Right, moderately liberal wing, to which Palacky and Safafik, the leaders of the 
Congress, belonged, sought to solve the national problem through autonomy 
of the Slav lands within the framework of the Habsburg monarchy. The Left, 
radical wing (Sabina, Fric, Libelt and others) wanted to act in alliance with the 
revolutionary-democratic movement in Germany and Hungary. Radical dele­
gates took an active part in the popular uprising in Prague (June 12-17, 1848), 
directed against the arbitrary rule of the Austrian authorities, and were 
subjected to cruel reprisals. On June 16, the moderate liberal delegates 
declared the Congress adjourned indefinitely. p. 159 
The Serbian insurrection against the arbitrary rule and brutal reprisals of the 
Turkish janissaries, which flared up in February 1804, developed into an 
armed struggle for Serbia's independence from Turkey. In the course of the 
insurrection a national government was set up and in 1808 Georgi Petrovic 
(Karageorge), the leader of the insurgents, was proclaimed hereditary 
supreme ruler of the Serbian people. The Serbian movement was greatly 
advanced by the successful operations of the Russian army in the Balkans 
during the Russo-Turkish war of 1806-12. Under the Bucharest peace treaty of 
1812 Turkey was to grant Serbia autonomy in domestic affairs, but taking 
advantage of Napoleon's invasion of Russia, the Sultan sent a punitive 
expedition to Serbia in 1813 and restored Turkish rule there. It was 
overthrown in 1815 as a result of a new Serbian insurrection and diplomatic 
support from Russia. After the Russo-Turkish war of 1828-29, which ended in 
the signing of the Adrianople peace treaty of 1829, Turkey recognised the 
autonomy, i.e. virtual independence, of the Serbian Principality by a special 
firman of the Sultan issued in 1830. p. 160 
This article is an altered version of part of the article "Germany and 
Pan-Slavism". The latter was written for the Neue Oder-Zeitung. Under the 
heading "Panslavism" the English version was printed in The Eastern Question. 
See Note 131. p. 163 
A reference to the adjournment of the Vienna Conference caused by 
disagreement between the participants on the Third Point of the terms 
presented to Russia (see Note 88). It was adjourned on April 26, 1855, 
following Russia's rejection of the Western Powers' demand that it should limit its 
naval forces in the Black Sea. It met for the last time on June 4, 1855. 
p. 163 
The Reform Movement—see Note 51. 
The Anti-Corn Law movement—see Note 14. 
The Bank Restriction Act, passed in 1797, introduced a compulsory rate for 
notes and abolished their convertibility into gold. These measures were 
re-introduced virtually in full in 1821 on the basis of an Act passed in 1819. 
p. 166 
The Association for Administrative Reform was set up in London in May 1855 
on the initiative of liberal circles in the City. Taking advantage of the outcry 
caused in the country by press reports and the findings of the Parliamentary 
Committee of Inquiry on the plight of the British army in the Crimea, the 
Association hoped by means of mass rallies to bring pressure to bear on 
Parliament and win broader access for members of the commercial and finance 
bourgeoisie to government posts, monopolised by the aristocracy. In their 

=====第756页=====
726 Notes 
campaign the Association's leaders sought to obtain the support of the 
Chartists. However, at rallies organised by the Association and at their own 
rallies the Chartists refused to back the moderate bourgeois demands for 
administrative reform and instead urged a Parliamentary reform based on the 
People's Charter (see Note 46). The administrative reform campaign was a 
failure, and the Association soon ceased to exist. In his subsequent reports 
Marx frequently touched on the Association's activities and relations with the 
Chartists. p. 167 
In Christoph Martin Wieland's Die Abderiten, eine sehr wahrscheinliche  Geschichte  a 
trifling dispute causes the population of the ancient Thracian city of Abdera to 
divide into two parties, the struggle between which nearly leads to the city's 
destruction. The first edition of the novel appeared in Weimar in 1774, the 
second, enlarged one, in 1781. p. 167 
In the 1806 general election the Radical James Pauli, a friend of William 
Cobbett's, was put forward as a candidate for Westminster. However, the 
authorities refused to endorse his nomination because of his denunciations of 
the Viceroy of India, Richard Wellesley. The Westminster electorate retaliated 
by returning to Parliament another Radical, Francis Burdett, who had actively 
defended Pauli. p. 168 
The Thirty Years' War (1618-48)—a war in which the Pope, the Spanish and 
Austrian Habsburgs and the Catholic German princes fought against the 
Protestant countries: Bohemia, Denmark, Sweden, the Republic of the 
Netherlands and a number of German states. The rulers of Catholic 
France—rivals of the Habsburgs—supported the Protestants. Germany was the 
main arena of this struggle, the object of pillage and territorial claims. The 
Treaty of Westphalia (1648) sealed her political dismemberment. p. 168 
Marx is referring to Pius IX, who between 1846 and early 1848 introduced a 
number of moderate liberal reforms in the Papal States in the interests of the 
nobility and the commercial and industrial bourgeoisie. In this way he sought 
to counteract the mounting revolutionary movement in Italy. p. 168 
A group of French deputies (called the Dynastic Opposition) headed by Odilon 
Barrot took part in the campaign of banquets for electoral reform conducted by 
the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois opposition in France on the eve of the 
February 1848 revolution. The group had joined the movement in an attempt to 
render it innocuous to the July monarchy. The Dynastic Opposition favoured 
moderate electoral reform as a means of preventing revolution and preserving the 
Orleans dynasty. p. 168 
An abridged and altered version of this article by Engels was published in the 
Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 217, on May 11, 1855, under the heading "Die 
Belagerung von Sebastopol" ("The Siege of Sevastopol"). It was marked with the 
sign X and dated May 8. The translation and editing were done by Marx. 
Footnotes indicate the passages where the German version differs from the 
English. p. 170 
The report turned out to be false. Engels stated this on the basis of verified 
data in his article "The Crimean War" (see this volume, pp. 201-07). The 
Russian fortifications mentioned were taken by the Allies on June 7, 1855. 
p. 170 
On April 28, 1855, Giovanni Pianori, an Italian revolutionary and associate of 
Garibaldi, shot at Napoleon III when the French Emperor was riding on 

=====第757页=====
Notes 727 
horseback in the Champs Elysées. The abortive attempt was provoked, among 
other things, by the part Louis Bonaparte played in 1849, when still President, 
in sending an expeditionary corps against the Roman Republic and crushing 
the Italian revolution. Pianori was executed in May 1855. p. 177 
A German version of Engels' article "The New Move in the Crimea" appeared 
in the Neue Oder-Zeitung under the heading "Der Feldzug in der Krim" ("The 
Campaign in the Crimea"), dated May 11. The translation and editing were done 
by Marx. 
The opening lines and further passages in the English version show 
alterations made by the editors of the New-York Daily Tribune. A comparison of 
the two versions reveals changes in the estimate of the strength of the Allied 
forces in the Crimea and a somewhat different presentation of figures, which 
was probably based on the reports of other Tribune correspondents, including 
A. Pulszky. However, the overall conclusions in the two versions are identical. 
p. 180 
The second half of this article beginning with the words "The anti-aristocratic 
movement" was first published in English under the heading "The Character 
of the Whigs and Tories" in Karl Marx, Surveys From Exile, Political Writings, 
Vol. 2, Harmondsworth, 1973. p. 186 
On May 14, 1855, Ellenborough moved in the House of Lords that a message 
be sent to the Queen informing her that the House was dissatisfied with the 
conduct of the Crimean War and that the success of the campaign could only 
be ensured by appointing deserving people to government posts. The proposal 
was discussed and rejected on the same day. p. 187 
The Anti-Corn Law League was founded by the Manchester factory owners 
Cobden and Bright in 1838. By demanding complete freedom of trade, the 
League fought for the abolition of the Corn Laws (see Note 14). In this way it 
sought to weaken the economic and political position of the landed aristocracy 
and lower the cost of living thus making possible a lowering of the workers' 
wages. The repeal of the Corn Laws under Peel's Tory government led to a 
split in the ranks of the Tories and facilitated the coming to power of the 
Whigs (1846). Having achieved its end, the League ceased to exist. p. 187 
See Note 139. p. 187 
The Act for a Seven-Year Parliament (the Septennial Act), passed by Parliament 
in the interests of the Whig oligarchy in 1716, extended the term of Parliament 
from three to seven years. 
By the latest Workhouse and Factory legislation the 1834 Poor Law is 
meant (see Note 56). p. 188 
A reference to the British naval expedition to the mouth of the Scheldt in 
1809,  during the war waged by the Fifth Coalition (Austria, Britain, Portugal 
and Spain) against Napoleonic France. The British captured Walcheren Island, 
but were unable to launch further operations and had to evacuate the island 
after about 10,000 of their landing party of 40,000 had died of hunger and 
disease. p. 190 
The rotten boroughs were sparsely populated constituencies which had retained 
the right to a seat in Parliament from the Middle Ages. In practice the election 
of MPs from the rotten boroughs depended on the landlords who controlled 
them. The 1832 Reform Act (see Note 45) deprived most of the rotten 

=====第758页=====
728 Notes 
boroughs of Parliamentary representation, but the old system of demarcating 
electoral districts, which favoured the landed aristocracy, was largely preserved. 
p. 192 
A reference to the London Chartist Organising Committee set up in February 
1855 as a successor to the Welcome and Protest Committee. The latter had 
been formed by Ernest Jones in October 1854 to arrange a festive welcome to 
London for Armand Barbes, a participant in the 1848 revolution in France 
who had been released from prison, and to organise a demonstration of protest 
against the proposed visit to London of Napoleon III, who was expected to 
come at about the same time. Together with the Executive of the National 
Charter Association the London Organising Committee worked for the revival 
of the Chartist movement in London and for closer international co-operation 
of democratic forces. The Committee included Ernest Jones, George Harrison, 
James Taylor and other noted Chartists. It set up a seven-man commission 
charged with the task of establishing international ties. Together with 
representatives of French, German and other refugees in London the 
commission formed an International Committee. At the end of 1855 the 
London Organising Committee was disbanded, and the International Commit­
tee was set up as an independent organisation. Renamed the International 
Association in 1856, it operated until 1859. p. 196 
In the battle of Jena (October 14, 1806) the French army, commanded by 
Napoleon, routed the Prussian army, thus forcing Prussia to surrender. 
p. 204 
This article was first published in English under the heading "On the Reform 
Movement" in Karl Marx, Surveys from Exile, Political Writings, Vol. 2, 
Harmondsworth, 1973. p. 208 
See Note 47. p. 209 
In July 1854, a French force commanded by Espinasse invaded the Dobruja. 
The expedition was a total failure. Many French soldiers died of cholera and 
other diseases. p. 212 
On the night of December 1, 1851, a battalion of the regiment commanded by 
Espinasse was on guard duty at the National Assembly. On December 2 
Espinasse, bribed by the Bonapartists, ordered his troops to occupy the 
Assembly building, thereby contributing to the success of Louis Bonaparte's 
coup d'état. p. 212 
A reference to Disraeli's statement in the House of Commons on May 22, 1855, 
that he would shortly submit for discussion a draft message to the Queen 
censuring the Palmerston government's vacillating policy on the issue of war 
and peace. A motion to this effect was in fact tabled on May 24 and evoked a 
lively debate in Parliament. Marx described this debate in a number of his 
articles (see this volume, pp. 227-36, 245-48 and 257-59). p. 213 
See Notes 88 and 137. p. 214 
Marx included this article in an abridged and somewhat revised form in his 
report for the Neue Oder-Zeitung headlined "Prologue at Lord Palmerston's.— 
Course of the Latest Events in the Crimea", which is published in this volume 
as a joint article by Marx and Engels (see pp. 218-21). p. 215 
The section of this article dealing with the latest events in the Crimea (up to 

=====第759页=====
Notes 729 
the last but one paragraph, which describes the circumstances of Pélissier's 
appointment) is an abridged German version of Engels' article "The New 
French Commander", published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4414, on 
June 12, 1855 (see this volume, pp. 215-17). The editing and translation were 
done by Marx. p. 218 
See Note 162. p. 218 
See Note 162. p. 222 
On May 11, 1855, T. M. Gibson stated in the House of Commons that he was 
going to submit for discussion a draft message to the Queen expressing the desire 
for a successful conclusion of the Vienna Conference and for an honourable 
peace. p. 223 
A reference to the third of the Four Points put forward by the Allies as terms 
for peace talks with Russia (see Note 43). It was interpreted by Western 
diplomats as calling for a limitation of the Russian naval forces in the Black Sea 
and was rejected by Russia's representatives at the Vienna Conference (see 
Notes 88 and 137). p. 228 
On December 5, 1853, the British, French and Prussian representatives at the 
Vienna Conference and the Austrian Foreign Minister Buol signed a protocol 
under which Notes were sent to Turkey and Russia offering Western mediation 
in settling the Russo-Turkish dispute. The following terms were stipulated as a 
basis for negotiations: evacuation by Russia of Moldavia and Wallachia, renewal 
of the former Russo-Turkish treaties, a guarantee of the rights of Christians by 
all European powers, and reform of Turkey's administrative system, p. 228 
See Note 107. - p. 229 
See Note 43. p. 229 
Probabilism—a theory that, truth being unattainable, all knowledge can only be 
probable. According to it, any action is permissible since some kind of plausible 
justification can always be found for it. p. 231 
See Note 43. p. 232 
See Note 110. p. 233 
See Note 107. p. 235 
Categorical imperative—the basic concept of the ethics of the German 
philosopher Immanuel Kant (1724-1804). It denotes the moral obligation of the 
individual to act according to rules that could serve as principles of universal 
legislation. p. 236 
See Note 43. p. 238 
This article was first published in English under the heading "The Association 
for Administrative Reform.— People's Charter" in Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, On Britain, Moscow, 1962. p. 240 
See Note 139. p. 240 
The alignment of class forces in France after the defeat of the uprising of Paris 
workers in June 1848 enabled the Bonapartist circles to take advantage of 
universal suffrage in order to get Louis Napoleon elected President (December 
10, 1848). On May 31, 1850, the French Legislative Assembly abolished 

=====第760页=====
730 Notes 
186 universal suffrage. Louis Napoleon demagogically used the slogan of its 
restoration in staging his coup d'état on December 2, 1851. An analysis of these 
events is given in Marx's The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 (see present 
edition, Vol. 10) and The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (Vol.11). 
p. 242 
In 1842 the radical and liberal Free-Trade circles made several attempts to 
enlist the working-class movement in the campaign for the repeal of the Corn 
Laws and for moderate reforms. To distract the workers from the struggle 
for the implementation of the Chartists' social and political programme, they 
put forward the vague demand for "full suffrage". With the aid of some 
conciliatory Chartist leaders (Lovett, Vincent and others) the radicals suc­
ceeded in convening in Birmingham two conferences of representatives of the 
bourgeoisie and Chartists (in April and December 1842) which discussed joint 
campaigns for electoral reform. However, on December 27 the Chartist 
majority at the conferences rejected the proposal to replace the People's 
Charter with a new "Bill of Rights" and the demand for "full suffrage". From 
then onwards the Charter was the exclusive demand of the proletarian masses. 
p. 243 
See Note 88. p. 245 
On the Peelites see Note 6. 
On the Manchester School see Note 7. p. 246 
The works of Thomas Hobbes were published in 1839-45, eleven volumes in 
English and five in Latin, by Molesworth. p. 247 
A reference to the Protocol of December 5, 1853 (see Note 97). 
On the Four Points see Note 43. p. 248 
The opening lines of the first and third paragraphs (the references to the 
reports brought by the Asia and to those received from Halifax, as well as to 
the publication in the preceding issue—No. 4424, June 22, 1855—of reports 
on the fighting in the Crimea) were added by the Tribune editors. The article 
was reproduced by Marx in German translation and with some alterations in 
his report published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung on June 11, 1855, under the 
heading "Zur Kritik der Vorgänge in der Krim" ("A Critique of the Events in the 
Crimea"). p. 249 
This article is, in part, a German version of Engels' report "From the Crimea" 
written for the New-York Daily Tribune (see this volume, pp. 249-52). The 
translation and editing were done by Marx. The description of the Allies' 
expedition to the Sea of Azov, their landing of May 25, 1855, and the capture 
of Kerch and Yenikale may have been taken from the same report, the relevant 
passage of which might have been left out by the Tribune editors because reports 
on this expedition had been published in the paper earlier (see the leading articles 
"From the Crimea" and "The Crimean War" in the New-York Daily Tribune, 
Nos.  4415 and 4422, June 14 and 21, 1855). p. 253 
See Note 151. p. 259 
The first paragraph of this article (the reference to the publication of the 
dispatches by General Pélissier and Lord Raglan under the common heading 
"The Recent Successes Before Sevastopol" in the New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 4428, June 28, 1855) was added by the Tribune editors. 

=====第761页=====
Notes 731 
An abridged version of this article with a few editorial changes by Marx 
(dated June 12, 1855 and marked with the sign X) was published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung on June 15 under the heading "Kritik der Krimschen Unter­
nehmungen" ("Criticism of the Operations in the Crimea"). p. 260 
After the defeat of the Prussian troops by Napoleon's army at Jena and 
Auerstadt in the autumn of 1806, many Prussian fortresses surrendered to the 
advancing French without a fight. However, the garrison of Colberg (Polish 
name: Kolobrzeg) on the Baltic coast offered staunch resistance. The siege 
began in mid-March 1807 and lasted for three and a half months. The defence, 
directed by Gneisenau, was supported by Schill's guerrilla detachment, 
operating behind the French lines. 
The fortress of Danzig (Gdansk), occupied by the French after their defeat 
in Russia in 1812, was besieged by the Russians and Prussians from land and 
sea in early 1813. The garrison withstood three regular sieges, but was 
ultimately forced to surrender. On January 2, 1814, the Allied troops entered 
the city. p. 261 
After the successful start of the North Italian campaign by General Bonaparte's 
army in the spring of 1796—a series of victories over the Austrians, the defeat 
of their allies, the Piedmontese, and the capture of Lombardy's capital, 
Milan—its advance was arrested by the resistance of Mantua. In June the 
French beleaguered the fortress. At the same time, Napoleon had to use some 
of his men for active operations against the Austrian troops attempting to 
relieve the city. It was only after a nine-month siege and the defeat of the 
Austrian relief army that the Mantua garrison surrendered (February 2, 1797). 
Danzig (Gdansk) was besieged by the French in March 1807, in the course 
of Napoleonic France's war against the Fourth European coalition (Prussia, 
Russia, Britain and Sweden). The garrison, consisting of Prussian troops and a 
Russian detachment, offered stiff resistance, supported by the attempts of 
another Russian detachment to break the siege from without. The fortress 
surrendered to the superior French forces at the end of May 1807. p. 262 
The text of this article by Engels was translated by Marx into German and 
included, with a certain amount of editing, in two reports for the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung: "The Debate on Layard's Motion.—The War in the Crimea", 
dated June 16 and published June 19, 1855 and "The Local War.— Debate on 
Administrative Reform.— Report of the Roebuck Committee, etc.", dated June 20 
and published June 23, 1855. The two reports are therefore published here as 
written jointly by Marx and Engels (see this volume, pp. 277-79 and 287-91). 
p. 267 
A reference to the French intervention against the Roman Republic which led 
to the latter's fall (July 1849) and the restoration of the temporal power of the 
Pope. Louis Napoleon, as President of the French Republic, was one of the 
organisers of the intervention. p. 267 
See Note 43. p. 268 
The Treaties of Tilsit—the peace treaties concluded on July 7 and 9, 1807 by 
Napoleonic France with Russia and Prussia, members of the Fourth anti-French 
coalition which was defeated in the campaigns of 1806 and 1807. In an attempt 
to divide the defeated powers, Napoleon made no territorial claims on Russia 
and even managed to have part of Prussia's Eastern possessions (the Bialystok 
region) transferred to it. At the same time, harsh terms were imposed on 

=====第762页=====
732 Notes 
Prussia, who lost nearly half its territory to the German states dependent on 
France, was obliged to pay an indemnity, had its army limited, etc. However, 
Russia, as well as Prussia, had to sever its alliance with Britain and, to its own 
disadvantage, join the Continental System. Napoleon formed the vassal Duchy 
of Warsaw on Polish territory seized by Prussia during the partitions of Poland 
in the late eighteenth century, and planned to use the duchy as a bridgehead in 
the event of war with Russia. The further aggravation of Russo-French 
differences led to Napoleon's campaign against Russia in 1812. p. 269 
A reference to the Austro-Prussian treaty of April 20, 1854, obliging the two 
states to take joint action against Russia in the event of her refusing to evacuate 
the Danubian Principalities or of the Russian troops' advancing further in the 
Balkans. p. 271 
Lower Empire (Bas Empire)—the name given in historical literature to the 
Eastern Roman Empire (Byzantine Empire); also used with reference to states 
at the stage of decline or disintegration. Here an allusion to the Second Empire 
in France. p. 271 
Acting on instructions from the Home Secretary James Graham, the British 
authorities in 1844 opened the correspondence of a number of Italian 
revolutionary refugees, including letters from the Bandiera brothers to Mazzini 
in which they set forth their plan for an expedition to Calabria to organise an 
uprising against the Neapolitan Bourbons and Austrian rule in Italy. In June 
1844 the members of the expedition, betrayed by one of their number, were 
arrested. The Bandiera brothers were shot. p. 273 
See Note 139. p. 274 
This article has not been found. p. 274 
In this report Marx drew on Engels' article "Napoleon's War Plans" written for 
the New-York Daily Tribune (see this volume, pp. 267-72). p. 277 
In his House of Commons speech on June 15, 1855, Layard tabled a resolution 
stating that the traditional practice of appointing members of influential 
families to government posts had caused incalculable harm to the country and 
was discrediting the nation. Layard's motion, discussed on June 15 and 18, was 
rejected. p. 277 
See Note 43. p. 278 
The Vienna Congress of European monarchs and their Ministers (September 
1814 to June 1815) concluded the wars of the European coalition against 
Napoleonic France. It was attended by representatives of all European states, 
except Turkey. The congress revealed sharp differences between the principal 
participants: Russia and Prussia, on the one hand, and Austria, Britain and 
France, on the other. The extremely protracted negotiations were accompanied 
by endless balls, masquerades and theatrical events. The decisions of the 
congress (further in the text Marx calls them the Vienna treaty, meaning the 
sum total of international acts, including the Final Act of June 9, 1815) helped 
re-install several royal dynasties overthrown during the French Revolution and 
the Napoleonic wars, sealed the political disunity of Germany and Italy, 
sanctioned the annexation of Belgium by Holland and the partition of Poland, 
and outlined measures to combat the revolutionary and national liberation 
movement, thereby preparing the ground for the Holy Alliance, a counter­
revolutionary union of European monarchs. p. 283 

=====第763页=====
Notes 733 
208 
213 
214 
215 Marx is referring to the secret treaty of alliance against Russia and Prussia 
signed by France, Austria and Britain in the Austrian capital on January 3, 
1815,  during the Congress of Vienna. Along with Chancellor Metternich of 
Austria and British Foreign Secretary Castlereagh, an important part in 
preparing the treaty was played by Talleyrand-Périgord, the French representa­
tive at the Congress, who sought to exploit the differences between the 
members of the former anti-Napoleonic coalition. The formation of the 
Anglo-Austro-French alliance forced Prussia to reduce her claims on the 
Kingdom of Saxony and with regard to the Polish lands. p. 283 
The treaties signed by Russia, Prussia and Austria in Vienna on May 3, 1815, 
and the Final Act of the Congress of Vienna, signed on June 9, 1815, 
sanctioned the abolition of the Duchy of Warsaw, set up by Napoleon in 1807, 
and a new partition of the Polish lands between Austria, Prussia and Russia. 
p. 284 
See Note 198. p. 286 
The last paragraph of this article was presumably added by the New-York Daily 
Tribune editors. p. 286 
In this report Marx drew on Engels' article "Napoleon's War Plans", which was 
written for the New-York Daily Tribune (see this volume, pp. 267-72). p. 287 
See Note 196. p. 288 
Speaking in the House of Commons on June 15, 1855, Edward George 
Bulwer-Lytton tabled a proposal (in the form of an amendment to a proposal 
by Layard) urging stricter regulations for the filling of government posts and a 
number of other administrative reforms. The proposal, largely aimed at 
depriving the Administrative Reform Association (see Note 139) of its raison 
d'être, was discussed by the House on June 15 and 18 and adopted on June 20. 
p. 289 
On May 26, 1855, the British frigate  Cossack  stopped off Gange (Hangö) in the 
Gulf of Finland and sent a boat under a flag of truce to treat with the Russians. 
Mistaking the envoys for an intelligence party, the Russian commanding 
officer, an ensign, laid an ambush. In the ensuing clash half the British sailors 
were killed and the others wounded and taken prisoner. The incident was 
discussed by the British Parliament. Marx describes the debate in question in 
his next report for the Neue Oder-Zeitung (see this volume, pp. 292-96). 
p. 291 
The beginning of Marx's article (the part concerning the false report about the 
seizure of Sevastopol) appeared in the Neue Oder-Zeitung on June 25 with an 
editorial note saying that the conclusion would be published in the next 
morning issue of the paper. p. 292 
On June 18, 1855, one of the major battles of the Crimean War was fought at 
Sevastopol, ending in defeat for the Allies. The nearly nine-month-long siege 
of the city, the destruction caused by the bombardment, and the capture by 
French and British troops on June 7, 1855 of the outlying fortifications, the 
Selenghinsk and Volhynsk redoubts and the Kamchatka lunette (which had 
been erected by the defenders in the course of the siege) induced the Allied 
command to undertake a full-scale assault on the Southern (Korabelnaya) part 

=====第764页=====
734 Notes 
217 
218 of the city. It was launched on the fortieth anniversary of the battle of 
Waterloo, fought on June 18, 1815. The assault was preceded by massive 
bombardment of the city from land and sea. Despite the Allies' substantial 
superiority in numbers, their attack, launched along the whole line of Russian 
fortifications at dawn on June 18, 1855, was repulsed at every point. The 
attackers suffered heavy losses. The fighting on June 18 showed the strength of 
Sevastopol's defences and the staunchness of the Russian troops. Marx gave a 
detailed account of the battle in his report "The Mishap of June 18.— 
Reinforcements"; Engels described it in his articles "From Sevastopol" and 
"The Late Repulse of the Allies" (see this volume, pp.  297-301,  313-19 and 
328-32). p. 292 
During an inspection of troops in Boulogne at the end of September 1854 
Napoleon III declared that the Allies had taken Sevastopol. This statement was 
based on false reports. P- 292 
A reference to the law on a new internal loan passed by the Legislative Corps 
on June 20, 1855. The loan was to total 750 to 800 million francs, p. 293 
See Note 213. p. 293 
In the battle of Waterloo fought on June 18, 1815, the Anglo-Dutch and 
Prussian forces commanded by the Duke of Wellington and Blücher defeated 
Napoleon's army. p. 297 
The Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi—see Note 25. 
The Dardanelles Treaty—a reference to the London Straits Convention signed 
on July 13, 1841 (see Note 98). p. 300 
Marx's description of the mass demonstration held in Hyde Park on June 24, 
1855,  in protest against a series of anti-popular measures adopted by Parliament 
(in particular, the prohibition of Sunday trading) is based mainly on his own 
observations. Wilhelm Liebknecht writes in his memoirs that Marx and other 
German revolutionary democrats took part both in this demonstration and in one 
organised by the Chartists at Hyde Park on the following Sunday, July 1, 1855. 
According to Liebknecht, in the course of the latter demonstration, which was 
dispersed by the police, Marx was very nearly arrested. Two days after the events 
of June 24, Marx wrote to Engels: "The demonstration held at Hyde Park on 
Sunday afternoon looked very revolutionary." The present article was first 
published in English in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, On Britain, Moscow, 
1953.  It was printed together with another article by Marx, describing 
the demonstration on July 1 (see this volume, pp. 302-07 and 323-27) under the 
joint editorial heading: "Anti-Church Movement. [—Demonstration in Hyde 
Park"].  p. 302 
The High Church—a trend in the Anglican Church which stressed the latter's 
derivation from Catholicism, maintained the traditional rituals and originally 
drew its following mainly from the aristocracy. 
The Low Church—a trend in the Anglican Church which laid special 
emphasis on Christian morality; its following originally consisted predominantly 
of members of the bourgeoisie and the lower clergy. 
Dissidents or dissenters were members of various Protestant sects and trends 
in England who to some degree or other rejected the dogmas of the 
Established Church. p. 302 
According to British Parliamentary procedure the House of Commons, when 
discussing certain important questions, may declare itself a Committee of the 

=====第765页=====
Notes 735 
Whole House. Each of its sittings is presided over by one of a list of chairmen 
who is appointed by the Speaker. p. 303 
A reference to the Executive Committee of the National Charter Association. 
Founded in July 1840 and numbering nearly 50,000 members in its heyday, the 
Association was the first mass working-class party in the history of the labour 
movement. In 1848, the defeat of the Chartists and division in their ranks 
drastically reduced the Association's following. Nevertheless, in the 1850s the 
Association, headed by Ernest Jones and other revolutionary leaders, launched 
a campaign for the revival of Chartism on a revolutionary basis. It urged the 
implementation of the People's Charter and the socialist principles proclaimed 
by the Chartist Convention in 1851. 
In 1855 widespread discontent with the policy of the ruling oligarchy 
induced the revolutionary Chartists to make another attempt to reorganise 
Chartism. In the summer of that year a number of local Chartist committees 
were elected, and in August the Executive Committee of the National Charter 
Association was formed. It included Ernest Jones, Abraham Robinson and 
James Finlen. The Association ceased its activities in 1858. p. 305 
225 See Note 213. p. 308 
226 See Note 139. p. 309 
An Act passed in Britain in the early eighteenth century obliged newly elected 
Members of Parliament to swear what was known as the Oath of Abjuration, 
which was a solemn denial of the right of James II's descendants to the Crown. 
The Oath included a statement of devotion to Christianity. Refusal by an MP to 
take the Oath virtually debarred him from participation in Parliamentary 
proceedings. Despite repeated motions for amending the text of the Oath, it 
was not until 1866 that the passage on devotion to Christianity was omitted. 
Lord John Russell's Jewish Disabilities Bill (1853) to allow elected Jews to 
swear a non-Christian oath had been carried in the Commons but rejected by 
the Lords. p. 311 
An abridged German version of this article dated June 29, 1855 was published 
in the Neue Oder-Zeitung on July 2, 1855 under the title "Über die Ereignisse in 
der Krim" ("On the Events in the Crimea"). The translation and editing were 
done by Marx. The first paragraph in the New-York Daily Tribune version shows 
signs of editorial interference. p. 313 
229 See Note 219. p. 316 
230 On Marx's participation in the second mass demonstration against the 
Anti-Sunday Trading Bill, held in Hyde Park on Sunday, July 1, 1855, see Note 
221. On July 3, 1855 Marx wrote to Engels about this demonstration: "The 
scenes in Hyde Park last Sunday were disgusting, firstly because of the 
constables' brutality and secondly because of the purely passive resistance put 
up by the huge crowds. Meanwhile things are clearly seething and fermenting 
and we can only hope that great disasters in the Crimea will bring them to a 
head." 
The article was first published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, On Britain, Moscow, 1953, pp. 420-25, as Part II, together with Marx's 
article on the demonstration of June 24, 1855 (see this volume, pp. 302-07) under 
the common editorial heading "Anti-Church Movement—Demonstration in 
Hyde Park". p. 323 

=====第766页=====
736 Notes 
232 A reference to the battle of Inkerman (November 5, 1854) in which the British 
suffered heavy losses (see Note 35). p. 326 
The text of this article by Engels was used by Marx in two reports for the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung: "Clashes between the Police and the People.—The Events in the 
Crimea" (published in this volume as a joint work by Marx and Engels, see 
pp. 333-36) and "Über den Sturm vom 18. Juni" ("On the Assault of June 18"). 
The latter has not been included in this volume as it is an almost word for word 
translation of part of Engels' article "The Late Repulse of the Allies". 
The first paragraph of the New-York Daily Tribune version of this article 
shows signs of editorial interference. p. 328 
A reference to the defeat of the British and Turkish forces in the battle of 
Balaklava (see Note 10). Particularly heavy losses were suffered by the British 
cavalry. p. 332 
234 
235 
243 The section of this article dealing with military events is part of Engels' article 
"The Late Repulse of the Allies" which was written for the New-York Daily 
Tribune (see this volume, pp. 328-32). p. 333 
Maine Law—the first law passed in the US banning the production and sale of 
alcoholic beverages. It was first adopted in the State of Maine in 1841 and 
renewed in amended form in 1851. p. 333 
Napoleon III and Empress Eugénie visited London in April 1855. p. 334 
Marx and Engels used this phrase with reference to Max Stirner in The 
German Ideology (see present edition, Vol. 5, p. 355). p. 334 
See Note 139. p. 334 
"Infantry Balaklava"—see Note 233. 
Marx continued his analysis of the military events of June 18, 1855 in a 
report dated July 7 and headlined "Über den Sturm vom 18. Juni" ("On the 
Assault of June 18"). It was published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung on July 11. The 
report reproduced in German a large section of Engels' article "The Late Repulse 
of the Allies" (see this volume, pp. 328-32). p. 335 
Quakers (or Society of Friends)—a religious sect founded in England during the 
seventeenth-century revolution and later widespread in North America. The 
Quakers rejected the Established Church with its rites and preached pacifist 
ideas.  The "wet" Quakers, so called in opposition to the orthodox or "dry" 
Quakers, were a trend which emerged in the 1820s and sought to renew the 
Quaker doctrines. p. 335 
See Note 51. p. 337 
Part of this article, beginning with the words "For two years..." and up to the 
end, was first published in English in Marx, Engels, Ireland and the Irish 
Question, Moscow, 1971. p. 340 
Court of Chancery—one of England's highest courts, a division of the High 
Court of Justice following the Judicature Act of 1873. It was presided over by 
the Lord Chancellor and dealt with matters relating to inheritance, observance 
of contracts, joint-stock companies and similar legal problems. It was notorious 
for red tape and procrastination. p. 340 

=====第767页=====
Notes 737 
247 
249 Committee of Supply (or Committee of Ways and Means)—in accordance with 
parliamentary procedure, the House of Commons, when discussing major 
questions concerning the national budget, declares itself a Committee of Ways 
and Means. This is one of the cases when the House sits as a Committee of the 
Whole House (see Note 223). p. 341 
For the Irish Brigade see Note 58. 
The Bills in question were submitted by Aberdeen's coalition Government in 
June 1853 to reduce the class struggle in the Irish countryside by granting the 
tenants certain rights and protecting them from landlord arbitrariness. Marx 
discussed the Bills in his article "The Indian Question.—Irish Tenant Right" 
(see present edition, Vol. 12, pp. 157-62). As Marx had foreseen, the British 
Parliament, reluctant to impinge on the interests of the landed aristocracy, 
refused to grant even minor concessions to the tenants. Even in curtailed form, 
the Bills were virtually quashed. p. 342 
The text of this article was reproduced by Marx in an abridged and altered 
German version (dated July 14) which was published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung 
on July 17 under the heading "Russell's Resignation.—The Events in the 
Crimea". In the present edition the Neue Oder-Zeitung version is given as a joint 
article by Marx and Engels (see this volume, pp. 348-51). p. 344 
The nickname of Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher, the Prussian field marshal, 
who advocated active offensive tactics during the 1813 campaign against 
Napoleon. For more on this see the article "Blücher" by Marx and Engels in 
Volume 18 of the present edition. p. 344 
The section of this article relating to the events in the Crimea is a somewhat 
abridged and altered version of Engels' article "The Great Crimean Blunder" 
(see this volume, pp. 344-47). p. 348 
See Note 247. p. 349 
I. e. from the sittings of the Vienna Conference (see Note 88). p. 353 
Previous question—(in British parliamentary procedure) the question as to 
whether a vote shall be taken on a question or issue, debated before the main 
question is put. A vote on the previous question—whether it was expedient 
"that this question be now put"—was often taken to avoid a division on some 
important matter. If the vote was negative the question was postponed, if 
positive it was put without further debate. p. 355 
According to custom, Ministers and Members of Parliament accused of illegal 
actions may be tried before the House of Lords at the instance of the House of 
Commons, a judicial process known as impeachment. This custom, which 
enabled the House of Commons to supervise the activities of Ministers, was 
frequently resorted to in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, but was 
practically abandoned in the nineteenth. p. 357 
Marx included the text of this article, in an abridged German translation, in his 
report of July 20 for the Neue Oder-Zeitung. It appeared on July 23 under the 
heading "From Parliament.— From the Theatre of War" (see this volume, 
pp. 363-66). In the present edition this report is given as a joint item by Marx and 
Engels. p. 358 
For the battle of Inkerman (November 5, 1854) see Note 35. 
On the fighting for the Mamelon (the Kamchatka lunette) and other 
25-3754 

=====第768页=====
738 Notes 
255 
257 
261 outlying Russian fortifications at Sevastopol in June 1853 see Engels' article 
"From Sevastopol" (this volume, pp. 313-19). 
On the assault of June 18, 1855 see Engels' article "The Late Repulse of the 
Allies" (this volume, pp. 328-32) and Note 215. p. 358 
Marx's report reproduces in an abridged and altered form Engels' article "War 
Prospects" written for the New-York Daily Tribune (see this volume, pp. 358-62). 
p. 363 
See Note 251. p. 363 
See Note 254. p. 363 
A reference to the dismissal on January 3, 1851 by President Louis Bonaparte 
of General Changarnier from the posts of commander of the Paris garrison 
and chief of the Paris National Guard. The General was a placeman of the 
Party of Order, which comprised the two monarchist factions—the Legitimists 
and the Orleanists—in the Legislative Assembly, whose conflict with the 
Bonapartists was growing increasingly acute. As a pretender to dictatorial 
power Changarnier was also a personal rival of Louis Bonaparte. p. 364 
On June 27, 1855 Britain, France and Turkey concluded an agreement by 
which the British and French governments undertook to grant Turkey a loan 
of £5 million. In July the British Government tabled a Bill in the House of 
Commons calling for a guarantee of the loan. It encountered strong opposition 
and was only passed by an insignificant majority. In August the Bill was 
sanctioned by Queen Victoria. p. 367 
See Note 88. p. 367 
By the Wakefield School Marx means the supporters of the plan for "systematic 
colonisation" advanced by the British economist and statesman Edward Gibbon 
Wakefield in his work England and America (Vols. 1 & 2,' London, 1833) and in 
other writings. Wakefield advocated colonisation through emigration, but held 
that there should be restrictions on the purchase of land by resettlers. This was 
to ensure the colonies an ample supply of wage labour and reduce social 
conflicts in the home country by providing an outlet for redundant labour. 
Wakefield's theory of colonisation attracted Marx's attention as early as the 
beginning of the 1850s, when he made a number of notes from Wakefield's 
book A View of the Art of Colonisation (London, 1849). Later he gave a detailed 
critique of this theory in the last chapter of the first volume of Capital (see 
present edition, Vol. 31). p. 368 
Marx later used the findings of the parliamentary committee in question ("First 
Report from the Select Committee on Adulteration of Food. Ordered, by the 
House of Commons, to be printed, 27 July, 1855) in a number of notes to the 
first volume of Capital (see present edition, Vol. 31, Index of Quoted and 
Mentioned Literature). p. 369 
Marx subsequently discussed the problem of industrial accidents stemming 
from employers' neglect of safety precautions in the first volume of Capital, 
notably the chapter "Machinery and Modern Industry" (see the section "The 
Factory"). As in the present article, he compared industrial accident reports to 
military bulletins, pointing out that the development of capitalist machine 
industry "with the regularity of the seasons, issues its list of the killed and 
wounded in the industrial battle". Characteristically, there too Marx corrobo-

=====第769页=====
Notes 739 
264 rated his conclusions with quotations from reports of factory inspectors, notably 
that of Leonard Horner for the second half of 1855 ("Reports of the 
Inspectors of Factories for the Half Year Ending 31st October, 1855." London. 
1856).  The "Reports of the Inspectors of Factories for the Half Year Ending 
30th April, 1855", which he analyses in the present article, were also used by 
him, but in a different context, in the chapter in Capital on the rate of surplus 
value (see present edition, Vol. 31. Index of Quoted and Mentioned 
Literature). p. 370 
The satirical pamphlet Lord John Russell, which Marx wrote in connection with 
the crisis of Lord Palmerston's Cabinet and John Russell's resignation, was 
intended as a series of articles for the Neue Oder-Zeitung and the New-York Daily 
Tribune. It was to be a portrait of this Whig leader, presenting all the major 
aspects of his activity. While he was collecting the relevant material for the 
pamphlet—Parliamentary reports, political brochures, articles in periodicals 
and Russell's own writings—Marx wrote to Engels (July 17, 1855): "Do you 
know of any book about the  êtres  of little Johnny Russell?" By the beginning of 
August 1855 a considerable part of the pamphlet had been written, and its 
publication began in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. On August 7 Marx wrote to Engels: 
"In the last few weeks I have sent the Tribune a series of articles—to be 
precise, three—reviewing the career of this little man from the outset." 
However, the pamphlet was published in full only in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, 
as a series of six articles under the common heading "Russell". The New-York 
Daily Tribune published one big article (August 28) under the heading "Lord 
John Russell", which was an abridged English version of instalments II to VI of 
the series that appeared in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. The cuts may have been by 
the Tribune editors, who condensed the series into a single article. It appeared 
unsigned. 
Instalment I of the Neue Oder-Zeitung series was first published in English in 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, On Britain, Moscow, 1953. It was followed by 
the condensed version of articles II to VI reproduced from the New-York Daily 
Tribune. 
In the present edition the pamphlet is published in full, according to the 
Neue Oder-Zeitung, but under the heading given in the New-York Daily Tribune. 
Where the German version differs substantially from the English the relevant 
passages are given in the footnotes. p. 371 
On the Utrecht Peace (1713) see Note 71. 
Marx knew some of Russell's historical works earlier. For instance, in July 
1843 he familiarised himself with the German edition of his constitutional 
history of Britain (Geschichte der englischen Regierung und Verfassung von 
Heinrichs VII bis auf die neueste Zeit, Leipzig, 1825). Excerpts from it are 
contained in one of his Kreuznach notebooks on World history (Notebook III). 
p. 374 
On the Reform Bill (submitted by Russell in the House of Commons on March 
1, 1831) see Note 45. p. 374 
The English version, which was published in the New-York Daily Tribune and 
reproduced in abridged form instalments II to VI of the Neue Oder-Zeitung 
series,  has no date at the beginning and starts with the following paragraph, in 
all probability added by the editors: "We have recently had occasion to notice 
the funeral obsequies of this politically departed statesman, and to utter a few 
farewell words above his grave. The part which his birth, and his position as 

=====第770页=====
740 Notes 
the only presentable member of the great revolutionary family and old Whig 
house of Bedford enables him to play in the drama of European Affairs, and 
the connection of his name with some of the great progressive measures of the 
day, seem to us to entitle him to a somewhat more lengthened and analytic 
obituary." p. 376 
Following the massacre of workers at a mass meeting in support of electoral 
reform on St. Peter's Field near Manchester on August 16, 1819, the British 
Parliament passed the Six Acts, proposed by Lord Castlereagh, which virtually 
abolished Habeas Corpus and the freedom of the press and assembly. They 
became known as the "gagging acts", and Marx uses the phrase in the English 
version of the article where he speaks of "Castlereagh's six gagging acts". 
p. 376 
269 
272 
274 Boroughs (in the English version: "nomination boroughs")—a reference to the 
rotten boroughs (see Note 155). 
Copyholders, leaseholders—types of tenant farmers in England whose legal 
status was formalised as early as the Middle Ages. The former held land by 
copy of the manorial court roll and were liable to the payment of a fixed rent. 
The latter held land under a lease, the terms of which were agreed upon by 
the landlord and the tenant. p. 377 
This refers to the widespread movement of farm labourers throughout the 
south of England in late 1830 and early 1831. The movement, which began 
apparently spontaneously in the south-east, was largely directed against the use 
of threshing machines, which the labourers held responsible for growing 
impoverishment and unemployment. As it spread rapidly from county to 
county to embrace the whole of southern England there were definite signs of 
some sort of collective plan behind it, and the participants claimed to represent 
a legendary "Captain Swing"—whence the name of the "Swing" movement. 
Large gangs went out at night systematically destroying all the threshing 
machines in the neighbourhood, and also burning down ricks and sometimes 
the houses of landlords and of parsons, whom they held to be in league with 
the landlords. The majority of tenant farmers, however, appear to have had a 
certain sympathy with the labourers, since they preferred the old methods and 
felt themselves obliged to purchase threshing machines only under pressure 
from landlords and of competition from other farmers who had been 
persuaded to buy one. Thus the farmers put up little resistance to the 
destruction of the machines, and on occasion even encouraged it. The Swing 
uprisings were crushed by the authorities. Nevertheless, they succeeded in their 
aims in as much as the destroyed machines were not restored and the threshing 
machine virtually disappeared from British agriculture for twenty years, until 
the 1850s. p. 377 
Tenants-at-will—tenants holding land on conditions dictated by the landlord at 
the given moment and dependent on his arbitrary will. p. 378 
Freeholders—a category of small landowners in England dating back to the 
Middle Ages. p. 379 
In keeping with English parliamentary tradition, the speaker of the House of 
Lords,  the Lord Chancellor, sits on a  woolsack,  symbolising what once used to be 
the main source of England's national wealth. p. 379 
See Note 6. p. 381 

=====第771页=====
Notes 741 
279 
280 In April 1833 the British Parliament adopted a police law for Ireland. This was 
caused by the spread of peasant unrest, in particular, the refusal of Irish 
peasants, the vast majority of whom were Catholics, to pay tithes to the 
Anglican Church in Ireland. The British Government was also forced to resort 
to other measures to control the profound social conflict in Ireland and 
safeguard the position of the Established Church. Marx discusses them further 
on in the text. Despite the mass movement, it was not until 1838 that tithes 
were abolished (by the Commutation Act). However, under the new regulations 
too the peasants continued to pay for the maintenance of the Anglican Church, 
now indirectly in the form of an increase in rents which the landlords were 
obliged to transfer to the church funds. p. 383 
See Note 74. p. 384 
See Note 75. p. 385 
The Bill introduced by Peel into the House of Commons in the spring of 1846 to 
legalise the arbitrary police regime in Ireland under the guise of prohibiting the 
bearing of arms. The bill was lost because of the opposition of the Whigs, who took 
advantage of the situation to overthrow the Peel ministry. When they came to 
power the Whigs themselves tried to take police measures against the Irish 
national liberation movement. In 1847 they passed on emergency law for Ireland 
which ushered in a new regime of atrocious repression of the Irish people. 
p. 385 
A writ of Habeas Corpus—the name given in English judicial procedure to a 
document enjoining the appropriate authorities to present an arrested person 
before a court on the demand of the persons interested to check the legitimacy 
of the arrest. Having considered the reasons for the arrest, the court either 
frees the arrested person, sends him back to prison or releases him on bail or 
guarantee. The procedure, laid down by an Act of Parliament of 1679, does 
not apply to persons accused of high treason and can be suspended by decision 
of Parliament. The British authorities frequently made use of this exception in 
Ireland. p. 386 
See Note 14. p. 386 
The sliding scale, so called, was adopted by the British Parliament at the 
proposal of the Tory Government in 1828. According to it import tariffs on 
grain were raised when grain prices on the home market fell and lowered when 
they went up. p. 388 
See Note 151. p. 389 
The Corporation Act, adopted by the British Parliament in 1661, required that 
persons holding elective posts (mainly members of municipal bodies) should 
take the sacrament according to the rites of the Church of England. 
The Test Act of 1673 required the same of all persons holding government 
posts. 
Originally directed against the Catholic reaction, these Acts later became 
instruments for fighting every form of opposition to the Established Church, 
including the various sectarian movements (the dissidents or dissenters), and 
protecting its privileges. p. 390 
See Note 51. p. 391 
I. e. the anniversary of the Gunpowder Plot, a Catholic conspiracy to blow up 

=====第772页=====
742 Notes 
Parliament. It was uncovered on November 5, 1605. Guy Fawkes was one of the 
plotters. Their aim was to restore Catholicism in England. p. 392 
The Ecclesiastical Titles Bill, which became law in August 1851, declared invalid 
the Pope's edict of 1850 on the nomination of Catholic bishops and archbishops 
in Britain. p. 392 
Irish Brigade—see Note 58. 
Manchester men, Manchester school—see Note 7. p. 392 
A German version of the article, dated July 27 and 28, 1855, was published in 
the Neue Oder-Zeitung under the heading "Birmingamer Konferenz. —Die 
dänische Erbfolge. — Die vier Garantien" ("The Birmingham Conference.—The 
Danish Succession.—The Four Guarantees") on July 30 and 31. It differs slightly 
from the English version in content and the way of quoting (as a rule, the 
quotations are more condensed and tfeated more freely). Where the German 
differs substantially from the English this is indicated in the footnotes. Marx's 
main sources were the reports of the committees of the Birmingham Conference, 
which were published soon after it ended on June 23, 1855. 
Under the heading "The Birmingham Conference" the article was included 
in The Eastern Question. p. 394 
A reference to the London Protocol of May 8, 1852 on the integrity of the 
Danish monarchy (see Note 23). p. 394 
The State Reform Association was set up by the Left, radical wing of the 
bourgeois opposition in July 1855. In contrast to the Administrative Reform 
Association, it urged Parliamentary reform based on universal suffrage. The 
Radicals leading the Association sought an agreement with the Chartists, 
hoping to bring the working-class movement under their ideological and 
political influence. Jones, Finlen and other Chartist leaders became members of 
the Association's Executive Committee, but soon resigned under pressure 
from the Chartist rank and file, who realised the danger of the Radicals' 
gaining control of the Chartist organisation. p. 394 
See Note 43. p. 396 
London Treaty of July 6, 1827—a reference to the convention signed by Britain, 
Russia and France confirming the St. Petersburg Russo-British protocol of 
April 4, 1826 which recognised Greece's right to autonomy. Like the protocol, 
the convention included an agreement on the diplomatic recognition of Greece 
and on armed mediation in the Greco-Turkish conflict. The contracting parties 
confirmed the commitment recorded in the protocol to seek no territorial or 
commercial benefits for themselves in pacifying Greece except such as were 
common to all European states. 
The Treaty of Adrianople—see Note 22. p. 398 
The London convention of  1841—  see Note 98. p. 399 
Russo-Dutch loan—see Note 24. 
The Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi—see Note 25. 
The Treaty of the Dardanelles—presumably the London convention on the 
Straits of 1841 (see Note 98). 
On the Balta-Liman Treaty see Note 22. p. 400 
Engels wrote this survey at the request of Marx, who received an order for it 
from the US journal Putnam's Monthly through Charles Dana, editor of the 

=====第773页=====
Notes 743 
300 
301 New-York Daily Tribune. In forwarding Dana's letter to Engels on June 15, 
1855,  Marx asked him to write "one printed sheet on all the European armies 
for Putnam's Monthly". However, Engels' survey turned out much longer and 
took a considerable time to write. Marx helped Engels by collecting data on 
various European armies, the Spanish and the Neapolitan, in particular, at the 
British Museum library. After receiving the first article of the series for 
forwarding to New York, Marx wrote to Engels (August 7, 1855): "The article 
on the 'Armies' is excellent." On September 1 he informed Engels of the New 
York Times' review—on the whole, favourable—of this article, which had been 
published in the August issue of Putnam's Monthly, and of the reviewer's 
awkward attempts to dispute the instances of corporal punishment of the lower 
ranks in the British Army cited by Engels. The continuation and conclusion of 
the series were published in the September and December issues of the journal. 
They were numbered articles two and three (the first article appeared without 
a number). By printing the survey unsigned, the editors tried to suggest that 
the author was an American. This may also have been the reason for the minor 
editorial changes in the text, in particular the use of the pronoun "our" with 
reference to the US army (see p. 407). p. 401 
Putnam's Monthly has the following note here, in all probability supplied by the 
editors: "We must not omit to state that our own country has produced a 
military history of the first class for impartiality, becoming language, and even 
handed justice to friend and foe: we refer to The War with Mexico, by Major 
Ripley." R. S. Ripley's book, published in New York in 1849, was known to 
Marx and Engels. Marx describes it in letters to Engels of November 30 and 
December 2 and 15, 1854. No statements by Engels on it have come to light. 
p. 405 
See Note 157. p. 405 
A reference to the operations of the British forces, commanded by Wellington, 
in the Peninsular War, which was waged by Britain against Napoleonic France 
on the territory of Spain and Portugal from 1808 to 1814. Simultaneously, 
throughout the Iberian Peninsula, the Spanish and Portuguese peoples were 
fighting for independence against the French occupation. In the course of the 
war Wellington won the battles of Oporto in 1809, Busano in 1810, and 
Fuentes de Onoro in 1811. He also took Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz in 1812. 
p. 405 
Boulogne Camp—the bridgehead set up by Napoleon I at Boulogne-sur-Mer on 
the English Channel between 1803 and 1805 for invading England. The threat 
of an attack by the forces of the third anti-French coalition (Russia, Austria, 
Britain and Sweden) formed in 1805 prevented him from carrying out his plan. 
At Austerlitz on December 2, 1805 Napoleon's troops defeated the Russians 
and Austrians. p. 405 
The battle of New Orleans (USA) between the British and American forces 
coincided with the receipt of a dispatch on the signing of the Ghent Treaty 
(December 24, 1814) which ended the British-American war of 1812-14 (the 
Second War of Independence) by restoring the pre-war position. p. 405 
At Borodino, near Moscow, a full-scale battle was fought by the French and 
Russian forces on September 7, 1812. It turned the tide in the war of 1812 in 
favour of Russia, even though the Russian army was forced to leave Moscow. 
p. 407 

=====第774页=====
744 Notes 
302 
307 The French Imperial Guards, disbanded after the fall of Napoleon I, were 
restored by a special decree of Napoleon III on May 1, 1854. p. 410 
See Note 119. p. 411 
See Note 2. p. 411 
The Seven Years' War—the war of 1756-63 between Britain and Prussia, on the 
one hand, and France, Russia and Austria, on the other. It was caused mainly 
by colonial and commercial rivalry between Britain and France and the clash 
between Prussia's policy of aggrandizement and the interests of Austria, France 
and Russia. In the course of the war the Prussian army of Frederick II won a 
series of victories over the French and Austrians, but suffered a number of 
serious defeats in battles against the Russian forces. As a result of the war, 
Britain expanded her colonial empire at the expense of France. Austria and 
Prussia retained, by and large, their former frontiers. p. 414 
This section was used by Marx as material for several articles for the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung. The text from the beginning up to the words "a small heroic 
detachment of Britons was almost lost in the mass of Allied troops" was 
reproduced in almost literal translation with a few insignificant cuts in the 
report "Die britische Armee", dated by Marx August 25, 1855 and published 
in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 399, August 28. The continuation up to the 
paragraph beginning with the words "The uniform and equipment of the 
British soldiers", edited and enlarged by Marx, provided the basis for the 
article "The Punishment of the Ranks", dated August 28, 1855 and published in 
the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 405, August 31, 1855. In this volume it is given as a 
joint work by Marx and Engels (see pp. 501-03). The rest of the section beginning 
with the words "The uniform and equipment of the British soldiers" and up to 
the end was used by Marx with a few cuts and additions in his article 
"Uniformirung und Equipirung des britischen Soldaten" ("Uniform and 
Equipment of the British Soldier"), dated August 23, 1855 and published in the 
Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 407, September 1, 1855. All these articles in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung are marked with the sign X. Where the article "Uniform and 
Equipment of the British Soldier" differs substantially from the corresponding 
English text, this is pointed out in the footnotes. p. 416 
See Note 10. p. 417 
See Note 35. p. 419 
Speaking of his personal experience, Engels may have had in mind his service 
as a volunteer in a brigade of the Guards' Artillery in Berlin in 1841-42. 
p. 421 
The Military frontier or the Military Border Area—the southern border regions 
of the Austrian Empire where military settlements began to be set up in the 
sixteenth century for protection against Turkish invasions. The inhabitants of 
these regions—Serbs, Croats, Romanians, Szeklers, Saxons, and others—were 
allotted plots of land by the state, for which they had to serve in the army, pay 
taxes and perform certain public duties. In 1848-49 the granichary, as the 
soldiers from these regions were called, formed part of the Austrian armies 
deployed against the revolutionary movement in Northern Italy and Hungary. 
p. 425 
See Note 83. p. 427 

=====第775页=====
Notes 745 
Todtleben was actually alive at the time. The statement in the text is based on 
inaccurate information then circulated by the European press. Wounded on 
June 20, 1855, Todtleben was forced to leave Sevastopol and was undergoing 
treatment when Engels wrote his survey. p. 443 
The battle of Chetatea, in the Danubian theatre, between the Turkish and 
Russian armies, took place in the early period of the Crimean War, on January 
6, 1854. It resulted from the Turks' attempts to take the offensive in the 
Kalafat area, at the juncture of Wallachia, Serbia and Bulgaria. After a stiff 
fight the Russian detachment was compelled to retreat under pressure from 
considerable Turkish forces (about 18,000 men), but following the arrival of 
Russian reinforcements the Turks were forced to go over to the defensive and 
eventually retreated to Kalafat. For a description of these events see Engels' 
article "The Last Battle in Europe" (present edition, Vol. 12, pp. 579-82). 
On the Russians' siege of Silistria in May-June 1854 see Note 115. 
314 German Confederation was an association of German states set up by the Congress 
of Vienna on June 8, 1815. Initially it included 34 states, mostly with a 
feudal-absolutist system of government, and four free cities. For all practical 
purposes the Confederation sealed Germany's political and economic fragmen­
tation and retarded her development. After the defeat of the revolution of 
1848-49 and the failure of the attempts to establish a more stable political 
union, the German Confederation was restored in its old decentralised and 
amorphous form. p. 448 
In 1826 Sultan Mahmud II brutally suppressed a mutiny of the Janissaries, 
who rebelled against a reform of the Turkish army aimed at replacing the 
feudal Janissary forces with regular units. After the mutiny was crushed, the 
Janissary corps was disbanded. 
On the Treaty of Adrianople see Note 22. p. 451 
The Turks besieged Vienna twice, in 1529 and 1683, both times unsuccessfully. 
In 1683 the Austrian capital was relieved by the troops of Polish King John III. 
p. 453 
At Oltenitza (south-east Wallachia) in the Danubian theatre, the Russian and 
Turkish forces fought one of the first battles of the Crimean War (November 
4, 1853). A Russian detachment attacked the Turkish forces which had crossed 
to the left bank of the Danube. The attack failed, but the Turkish troops were 
soon compelled to withdraw to the right bank. Engels described the battle in his 
article "The War on the Danube" (see present edition, Vol. 12, pp. 516-22). 
p. 456 
Engels is referring to the strength of the Sardinian army at the time of the 
Austro-Italian war of 1848-49. Sparked off in March 1848 by the national 
liberation uprising in Lombardy and Venice, then under Austrian rule, the war 
was fought in two stages. Following the entry into the war of the King of 
Sardinia (Piedmont), the main fighting took place between the Sardinian and 
Austrian forces, the latter commanded by Field Marshal Count Josef von 
Radetzky. On July 25, 1848 the Austrians beat the Italians at Custozza, and on 
August 9 Sardinia signed an armistice obliging her to withdraw her troops 
from Lombardy and Venice. The mounting revolutionary movement in Italy 
forced the King of Sardinia to resume hostilities (March 20, 1849), and the 
second stage of the war began. However, on March 21-23 the Sardinian army 

=====第776页=====
746 Notes 
326 was defeated at Mortara and Novara. The rout of Sardinia also enabled the 
Austrians to crush the other centres of resistance in Northern Italy, p. 457 
This refers to the military convention concluded on January 26, 1855 by 
Britain and France, on the one hand, and the Kingdom of Sardinia (Piedmont), 
on the other. Sardinia undertook to send a corps of 15,000 to fight against 
Russia in the Crimean War, while Britain and France guaranteed the integrity 
of the Kingdom of Sardinia. By entering the war Sardinia's ruling quarters 
sought to secure Napoleon Ill's support for their future struggle for the North 
Italian territories held by Austria. p. 457 
On August 16, 1855 Russian troops attacked the French and Sardinians on the 
river Chernaya about twelve kilometres southeast of Sevastopol in an attempt to 
weaken the Allies' siege of the city. However, the Russians were repulsed and 
suffered heavy losses due to inadequate preparation of the attack and errors on 
the part of the Russian command. Engels analysed this important episode of 
the Crimean War in his article "The Battle of the Chernaya" (see this volume, 
pp. 504-12). p. 458 
In 1796, during France's war against the Second Coalition, which included 
Naples (the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies), the French defeated the army of the 
Neapolitan King Ferdinand I and seized Naples. 
In July 1820 the carbonari, aristocratic and bourgeois revolutionaries, rose 
in revolt against the absolutist regime in the Kingdom of Naples and succeeded 
in having a moderate liberal constitution introduced. However, in 1821 Austria, 
acting in accordance with a decision of the Laibach congress of the Holy 
Alliance, invaded Naples. The Austrian troops defeated the Neapolitan army 
and occupied Naples. The absolutist regime was restored. p. 460 
This refers to the participation of the Kingdom of Naples in the French and 
Austrian invasion of the Roman republic in May-July 1849. The republican 
forces, commanded by Garibaldi, launched two vigorous offensives, putting the 
Neapolitans to flight. p. 460 
A reference to the Constitution of the Swiss Confederation adopted on 
September 12, 1848. It ensured a measure of centralisation for the country, 
which from a loose union of cantons with an extremely weak central 
administration was turned into a federative state. In place of the former Diet a 
central legislative body, the Federal Assembly, consisting of a National Council 
and a Council of States, was set up. Executive power was vested in the Federal 
Council, whose chairman acted as President of the republic. p. 461 
The Sonderbund —a separatist union of the seven economically backward 
Catholic cantons of Switzerland, formed in 1843 to resist progressive bourgeois 
reforms and to defend the privileges of the church and the Jesuits. The decree 
of the Swiss Diet of July 1847 dissolving the Sonderbund served as a pretext 
for the latter to start hostilities against the other cantons early in November. 
On November 23, 1847 the Sonderbund forces, consisting largely of militia 
detachments, were defeated by the federal army. p. 462 
In the spring of 1798 the forces of the French Directory defeated the Swiss 
army and occupied Switzerland. As a result, Swiss territory became one of the 
main theatres of operations between France and the Second Coalition (Austria, 
Britain, Russia, the Kingdom of Naples and Turkey). p. 462 
Norway was a Danish possession from the late fourteenth century. Under the 
Treaty of Kiel (1814) Denmark ceded it to Sweden. Early in the same year 

=====第777页=====
Notes 747 
327 Norway made an abortive bid for independence, but was forced to accept 
union with Sweden. The union had been backed by a number of European 
powers who wanted Sweden to join the anti-French coalition of 1813-14. The 
annexation of Norway to Sweden was sanctioned by the Congress of Vienna 
(1814-15). Under the terms of the union Norway retained its parliament 
(Storting) and administration and also its officer corps in the army, the King of 
the united kingdom of Sweden and Norway acting as Commander-in-Chief. In 
1905 the union was dissolved and Norway regained its independence. 
p. 463 
See Note 142. p. 464 
See Note 84. p. 464 
This refers to the Kingdom of Denmark's war against the secessionist duchies 
of Schleswig and Holstein (1848-50). Prussia entered the war on the side of the 
duchies, seeking to exploit the national liberation movement there for its own 
ends.  However, the need to combat the revolutionary movement in their own 
country, and diplomatic pressure from the European powers, compelled 
Prussia's ruling circles to conclude an armistice with Denmark on August 26, 
1848 at Malmö. Hostilities were resumed in the spring of 1849, followed by 
another armistice on July 10. The Schleswig-Holstein forces, now fighting the 
Danes single-handed, were defeated. The war ended in the restoration of 
Danish rule in Schleswig-Holstein. p. 464 
Engels is referring to the second and third bourgeois revolutions in Spain. The 
former began with the mutiny of a unit of the Spanish army at Cadiz on 
January 1, 1820. Preparations for the mutiny started in the previous year. The 
revolution was suppressed in 1823 by the French occupation army sent to Spain 
in accordance with the decision of the Verona congress of the Holy Alliance. 
The third revolution (1834-43) was touched off by the first Carlist war of 
1833-40 (see Note 18). p. 469 
"Entente cordiale" —the relations established between Britain and France after the 
July 1830 revolution by an agreement signed in April 1834, when Britain, France, 
Spain and Portugal formed an alliance. However, already at that stage differences 
between Britain and France emerged, which intensified as time went on. Marx is 
referring here to the strongly anti-French attitude taken by the British 
Government, in particular Palmerston, during the Turko-Egyptian conflict of 
1839-41 (see Note 69). p. 470 
Bill regulating lease-hold tenure in Ireland—see Note 245. 
The Irish Brigade—see Note 58. p. 470 330 
333 No articles on India by Marx appeared in any subsequent issues of the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung. 
The Parliamentary recess lasted from August 14, 1855 to January 31, 1856. 
p. 472 
A reference to Palmerston's flirting with the Italian liberal movement on the 
eve of and during the revolution of 1848-49. In an attempt to avert a 
revolutionary crisis in Italy he sent Lord Minto to Rome and Naples in the 
autumn of 1847 to try and persuade Italy's rulers to make certain concessions 
to the Liberals and introduce some moderate reforms. During the revolution 
Palmerston's ambiguous attitude gave the Italian Liberals, and even Republi-

=====第778页=====
748 Notes 
337 
338 
339 
340 cans,  grounds to expect diplomatic and military support from Britain. Actually, 
however, Britain supported the Austro-French invasion of the Roman Republic, 
thereby greatly contributing to the victory of the counter-revolutionary forces 
in Italy. p. 474 
Marx is referring to the treaty concluded by Britain, France and Austria in 
Vienna on December 2, 1854 (see Note 100). p. 476 
Some details in Marx's account of the meeting, in particular his description of 
the speakers, show that his article was based either on his own impressions or 
those of eyewitnesses. It is possible therefore that he attended the meeting. He 
may also have used the report on the meeting published in The People's Paper, 
No. 171, August 11, 1855, which gave the text of the amendment tabled by the 
Urquhartist Collet and adopted by the meeting (Marx quotes it). Marx also 
had at his disposal copies of leaflets distributed in the hall, from which he 
quotes, though their contents were not included in newspaper reports. 
The Literary Association of the Friends of Poland was set up in London in 1832 
and was modelled on the Literary Society established in Paris by the 
conservative, aristocratic-monarchist wing of the Polish refugee community 
(Adam Czartoryski's followers) in the same year. p. 477 
The Democratic Polish Association was formed by radical nationalist or 
democratic Polish refugees—noblemen and bourgeois—in France in 1832. In 
1836 the Centralisation, the Association's executive committee, was established. 
The Association worked for a popular revolution involving the peasant masses. It 
aimed at national independence, the abolition of feudal services and inequality 
stemming from the existence of social estates, the transfer of plots to the peasants 
without redemption, and a number of other progressive measures. The 
Democratic Association took an active part in preparing the 1846 Cracow uprising 
and in the 1848-49 revolution. In the summer of 1849, after the Association was 
banned in France, the Centralisation's headquarters were transferred to London. 
The 1850s were marked by dissent within the Association. After the establishment 
in Poland of the Central National Committee for the Preparation of a National 
Liberation Uprising, the Association dissolved (1862). p. 477 
In 1846 a national liberation uprising took place in the Cracow republic, which 
by decision of the Congress of Vienna was controlled jointly by Austria, Prussia 
and Russia, who had partitioned Poland at the end of the eighteenth century. 
The seizure of power in Cracow by the insurgents on February 22, 1846 and 
the establishment of a National Government of the Polish republic, which 
issued a manifesto abolishing feudal services, were part of the plan for a 
general uprising in the Polish lands, which was inspired mainly by the 
revolutionary democrats. In March the Cracow uprising, lacking active support 
in other parts of Poland, was crushed by the forces of Austria and Tsarist 
Russia. In November 1846, Austria, Prussia and Russia signed a treaty 
incorporating the "free town of Cracow" into the Austrian Empire. 
In 1848 a revolutionary movement again spread in many regions of Poland, 
in particular, Posen and Silesia, and also among the Ukrainian peasants in 
Galicia. In 1848-49 Polish revolutionaries were active in the revolutionary 
struggle in Germany, Austria, Hungary, France and Italy. p. 478 
Addressing the House of Commons on December 12, 1854, Peel urged the 
British Government to take repressive measures against the political refugees 

=====第779页=====
Notes 749 
and put an end to public criticism by refugees, above all Victor Hugo and Lajos 
Kossuth, of the governments of their countries. p. 480 
341 See Note 139. p. 480 
Later Marx sent an enlarged English version of this article to the New-York 
Daily Tribune. It appeared as a leading article under the heading "Austria and 
the War" on September 13, 1855 (see this volume, pp. 495-500). p. 481 
An English version of the second instalment of this article, written by Engels, 
appeared in the New-York Daily Tribune on September 1, 1855 as a leading 
article headlined "The War". It is considerably shorter than the German 
version and in some passages, particularly at the beginning, contains editorial 
changes. In all probability it was the Tribune editors who shortened the text 
considerably. Where the German differs substantially from the English, this has 
been indicated in the footnotes in the present volume. p. 484 
344 See Note 320. p. 487 
Sveaborg was a fortress situated on a group of islands at the entrance to the 
Helsinki harbour in the Gulf of Finland (modern Finnish name: Suomenlinna). 
The bombardment of Sveaborg by British and French ships described in the 
article took place on August 9 and 10, 1855. p. 488 
In August 1855 Queen Victoria visited France. According to the official British 
press,  the visit was meant to strengthen the "Holy Alliance of England and 
France". p. 490 
347 See Note 320. p. 490 
In the second half of this article Marx included a large section of his report "On 
the Critique of Austrian Policy in the Crimean Campaign" published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung on August 18 (see this volume, pp. 481-83). The first paragraph 
of the article contains changes made by the editors of the New-York Daily 
Tribune, who may, in particular, have added the reference to the report on 
Emperor Francis Joseph's inspection tour. 
The article was published in The Eastern Question under the heading 
"Austria and England". In a footnote to the first sentence the compilers— 
Eleanor Marx and Edward Aveling—suggest that the report of the Austrian 
officer mentioned in it was sent to the Tribune by Marx in his own translation. 
However, no evidence to support this has come to light. p. 495 
The concentration of Austrian troops on the Austro-Russian border began in 
May 1854 and was accompanied by large-scale conscription. Prior to this, on 
April 20, 1854, Austria concluded a defensive and offensive treaty with Prussia. 
Austria's military preparations were a major factor behind Russia's decision to 
withdraw its troops from the Danubian Principalities. However, on June 24, 
1855 a reduction of the Austrian troops concentrated along the Galician 
frontier began on the orders of the Austrian Emperor. This was tantamount to 
an open refusal by Austria to enter the war on the side of the Allies. 
p. 495 
5 This article is a fragment of the section "The English Army" from Engels' 
survey The Armies of Europe, published in Putnam's Monthly in August-
December 1855 (see this volume, pp. 401-69 and Note 295). Marx translated 
this fragment into German and made a number of additions and other 
changes. p. 501 
351 See Note 35. p. 502 

=====第780页=====
750 Notes 
A somewhat altered German version of this article was prepared by Marx for 
the Neue Oder-Zeitung. It was dated August 31 and September 1 and published 
on September 3 and 4 under the heading "Über die Schlacht an der Tschernaja" 
("On the Battle of the Chernaya"). 
The first paragraph in the New-York Daily Tribune version contains changes 
made by the editors who, in particular, added the reference to the publication 
of the Pélissier and Simpson reports in the Tribune (No.  4493,  September 13, 
1855).  p. 504 
See Note 10. p. 507 
The battles mentioned were fought by the British and their allies against the 
armies of Napoleonic France. The battle of Bussaco (Portugal) was on 
September 27, 1810; the battle of Pamplona was during the siege of that 
Spanish fortress in 1813, and the battle of Waterloo was on June 18, 1815 (see 
Note 219). p. 511 
See Notes 2 and 35. p. 511 
This article was published in The Eastern Question under the heading "Napier 
and Graham". p. 513 
In 1839 the British Parliament issued a Blue Book on Persia and Afghanistan 
containing, among other documents, a number of letters by A. Burnes, the 
British representative in Kabul, on the Anglo-Afghan war (see Note 20). The 
letters had been selected and presented by the Foreign Office in such a way as 
to conceal Britain's provocative role in unleashing the war. Shortly before his 
death Burnes sent duplicates of his letters to London. Those not included in 
the Blue Book were published by his family. p. 513 
A reference to the following facts connected with James Graham's activities as 
Home Secretary and First Lord of the Admiralty: the opening, on his 
instructions, of the letters of Italian revolutionary refugees (see Note 199); his 
part in the welcome given to Russian Emperor Nicholas I during the latter's 
visit to Britain in June 1844; his administration of the 1834 Poor Law and 
especially his responsibility for the notorious scandal at the Andover workhouse 
in 1845; and the attempt to put Captain Christie, head of port and transport 
facilities in Balaklava, on trial for neglect of duty, an attempt which caused 
Christie's premature death. p. 514 
The Sind, an area in Northwest India bordering on Afghanistan, was seized in 
1843.  During the Anglo-Afghan war of 1838-42, the East India Company by 
threats and violence forced the feudal rulers of the Sind to agree to the transit of 
its troops through their territory. In 1843 the British demanded that the local 
feudal lords become vassals of the Company. This caused an uprising of the 
Baluch tribes (the Sind's indigenous population) after whose suppression by 
British troops under Sir Charles Napier the whole area was annexed to British 
India. p. 514 
A German version of this article prepared by Marx and dated September 11, 
1855 was published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung under the heading "Zur Einnahme 
von Sebastopol" ("On the Capture of Sevastopol"). In a letter to Engels dated 
September 11, 1855 Marx wrote that he had made a number of changes on the 
basis of the latest telegraphic dispatches. 
The last two paragraphs in the English version were presumably added by 
the editors of the New-York Daily Tribune. p. 519 

=====第781页=====
Notes 751 
370 
372 The Red Cap was the headgear of the ancient Phrygians. During the French 
Revolution it was adopted by the Jacobins and came to symbolise freedom. 
p. 524 
Part of this article was reproduced by Marx in his report for the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung published on September 18, 1855 under the heading "Events in the 
Crimea". In the present edition this version is given as an item by Marx and 
Engels (see this volume, pp. 531-33). 
The first and last paragraphs of the English version contain insertions made 
by the editors of the New-York Daily Tribune. The London correspondent 
mentioned in them was probably A. Pulszky. p. 525 
The battles of Oltenitza and Chetatea—see Notes 317 and 313. 
The battle of the Chernaya—see Note 320. 
The battle of Inkerman—see Note 35. p. 526 
On the Allies' abortive assault on Sevastopol of June 18, 1855 see Note 215. 
p. 526 
Engels discussed the significance of the Northern side of Sevastopol in an 
earlier article, "The Siege of Sevastopol", published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 4236, November 15, 1854 (see present edition, Vol. 13, pp. 
505-09). p. 528 
See Note 305. p. 528 
In October 1805, during the war of the Third Coalition (Austria, Britain, 
Russia and Sweden) against Napoleonic France, the Austrian army of General 
Mack was encircled by the French at Ulm and forced to surrender, p. 529 
This article is Marx's adaptation for the Neue Oder-Zeitung of part of Engels' 
article "Crimean Prospects" published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4508, 
October 1, 1855 (see this volume, pp. 525-29). p. 531 
On the battles of Oltenitza and Chetatea see Notes 317 and 313. 
On the battle of the Chernaya see Note 320. 
On the battle of Inkerman see Note 35. p. 532 
The Société générale du Crédit mobilier was a big French joint-stock bank 
founded by the Péreire brothers in 1852. It was closely associated with 
Napoleon Ill's government and under the latter's protection engaged in 
large-scale speculation. It went bankrupt in 1867 and was liquidated in 1871. 
p. 534 
An abridged German version of this article was published in the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung on September 29, 1855 under the heading "Die Widerstandskraft 
Rußlands" ("Russia's Power of Resistance"). The translation and changes were 
made by Marx. 
The first and last paragraphs of the English version contain changes made 
by the editors of the New-York Daily Tribune. p. 537 
The patrimonial court was a feudal court whose jurisdiction was based on the 
right of the landowners to try and punish their peasants. 
The unsalaried magistrates were justices of the peace appointed from among 
members of the propertied classes. p. 544 
Under the laws on local administration adopted on July 7, 1852 and May 5, 
1855 the general councils of the French departments were deprived of the 
right to elect their presidents, vice-presidents and secretaries. These were 

=====第782页=====
752 Notes 
376 
377 appointed by the head of state; the general councils were to meet in closed 
session; the prefects and the head of state had the right to dissolve the 
municipal councils, whose officials were appointed by the local prefects. 
p. 545 
An abridged German version of this article was prepared for the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung by Marx. It was dated September 29, 1855 and appeared under 
the heading "Zur Erstürmung Sebastopols" ("The Assault on Sevastopol") on 
October 4, 1855. The first paragraph in the New-York Daily Tribune version 
contains changes made by the editors. 
The English version was included, under the same heading, in The Eastern 
Question. p. 546 
See Note 215. p. 549 
See Notes 10 and 35. p. 550 
The Federal Diet (Bundestag) was the central representative body of the 
German Confederation (see Note 314). The Diet consisted of representatives of 
the German states and met in Frankfurt am Main. Though virtually powerless, 
it was nevertheless an instrument of feudal and monarchist reaction. The Diet 
ceased its activities during the revolution of 1848-49 in connection with the 
drafting of the German Imperial Constitution by the Frankfurt National 
Assembly and the attempts to unite Germany on this basis. Its powers were 
restored in March 1851. The formation of the North German Union in 1867 
under Prussia's hegemony put an end to the German Confederation and the 
Federal Diet. p. 553 
See Note 370. p. 555 
See Note 219. p. 559 
The Committee in Newcastle-upon-Tyne was one of the Foreign Affairs 
Committees set up by Urquhart and his supporters between the 1840s and 
1860s with the prime purpose of counteracting the foreign policy of 
Palmerston. Marx was highly critical of the Urquhartists' conservative views, as 
can be seen from his articles "David Urquhart" (see present edition, Vol. 12, 
pp. 477-78) and "The Association for Administrative Reform. [—People's 
Charter"] (see this volume, pp. 240-44) and other newspaper items, also from his 
letters to Engels of March 9, 1853, February 9 and April 22, 1854, and others. 
At the same time he held that their foreign-policy statements could be used by 
Britain's working-class spokesmen in the struggle against the bourgeois-
aristocratic oligarchy. 
The report of the Committee in Newcastle-upon-Tyne quoted by Marx was 
published in The Sheffield Free  Press.  A summary of the documents included in 
the report was issued by this Urquhartist newspaper in the form of a leaflet 
entitled "The Case of the Alleged Bribery against Lord Palmerston. (Reprinted 
from the Free Press). Sheffield". Marx probably used The Sheffield Free Press, 
though he may have obtained the report from other sources. p. 560 
No sequel to this report was published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. This is most 
probably due to the fact that on October 7, 1855 its editor, M. Eisner, asked 
Marx by letter to stop sending articles for the time being in view of the 
newspaper's financial straits and obstacles raised by the censors. That is 
presumably why Marx left this article unfinished. Available material gives no 

=====第783页=====
Notes 753 
indication as to whether Marx resumed his regular contributions to the Neue 
Oder-Zeitung later. Although articles and reports marked with the sign X used 
by Marx continued to appear in the newspaper until it ceased publication in 
late 1855, only one of them was definitely written by Marx, the article "Big 
Meeting in Support of Political Refugees" (published on November 16, 1855; 
see this volume, pp. 581-82), as is indicated by the fact that its basic 
propositions coincide with those of Marx's letter to Eisner of November 8, 1855 
(see present edition, Vol. 39). p. 562 
The first paragraph of this article was probably added by the editors of the 
New-York Daily Tribune. This is suggested, among other things, by the 
reference to the publication in the same issue of comments on Gorchakov's 
report. 
Like many other articles by Marx and Engels, this one was reprinted in the 
New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune and the New-York Weekly Tribune. The first 
reprint reproduced the text unchanged, while in the second, which appeared 
five days later, the section dealing with the operations of the Anglo-French 
fleet and landing troops against Kinburn (in the Dnieper estuary) was 
substantially altered and enlarged. The new information may have been drawn 
from another report by Engels, received in the meantime and not published in 
the Daily Tribune, containing details of the fall of Kinburn (October 17, 1855) 
which were not yet available to him when he was writing the present report. At 
the same time, the new text contained additions clearly made by the Tribune 
editors, who may have drawn on the reports of other correspondents. In view 
of this the Weekly Tribune version of the article is given in this volume in the 
Appendices and not in the main text (see pp. 694-702). 
The Daily Tribune version was reprinted in The Eastern Question under the 
heading "Alarums and Excursions". The article was attributed to Marx, as also 
a number of other articles by Engels included in the collection. p. 563 
On the battle of Silistria see Note 115, on that of Inkerman—Note 35, and on 
that of the Chernaya—Note 320. p. 564 
A reference to the first campaign of the Russo-Turkish war of  1787-91.  Austria 
took part in it on the side of Russia, but concluded a separate peace with 
Turkey in 1790. In the course of the war the Russian forces inflicted a number 
of serious defeats on the Turkish army and navy. The war ended in the signing 
of the Treaty of Jassy, which confirmed the incorporation of the Crimea into 
Russia (1783) and fixed Russia's Western frontier along the river Dniester. 
p. 564 
This article and the next ("The Russian Army") belong to the series of works 
in which Engels reveals the causes of Tsarist Russia's defeat in the Crimean War, 
the negative effect of serfdom and economic backwardness on the state of 
armed forces, and the inadequacy of its military potential to satisfy tsarism's 
foreign-policy ambitions which increased particularly after its participation in 
suppressing the revolution of 1848-49 (notably the Tsarist intervention in 
Hungary in 1849). It is from that angle that Engels considers Russia's military 
history, and this in great measure explains why he gives a rather one-sided 
account of some of its episodes. It will be noted that in his later writings, based 
on more objective sources, including works by Russian authors, Engels 
modified his views on this subject. For instance, he pointed out that in the 
eighteenth century Turkey was not Russia's strongest opponent, Sweden being 
more powerful, that even the Ottoman Empire, though in a state of decline, 

=====第784页=====
754 Notes 
still possessed a considerable defence potential, and that Frederick II, the 
Prussian king, had been placed in a critical position by the advance of Russian 
troops in Prussia during the Seven Years' War (see Engels' article "The Foreign 
Policy of Russian Tsarism", 1890, present edition, Vol. 28). He had a high 
opinion of Suvorov's crossing of the Alps in 1799 ("Po and Rhine", 1859, 
Vol. 16), the operations of the Russian army and partisans during Napoleon's 
retreat from Moscow in 1812, and the part played by Russian forces in 
the campaigns against Napoleonic France in 1813 and 1814 (see his articles 
"Barclay de Tolly" and "Blücher", 1857, Vol. 18, and "The Position in the 
American Theatre of War", 1862, Vol. 19). The defence of Sevastopol in the 
Crimean War was later characterised by Engels as active, not passive (see his 
article "Saragossa-Paris", and instalment XXXIII of his series "Notes on the 
War", 1870, Vol. 22). 
The article was reprinted in The Eastern Question under the heading "The 
Russians as Fighters". p. 569 
A reference to two major battles in the Seven Years' War (1856-63), waged by 
Prussia and Britain against Austria, France and Russia. 
At Zorndorf (Eastern Prussia) on August 25, 1758 the Russian army suffered 
heavy losses in a battle with the Prussian forces commanded by Frederick II. 
However, there was no victor in the battle, nor did it prevent a fresh Russian 
offensive the following year. 
At Kunersdorf (east of Frankfurt an der Oder) on August 12, 1759 the 
Russian and Austrian forces under the joint command of P. Saltykov inflicted a 
heavy defeat on Frederick II's army. The Russian forces, in particular the 
infantry, played a decisive part in securing the victory. At the same time, the 
successful operations of the Austrian cavalry corps under Gideon Ernst von 
Loudon contributed to the rout of the Prussian cavalry. p. 569 
During the war of the Second Coalition (it was formed in 1798 and included 
Austria, Britain, Naples, Russia, Turkey and other states) against France, the 
Russian and Austrian forces under the command of Alexander Suvorov freed 
almost the whole of Northern Italy from the French in the spring and summer 
of 1799. At the insistence of the Austrian government Suvorov's army was then 
sent to Switzerland to link up with the Russian corps of Rimsky-Korsakov, 
which was being pressed by the forces of the French General Masséna. After 
the Russian army had heroically fought its way across the Saint Gotthard and 
several other mountain passes it was encircled by superior French forces, which 
had defeated Korsakov's corps at Zurich on September 25. Under extremely 
hard conditions Suvorov's troops succeeded in making their way through a 
number of Alpine mountain passes and on October 12 reached the upper 
Rhine. In his work "Po and Rhine" (see present edition, Vol. 16) Engels wrote: 
"This passage was the most impressive of all Alpine crossings in modern 
times."  p. 569 
On the battle of Austerlitz see Note 299. 
At Friedland (Eastern Prussia) the closing battle of the war of the Fourth 
Coalition (Britain, Prussia, Russia and Sweden) against Napoleonic France 
was fought on June 14, 1807. After the rout of the Prussian Army by Napoleon in 
1806,  the main theatre of operations in the war shifted to Eastern Prussia, where 
the French encountered stiff resistance from the allied armies of Russia and 
Prussia. In the battle of Friedland Napoleon won a victory over the Russian forces. 
It was preceded by a bloody battle at Preussisch-Eylau (February 7 and 8, 1807) 
which ended indecisively. The Prussian General Lestocq distinguished himself in 

=====第785页=====
Notes 755 
392 that battle as well as the Russian General Pyotr Bagration, who commanded the 
rearguard. p. 569 
On the battle of Borodino see Note 301. Engels' judgment of it was based on 
information drawn from a number of West-European military writers who 
represented the outcome of the battle as a victory for Napoleon and ignored 
the fateful consequences it had for the French army even though the Russians 
did leave Moscow temporarily. Later research produced a substantially 
different picture of the battle. It was established, in particular, that the French 
rather than the Russian army was superior in numbers and suffered heavier 
losses. p. 570 
A reference to the Russo-Turkish war of 1828-29, which ended in the Treaty 
of Adrianople (see Note 22) and the suppression by the Tsarist forces of the 
Polish national insurrection in  1830-31.  p. 570 
See Note 2. p. 571 
On the battles of Inkerman and the Chernaya and on the siege of Silistria see 
Notes 35, 320 and 115. 
On the Russians' abortive assault on Kars (September 29, 1855) see this 
volume, pp. 563-68. p. 571 
On the battle of Oltenitza see Note 317. 
The Russian troops took the fortresses of Akhaltsikh and Erzeroum in 
Transcaucasia during the Russo-Turkish war of 1828-29. Under the Treaty of 
Adrianople (1829) Erzeroum was returned to Turkey. 
By capturing Warsaw in September 1831 Tsarist forces dealt the final blow 
to the Polish national insurrection of  1830-31. 
The Turkish fortress of Ismail on the Danube was taken by Russian troops 
by storm under Alexander Suvorov on December 22, 1790, during the 
Russo-Turkish war of  1787-91. 
On November 4, 1794 Russian troops under Suvorov sent by the Tsarist 
Government to suppress the Polish national insurrection led by Tadeusz 
Kosciuszko (which started in March 1794) captured Praga, a suburb of Warsaw, 
thus compelling the Polish capital to surrender. The suppression of the 
insurrection was followed, in 1795, by the third partition of Poland between 
Austria, Prussia and Russia, and the final abolition of the Polish state. (The first 
two partitions took place in 1772 and 1793.) p. 571 
See Note 215. p. 572 
In June 1854 Russia contracted a 50 million silver rubles loan at 5 per cent 
interest through the St. Petersburg bank of Stieglitz & Co. It was mainly 
intended to finance the Crimean War. p. 575 
On October 10, 1855 the French petty-bourgeois democrat Félix Pyat 
addressed an open letter to Queen Victoria in connection with her visit to 
France in August of that year. It was printed in L'Homme, a refugee newspaper 
published in Jersey. Anti-Bonapartist in content, the letter, like all public 
statements by Pyat, was adventurist in character and provided Bonapartist 
circles and the conservative British press with a pretext for launching a 
sustained attack on the refugees. It was rumoured that the British Government 
was contemplating repressive measures against the refugees. The Governor of 
Jersey ordered the publisher of L'Homme, Sventoslawski, and some other 
refugees to leave the island. Victor Hugo too was threatened with expulsion. 

=====第786页=====
756 Notes 
402 
403 This in turn gave rise to an angry protest campaign by the progressive public 
in Britain. 
Concerning Marx's authorship of this article see Note 381. p. 581 
The Alien Bill (Marx uses the English term) was passed by the British 
Parliament in 1793 and renewed in 1802, 1803, 1816, 1818 and, finally, in 
1848,  this time in connection with revolutionary developments on the 
Continent and Chartist demonstrations in Britain. The Bill authorised the 
Government to expel any foreigner from the Realm at any moment. It 
remained in force for one year. Subsequently conservative circles repeatedly 
urged its renewal. 
In connection with the developments in Jersey, the proposed expulsion of 
revolutionary refugees was discussed for several months and finally rejected at 
the beginning of 1856. On February 1 of that year Palmerston told the House of 
Commons that the Government would not seek a renewal of the Alien Bill. 
p. 581 
The Fusionists advocated a merger (fusion) of the Legitimists (supporters of the 
elder branch of the French house of Bourbons) with the Orleanists (supporters 
of the younger branch). p. 581 
The name of Viscount Henry Addington Sidmouth, Home Secretary in 
Liverpool's Tory Cabinet from 1812 to 1821, was associated with a number of 
anti-popular laws and reactionary measures: the introduction of the Corn Laws 
in the interests of the landowners in 1815, the restriction of the right of 
assembly and the virtual introduction of censorship in 1817, the bloody 
dispersal of a workers' meeting near Manchester in 1819 (the Peterloo 
massacre), the passage of the "gagging acts" (see Note 268) and others. 
p. 582 
This article was reprinted under the same heading in The Eastern Question. 
.' p. 584 
The attitude of the European powers during the American War of 
Independence (1774-83) was determined by their commercial and colonial 
rivalry with Britain. France entered the war against Britain in 1778, Spain in 
1779,  and Holland in 1780. Despite the British Government's attempts to 
secure the support of Russia, the latter maintained an attitude of benevolent 
neutrality towards the United States and thereby contributed to the victory of 
the American republic. p. 584 
The principle of armed neutrality (the armed protection of the merchantmen 
of neutral countries trading with Britain's opponents) was proclaimed by 
Catherine II in 1780 and recognised by a number of states. It stipulated the 
right of neutral countries to trade with the belligerents, a ban on privateering, 
refusal to recognise the blockade of ports access to which was not actually 
prevented by armed force, and a number of other rules. The declaration of 
armed neutrality objectively favoured the struggle of the North Americans for 
independence. p. 585 
Britain declared war on Holland in December 1780 on the pretext that the 
latter was violating the Westminster peace treaty of 1674, which ended the 
Anglo-Dutch war of 1672-74. Holland was accused, in particular, of infringing 
a secret clause under which the two parties undertook not to aid any powers 
hostile to either side. Britain objected to Holland's trade with France, Spain 
and the United States of North America, against which Britain was waging war. 

=====第787页=====
Notes 757 
408 
410 In taking this attitude Britain ignored another clause of the treaty, one 
guaranteeing freedom of trade and navigation. 
The Anglo-Dutch war ended in 1784 in a victory for Britain. Holland was 
forced to cede the port of Negapatam (Southern India) to it and grant it 
freedom of navigation in the waterways of the Dutch East India Company. 
p. 586 
The capture of Kars on November 28, 1855 concluded the successful 
operations by the Russian forces against the Turks in the Caucasian theatre of 
the Crimean War. Assisted by the British, the Turks had turned Kars into a 
bridgehead for the invasion of Transcaucasia. In the course of the fighting the 
Russian forces inflicted a series of defeats on the Turks (at Akhaltsikh 
on November 26, 1853, at Bash-Kadyklar on December 1, 1853, at Cholok on 
June 15, 1854, at Bayazid on July 20, 1854 and at Kuruk-Dar on August 5, 
1854),  thus thwarting their attempts to force their way into Armenia and 
Georgia. In October 1855 Omer Pasha's army was transferred from the Crimea 
to the Caucasus and marched from Sukhum-Kaleh to Mingrelia in an 
unsuccessful attempt to relieve the Turkish garrison. The capture of Kars, the 
last important event of the war, accelerated the conclusion of peace, p. 588 
A reference to the campaigns of the Arab tribes of the Arabian Peninsula in 
the course of which the Arabian Caliphate subjugated and annexed the 
countries of the Middle East, Northern Africa and Southwest Europe. The 
Arabs' advance in Europe was stopped in 732 as a result of the battle of 
Poitiers, in which the Franks under Charles Martel, the virtual ruler of the 
Merovingian state, defeated the Arabs who had invaded France from Spain. 
p. 590 
Engels is referring to the sieges of the Balkan fortresses of Varna, Bräila and 
Silistria during the Russo-Turkish war of 1828-29. Despite stiff resistance from 
the Turks, these fortresses were taken by the Russian troops. p. 590 
A reference to the secret meetings of the military representatives and diplomats 
of Britain, France and Sardinia held under Louis Bonaparte's chairmanship in 
Paris in January 1856. According to press reports, they discussed co-ordinated 
action by the Allies in the event of another military campaign against Russia. 
p. 595 
An allusion to an episode in the Russo-Turkish war of 1828-29: the march of 
advance units of the Russian army towards Constantinople in the summer of 
1829.  p. 595 
A reference to the Five Points, the terms for peace talks presented to Russia by 
Austria on behalf of the Allied Powers in December 1855. An elaboration of 
the earlier Four Points (see Note 43), they called for replacement of the 
Russian protectorate over the Danubian Principalities by a protectorate of all 
the contracting parties, a revision of the Bessarabian border involving the 
relinquishing by Russia of the territory along the Danube, the neutralisation of 
the Black Sea, the closure of the Straits to warships, a ban on the maintenance 
of arsenals and navies in the Black Sea by Russia and Turkey; and collective 
protection of the Christian subjects of Turkey by the Great Powers. Presented 
in the form of an ultimatum, these terms were accepted by the Tsarist 
Government and provided the basis for the Paris peace talks. p. 598 
In the second half of this article Marx drew on a letter from Engels of 
February 7, 1856 describing the position in France. p. 599 

=====第788页=====
758 Notes 
A reference to the struggle between Britain and the United States for 
domination in Central America. It found reflection in the sharp differences 
over the interpretation of the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty of 1850, under which 
Britain and the United States guaranteed the neutrality of the projected 
Isthmian canal and undertook to refrain from occupying Nicaragua, the 
Mosquito Coast and certain other areas. However, Britain, in violation of the 
Treaty, continued to hold the Mosquito Coast and the territories she captured 
in the 1840s. The United States supported the adventurer William Walker, who 
had seized power in Nicaragua in 1855. Relations were further aggravated by 
Britain's attempts to recruit mercenaries in the United States for her Crimean 
army. The governments of the two countries each threatened to break off 
diplomatic relations with the other. In October 1855 Britain sent warships to 
the American coast. The conflict was settled in October 1856 by the signing of 
a convention neutralising the Mosquito Coast and the adjacent sea zone. 
p. 599 
The peace of Amiens—the peace treaty concluded by Napoleonic France and its 
allies (Spain and Holland) with Britain on March 27, 1802. It was actually a 
brief truce in these states' armed struggle for supremacy, which was resumed in 
May 1803. p. 599 
Marx is ironically comparing the Franco-British alliance of the Crimean War 
period with the rapprochement between Britain and France in the early years 
of the July monarchy, which went down in history as the "Entente cordiale" 
(see Note 331). p. 599 
This refers to the Five Points (see Note 409). p. 600 
Speaking in the French Legislative Assembly on May 22, 1850, Montalembert 
urged the Government to launch a military expedition against the revolutionary 
and democratic forces in France similar to that undertaken against the Roman 
Republic in 1849 (see Note 194). p. 601 
On December 29, 1855, during the ceremony held in Paris to welcome the 
French army returning from the Crimea, students of the École Polytechnique 
refused to greet the troops and the Emperor. The Government retaliated by 
repressive measures. 
In his speech to the troops Louis Bonaparte compared himself to the 
Roman Senate, which usually went out in a body to welcome the victorious 
legions at the gates of Rome. p. 602 
Sire de Franc Boissy—a French song containing satirical allusions to royalty and 
the government. p. 603 
At the end of August 1855 several hundred workers in Angers (north-west 
France) rose in revolt in an attempt to set up a republic. Their leaders were 
associated with Marianne, a secret republican society established in 1850. 
Numerous arrests were made and trials held in late 1855 and early 1856 in 
connection with unrest in different parts of the country. p. 603 
This article, written for the New-York Daily Tribune in connection with the 
publication of a number of documents relating to the fall of Kars, was Marx's 
first public reaction to this event. Soon after that he wrote a serialised pamphlet 
under the same heading for the Chartist People's Paper (see this volume, 
pp. 621-54). In it he used some of the formulations and developed the content 
of the present article, virtually the first version of the exposé. As the text of 

=====第789页=====
Notes 759 
the article differs substantially from that of the pamphlet, the article is 
reproduced in full in the present edition. 
The first paragraph contains insertions made by the editors of the New-York 
Daily Tribune. p. 605 
The decision to enter into negotiations with the Russians on the terms of 
capitulation was taken by the commanding officers of the Kars garrison on 
November 24, 1855. The fortress surrendered on November 28. p. 606 
Besides The People's Paper, Marx also sent this article to the New-York Daily 
Tribune, which published it as a leading article under the heading "Bonapar-
tean Victims and Tools" on April 14, 1856. It was reprinted under that 
heading in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune on April 15. The Tribune version 
differs somewhat from The Peopled Paper one. Certain passages were omitted 
and a number of—presumably editorial—insertions made. One such insertion, 
referring to Tassiliers letter, is the phrase "which will be found in another 
column" at the beginning of the article (the letter, possibly translated by Marx, 
was published in the same issue of the New-York Daily Tribune). Both versions 
contain numerous misprints in figures, which have been corrected on the basis 
of the sources used by Marx. 
The People's Paper, founded in May 1852, was a weekly published by the 
revolutionary Chartists. Marx contributed to it without claiming remuneration 
and helped Ernest Jones, the chief editor, with the editing and organisational 
matters, especially in the weekly's early years. He also enlisted as regular 
contributors his associates Adolf Cluss (who lived in the USA), Georg Eccarius 
and Wilhelm Pieper. In the period between October 1852 and December 1856 
The People's Paper, in addition to publishing Marx's articles written specially for 
it, reprinted the most important articles by Marx and Engels from the New-York 
Daily Tribune. At the beginning of 1856 Marx's contributions to The People's 
Paper became especially frequent. However towards the end of the year Marx 
and Engels temporarily broke off relations with Jones and ceased to contribute 
to his weekly because of Jones' increasing association with bourgeois radicals. In 
June 1858 the paper was taken over by J. Baxter Langley, a follower of 
Richard Cobden, with the proviso that Jones should have two columns in each 
issue for Chartist news. However, the paper met with no success and ceased 
publication in September 1858. p. 615 
The reference is to French Guiana where political prisoners were sent for penal 
servitude. The high mortality caused by the harsh prison regulations and the 
unhealthy tropical climate earned Cayenne the nickname of the "Dry 
Guillotine". 
Lambessa (Lambèse) was a French penal colony in North Africa set up on 
the ruins of the ancient Roman town of Lambaesis. From 1851 to 1860 it was a 
place of deportation for political prisoners. 
Belle-lie is an island in the Bay of Biscay. From 1849 to 1857 political 
prisoners, including participants in the June 1848 uprising of Paris workers, 
were confined there. p. 615 
An allusion to the methods Louis Bonaparte employed to win supporters while 
preparing the coup d'état of December 2, 1851. At the receptions and military 
reviews he held as President of the Republic at Satory and elsewhere army 
officers and men were served sausage, cold meat and champagne (see Marx's 
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 
99-197). p. 615 

=====第790页=====
760 Notes 
426 
427 
428 Furcae Caudinae (Caudine Forks)—a gorge near the Roman town of Caudium, 
where in 321 B.C., during the second Samnite war, the Samnites defeated the 
Roman legions and made them "pass under the yoke", which was considered a 
terrible disgrace to a defeated army. Hence the expression to "pass under 
Furcae Caudinae"—to be subjected to extreme humiliation. 
On the Lower Empire (the New-York Daily Tribune has New Lower Empire 
everywhere) see Note 198. p. 616 
The Society of December 10 was a secret Bonapartist society set up in 1849 
consisting mainly of declasse elements. Marx gives a detailed description of it in 
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (see present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 
99-197). p. 617 
The Batrachomyomachia (The Battle of the Frogs and Mice) was an Ancient 
Greek anonymous mock-heroic poem parodying Homer's  Iliad.  p. 618 
Instead of this sentence the New-York Daily Tribune has the following one 
partly or wholly added by the editors: "The wretched state of the French army 
in the Crimea was broadly asserted in our columns before the London press 
dared hint at it." p. 618 
Marx wrote the pamphlet The Fall of Kars for the Chartist People's Paper as a 
series of four articles which were published in four consecutive issues of the 
weekly in April 1856. The individual instalments appeared under Marx's name, 
unnumbered (for convenience they have been numbered by the editors of this 
volume). The second, third and fourth instalments were preceded by a note 
saying that they were continuations of the instalment published in the previous 
issue. After the first and third instalments there were notes to the effect that 
they were to be continued in the next issue. The pamphlet was based on Marx's 
article on the same subject written for the New-York Daily Tribune and likewise 
entitled "The Fall of Kars" (see this volume, pp. 605-14). The text of this 
article was thoroughly revised and considerably enlarged. In a letter to Engels 
of April 16, 1856 (see present edition, Vol. 40) Marx wrote that in the absence 
of the original he was compelled, in preparing the pamphlet, to restore the 
Tribune article from memory as well as he could. His main source in writing 
both the article and the pamphlet was a Blue Book on the defence of Kars 
published soon after the surrender of the fortress on November 28, 1855. In 
late April and early May 1856 Marx compiled a summary of his pamphlet for 
The Free Press and The Sheffield Free Press, two periodicals published by David 
Urquhart and his supporters (see this volume, pp. 673-80). 
The People's Paper version of "The Fall of Kars" was reprinted in The 
Eastern Question. p. 621 
The Five Points—see Note 409. 
The Paris Treaty—the peace treaty that concluded the Crimean War 
(1853-56). It was signed by the representatives of Austria, Britain, France, 
Prussia, Sardinia and Turkey, on the one hand, and of Russia on the other, at 
the Congress of Paris on March 30, 1856. Under the treaty, Russia ceded the 
mouth of the Danube and part of Bessarabia, renounced its protectorate over 
the Danubian Principalities and its protection of Christians in Turkey, agreed 
to the neutralisation of the Black Sea (involving the closure of the Straits to 
foreign warships and a ban on Russia and Turkey maintaining navies and naval 
arsenals on the Black Sea) and returned the fortress of Kars to Turkey in 

=====第791页=====
Notes 761 
exchange for Sevastopol and other Russian towns held by the Allies. By 
skilfully exploiting the differences between Britain and France the Russian 
diplomats at the congress succeeded in foiling the attempts to impose still more 
onerous peace terms on Russia. 
The Paris Treaty failed to settle the Eastern Question. In the 1870s relations 
between the European Powers in the Balkans and the Near East became tense 
again. p. 623 
"Take care of Dowb" Panmure—a nickname for the British Secretary at War 
Panmure who, in an official dispatch informing General Simpson of his 
appointment to the post of commander-in-chief in the Crimea, asked him to 
look after Panmure's nephew, the young officer Dowbiggin. p. 626 
431 See Note 215. p. 635 
The Fanariots were inhabitants of the Fanar, the main Greek quarter in 
Constantinople, mostly descendants of aristocratic Byzantine families. Due to 
their wealth and political connections many of them held high administrative 
posts in the Ottoman Empire. p. 635 
A reference to the capture of Kars by the Russians during the Russo-Turkish 
war of 1828-29. Under the Treaty of Adrianople of 1829 the fortress was 
returned to the Turks. p. 641 
434 See Note 420. p. 652 
435 On April 14, 1856 Marx was invited as an official representative of the 
revolutionary refugees in London to a banquet commemorating the fourth 
anniversary of the Chartist People's  Paper.  He used the occasion to demonstrate 
the internationalist solidarity that united the proletarian revolutionaries, among 
whom he had established himself as the outstanding leader, with the 
revolutionary wing of the Chartist movement, and show that in contrast to the 
French and German petty-bourgeois democrats, who were merely flirting with 
the Chartist leaders, the German Communists were true allies of the Chartists, 
sharing with them the aim of achieving the rule of the working class in all 
countries (for more on this see Marx's letter to Engels of April 16, 1856 in 
Vol. 40 of the present edition). In his address (he was the first speaker) Marx 
concentrated on the historic role of the proletariat. The banquet was also 
addressed by another representative of the German Communists, Wilhelm 
Pieper. The other speakers were mostly Chartists (James Finlen, Ernest Jones 
and others). 
Marx did not intend to publish his speech. It was, however, included in the 
newspaper report under the heading "Fourth Anniversary Banquet of The 
People's Paper". The following text preceded the speech: 
"On Monday last at the Bell Hotel, Strand, Ernest Jones entertained the 
compositors of The People's Paper and the other gentlemen connected with its 
office, at a supper, which was joined by a large number of the leading 
Democrats of England, France and Germany now in London. The entertain­
ment was of the choicest description, and reflected the greatest credit on the 
enterprising proprietor of the Hotel, Mr. Hunter; the choicest viands and 
condiments of the season being supplied in profusion. The tables were well 
filled with a numerous company of both sexes, Ernest Jones occupying the 
chair, and Mr. Fawley, manager of The  People's  Paper office, the vice-chair. The 
banquet commenced at seven, and at nine o'clock the cloth was cleared, when a 
series of sentiments was given from the chair. 

=====第792页=====
762 Notes 
"The Chairman then proposed the toast: 'The proletarians of Europe', 
which was responded to by Dr. Marx as follows." 
Then follows the text of the speech. p. 655 
In this article Marx used information on the economic position of Prussia and 
other European countries which he had received from Engels in a letter of 
April 14, 1856. p. 657 
See Note 370. p. 657. 
Chambre introuvable was the name given by King Louis XVIII to the Chamber 
of Deputies in France, which in 1815-16 consisted of extreme conservatives. It 
attacked the Government from the right and was eventually disbanded by the 
King because of its arch-reactionary views. p. 659 
Marx's authorship of this article, published in The People's Paper anonymously, 
is evident from his letter to Engels of April 26, 1856 (see present edition, 
Vol. 40) where the article is mentioned in the list of items enclosed. "In it I 
imitate, tant bien que mal, the style of old Cobbett," he writes. p. 662 
A reference to the Duke of York's part in the wars of the First and Second 
European coalitions (1792-97 and 1799-1800) against the French republic. In 
1793 the British army commanded by the Duke unsuccessfully besieged 
Dunkirk and, following the defeat of the coalition forces at Hondschoote on 
September 6-8 of that year, narrowly escaped annihilation by hastily retreating 
without a fight. Later the Duke of York commanded the British corps of the 
Anglo-Russian army that landed at Helder (Northern Holland) at the end of 
August 1799. In October the allied troops were defeated by a Franco-Dutch 
army commanded by Brune. p. 663 
The convention of Alkmaar was signed on October 18, 1799 after the defeat in 
Holland (then the Batavian Republic) of the Anglo-Russian forces commanded 
by the Duke of York. It provided for the withdrawal from Holland of the 
forces of the anti-French coalition and the release of the French and Dutch 
prisoners. p. 664 
See Note 22. p. 665 
A reference to the group of Whig radicals headed by Charles James Fox. They 
opposed the war against the French republic and advocated a reform of 
Parliament favouring the industrial and commercial bourgeoisie. p. 665 
"Friends of the King"—a group of close associates of George III, mostly 
extreme Tories. They supported George Ill's attempts to extend the Royal 
prerogative at the expense of Parliament and establish his personal rule. 
Members of the group repeatedly headed the government and held ministerial 
posts between 1760 and the early 1780s. p. 666 
This article is Marx's summary of his pamphlet The Fall of Kars, which was 
published in April as a series of articles in The  People's  Paper (see Note 428). He 
substantially abridged and rearranged the text of the pamphlet in preparing 
the summary. The editors of The Free Press published it together with the 
covering letter (see this volume, p. 672), adding the following note in brackets 
below the heading: "The subjoined paper has been supplied to us by Dr. Karl 
Marx". p. 673 
Engels' summary "Crimean War", written in German, listed in chronological 
order the major military events in the Crimea beginning with the landing of the 

=====第793页=====
Notes 763 
Allied troops in Eupatoria on September 14, 1854 and ending with their 
capture of the Southern side of Sevastopol by storm on September 8, 1855. We 
do not know for what particular purpose it was compiled. One may assume, 
however, that Engels, who continued to cover the war after the capture of 
Sevastopol, was intending to write a retrospective review of the hostilities in the 
Crimea and drew up this outline of the fighting for that purpose. The review 
evidently never materialised. 
Engels described the main episodes of the war—the battles of the Alma, 
Balaklava, Inkerman and the Chernaya, the construction of the Selenghinsk 
redoubt and the Kamchatka lunette, the abortive assault of June 18, 1855, the 
assault of September 8, 1855, and others—in a series of articles which will be 
found in Volume 13 (pp. 492-97, 518-27 and 528-35) and in the present 
volume (pp. 113-17, 132-35, 151-55, 328-32 and 504-12, 546-52).See also Notes 
2, 10, 35, 215 and 320. p. 685 
This article is the English version of part of Engels' article "Germany and 
Pan-Slavism"', published in full in the Neue Oder-Zeitung in April 1855, 
and—in content—a sequel to the article "The European Struggle", which was 
the English version of another part of "Germany and Pan-Slavism", published 
in the New-York Daily Tribune on May 5 of the same year (see this volume, 
pp. 156-62 and Note 131). The Tribune editors altered Engels' text 
considerably. In particular, they added the second paragraph, setting forth the 
views on Pan-Slavism of the Tribune correspondent,A. Gurowski, which were at 
variance with those of Marx and Engels. The closing paragraph too contains 
editorial changes. Marx was incensed by this treatment and even considered 
ceasing to work for the newspaper. On receipt of the issue containing the article 
he wrote to Engels (May 18, 1855): "The devil take the Tribune. It is absolutely 
essential now that it should come out against Pan-Slavism" (see present edition, 
Vol. 39). 
The article was published under the same heading in The Eastern Question. 
p. CS9 
p. G90 
p. 690 
p. 692 
p. 692 
This is an enlarged version of an article published under the same heading in 
the New-York Daily Tribune and the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune (see this 
volume, pp. 563-67, and Note S82). It shows clear signs of editorial 
interference. This applies especially to the passages which do not occur in the 
Daily or Semi-Weekly Tribune (the details of the capture of Kinburn by the 
Allies on October 17, 1855). In all probability, the editors added the second 
passage on the fighting at Kinburn during the Russo-Turkish war of 1787-91 
(on which see Note 384) and the part played in it by Rear-Admiral Paul Jones, 
a veteran of the American War of Independence (1774-83). p. 694 
On the battle of Silistria see Note 115, the battle of Inkerman, Note 35, and the 
battle of the Chernaya, Note 320. p. 695 
A referenceto the destruction of the fortifications of Bomarsund, a fortress on 
one of the Aland islands in the Gulf of Bothnia, by the Anglo-French navy and 
a French landing party in August 1854. p. 698 See Note 132. 
See Note 133. 
See Note 134. 
See Note 135. 

=====第794页=====
764 
NAME INDEX 
A 
Abdul Mejid (1823-1861)—Sultan of 
Turkey (1839-61).—92, 103, 397, 
481, 589, 595, 614, 629, 637, 643, 
678 
Aberdeen, George Hamilton Gordon, Earl 
of (1784-1860)—British statesman, 
Tory, leader of the Peelites from 
1850;  Foreign Secretary (1828-30, 
1841-46) and Prime Minister of the 
Coalition Government (1852-55).— 8, 
18, 24, 27, 28, 41, 44, 50, 102, 224, 
229, 237, 258, 290, 353, 354, 356, 
363, 399, 652, 662, 665, 671 
Acland,  James (1798-1876)—British 
politician, Free Trader; organised the 
movement by commercial and finan­
cial circles for administrative reform 
in 1855.—168, 195, 196 
Adair, Robert Alexander Shafto 
(b. 1811)—British colonel, member 
of the House of Commons; member 
of the Financial Committee of the 
Patriotic Fund in 1855.—355, 356 
Addington—see Sidmouth, Henry Ad-
dington, Viscount 
Aeschines (389-314 B. C.) —Athenian 
orator and politician, leader of the 
Macedonian party.— 77 
Airey,  Richard,  Lord Airey  (1803-
1881)—British general; quartermas­
ter-general of the army in the 
Crimea (1854-55).—654 Alberoni, Giulio (1664-1752)—Spanish 
statesman and cardinal; First Minister 
of King Philip V (1717-19).—24 
Albert, Prince Consort of Queen Victoria 
of Great Britain (1819-1861).—274-
76, 280, 281, 299-300, 321, 558 
Alexander I (1777-1825)—Emperor of 
Russia (1801-25).—68, 104, 283 
Alexander II (1818-1881)—Emperor of 
Russia (1855-81).—67, 103, 104, 105, 
111, 112, 119, 156, 164, 165, 269, 
288, 295, 346, 537, 571, 573, 576, 
689, 690 
AH Mehemet Pasha (1815-1871)— 
Turkish statesman, ambassador to 
London (1841-44), Foreign Minister 
(1846-52), Grand Vizier "(July 1855 
October 1856).—609, 624, 636, 653, 
667 
Allonville, Armand Octave Marie d' 
(1800-1867)—French general; com­
manded cavalry units in the Crimea 
(1854-55).—563,  564, 694, 702 
Alsager, Thomas Massa (1779-1846) — 
English journalist, an editor and co-
owner of The Times (1817-46).—122 
Althorp, John Charles, Viscount Althorp, 
Earl Spencer (1782-1845)—British 
statesman; member of the House of 
Commons and, from 1834, of the 
House of Lords, Chancellor of the 
Exchequer (1830-34).—378, 379, 670 
Anne (1665-1714)—Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1702-14).—64 

=====第795页=====
Name Index 765 
Archimedes (c. 287-212 B. C.)—Greek 
mathematician; made discoveries in 
mechanics and hydrostatics.—304 
Argyll, George John Douglas Campbell, 
Duke of (1823-1900)—British states­
man, Peelite; Lord Privy Seal  (1853-
55), Postmaster-General (1855-58, 
1860),  Secretary for India (1868-
74).—49 
Arif Bey (1786-1866)—Turkish states­
man, ambassador to Austria (1850-
54), Sheikh ul-Islam (Grand Mufti) 
(March 1854-1858).—473 
Arnim-Heinrichsdorf-Werbelow, Heinrich 
Friedrich, Count von (1791-1859)— 
Prussian diplomat; Foreign Minister 
(1849),  envoy in Vienna (1845-49, 
1851-58).—106 
Arnim,  Ludwig Joachim (Achim) von 
(1781-1831)—German romantic 
poet.—651 
Ashley (Cooper, Anthony Ashley, Earl of 
Shaftesbury)—see Shaftesbury 
Aster, Ernst Ludwig von (1778-1855)— 
Prussian general and military en­
gineer, fortifications expert.—262, 
435 
Astley, Philip (1742-1814)—London cir­
cus owner.—40, 487 
Attwood, Charles—English public figure, 
Urquhartist.— 562 
Auber, Daniel François Esprit (1782-
1871)—French composer.—141 
Aumale, Henri Eugène Philippe Louis 
d'Orléans, duc d' (1822-1897)—fifth 
son of King Louis Philippe of 
France; took part in the conquest of 
Algeria (1840-47).—110 
Autemarre, d-—French general; com­
manded a brigade in General Bos­
quet's Second Division in the Crimea 
(1855).—547 
B 
Babbage, Charles (1792-1871)—English 
mathematician and economist.—247 
Backhouse, John (1772-1845) —British 
official; Under-Secretary for Foreign 
Affairs (1827-42).—20 
Baillie, Henry James (b. 1804)—Tory member of the House of Com­
mons.—213 
Bakewell, R. Hall—English surgeon; 
worked at a field hospital in the 
Crimea in 1855.—492 
Ballantine, William (1812-1887)— 
English lawyer.—334 
Balzac, Honoré de (1799-1850)—French 
novelist.— 31 
Bandiera brothers, Attilio (1810-1844) 
and Emilio (1819-1844)—leaders of 
the Italian national liberation move­
ment, members of the Young Italy 
society; executed for their attempt to 
raise a revolt in Calabria (1844).— 
273, 513 
Banks—police inspector in London in 
1855.—305,  324 
Baraguay d'Hilliers, Achille, comte (1795-
1878)—French general, Marshal of 
France from 1854, Bonapartist; am­
bassador to Constantinople  (1853-
54); commanded the French ex­
peditionary corps in the Baltic in 
1854.—220 
Barbes, Armand (1809-1870)—French 
revolutionary, a leader of secret 
societies during the July monarchy; 
deputy to the Constituent Assembly 
(1848);  sentenced to life imprison­
ment for his participation in the 
popular uprising of May 15, 1848; 
emigrated to Belgium after an am­
nesty in 1854.—121, 655 
Baring, Sir Francis Thornhill (1796-
1866) — British statesman, Whig M. P.; 
Chancellor of the Exchequer (1839-
41), First Lord of the Admiralty 
(1849-52).—22, 227, 228, 245, 257 
Barnes, Thomas (1785-1841)—editor of 
The Times (1817-41).—122 
Barrington, William Wildman, Viscount 
(1717-1793)—British statesman, To­
ry; Secretary at War  (1755-61,  1765-
78), Chancellor of the Exchequer 
(1761-62).—64 
Barrot, Camille Hyacinthe Odilon  (1791-
1873)—French politician and lawyer; 
leader of the liberal dynastic opposi­
tion during the July monarchy; 
headed the monarchist Coalition 
Ministry (December 1848-October 
1849).—168, 616 

=====第796页=====
766 Name Index 
Bates, Robert Makin (born c. 1791) — 
English banker.—310 
Batory, Stefan (1533-1586)—King of 
Poland (from 1576) and general.— 285 
Bauer, Bruno (1809-1882) —German 
philosopher, Young Hegelian; in the 
1850s published several pamphlets on 
Russia's international position.—162 
Beale, James—English radical.—99 
Beatson, William Ferguson—British gen­
eral; commanded a Turkish cavalry 
detachment on the Danube (1854) 
and in the Crimea (1854-September 
1855).—609, 612, 624, 626, 631, 
674 
Bebutoff (Bebutov), Vastly Osipovich, 
Prince (1791-1858) — Russian general; 
commanded Russian troops in the 
Caucasus during the Crimean war.— 
593, 627 
Bedeau, Marie Alphonse (1804-1863)— 
French general and moderate repub­
lican politician; Vice-President of the 
Constituent and Legislative Assem­
blies during the Second Republic; 
expelled from France after the coup 
d'état of December 2, 1851.—87 
Bedford, Dukes of—English noble 
family.—187 
Bedford, John Russell, Duke of (1766-
1839)—English aristocrat, father of 
John Russell.—373, 374, 379 
Bell, Jacob (1810-1859)—founder of 
the Pharmaceutical Society and the 
Pharmaceutical Journal; member of 
the House of Commons (1850-51).— 
99 
Bellini, Vincento (Vincenzo)  (1801-
1835)—Italian composer.— 292 
Benkendorf,  Konstantin Konstantinovich 
(1817-1857)—Russian general; car­
ried out military and diplomatic mis­
sions for the Russian armies  (1853-
55)._573 
Bentley —innkeeper at the Ballarat gold-
fields in Victoria (Australia).—  64, 65 
Beresford, J. C.—member of the House 
of Commons (1808).—670 
Berg, Fyodor Fyodorovich, Count (Berg, 
Count Friedrich Wilhelm Rembert) 
(1793-1874) — Russian general, later field marshal-general; Governor-
General of Finland (1855-63).—361 
Berkeley, Francis Henry Fitzhardinge 
(1794-1870)—British Liberal politi­
cian, member of the House of Com­
mons.—369 
Berkeley, Maurice Frederick Fitzhardinge, 
Baron Fitzhardinge (1788-1867)— 
British admiral, Whig, member of 
the House of Commons; Lord of the 
Admiralty (1833-39, 1846-57).—273 
Bernadotte, Jean Baptiste Jules  (1763-
1844)—Marshal of France; became 
heir to the Swedish throne in 1810; 
took part in the war against 
Napoleon I in 1813; King of Sweden 
and Norway as Charles XIV John 
(1818-44).—464 
Bernstorff,  Albrecht, Count von (1809-
1873)—Prussian diplomat; envoy to 
Naples (1852-54) and to London 
(1854-61,  1862-67), Foreign Minister 
(1861-62).—106 
Bird,  T.O'M.—Vienna correspondent 
of The Times (1848-66).—178 
Bizot, Michel Brice (1795-1855)— 
French brigadier-general, milit îry en­
gineer, head of the Ecole Polytechnique 
in Paris; commanded the engineers 
in the Crimea (1854-55).—114 
Blanqui, Louis Auguste (1805-1881)— 
French revolutionary, Utopian com­
munist; organised secret societies and 
plots;  leader of the extreme Left 
wing of the democratic and pro­
letarian movement during the 1848 
revolution; sentenced to imprison­
ment several times.—655 
Bligh,  James—a Chartist leader in the 
1850s.—304, 305 
Bodenstedt, Friedrich von (1819-1892) — 
German poet and translator; travel­
led in the Caucasus, the Crimea and 
Asia Minor in the 1840s.— 593 
Böhm —Austrian general; commandant 
of the Olomouc (Olmütz) fortress 
during the Crimean war.—497 
Bolingbroke, Henry St. John, Viscount 
(1678-1751) —English deist philos­
opher and politician, a Tory leader.— 
188 
Bonald,  Louis Gabriel Ambroise, vicomte 

=====第797页=====
Name Index 767 
de (1754-1840)—French politician 
and writer; monarchist; an ideologist 
of aristocratic and clerical reaction 
during the Restoration.— 660 
Bonaparte—imperial dynasty in France 
(1804-14, 1815, 1852-70).—86, 91, 
148, 259, 596 
Bonaparte, Jerome (1784-1860)— 
youngest brother of Napoleon I; 
King of Westphalia (1807-13), Mar­
shal of France from 1850.—109 
Bonaparte, Prince Napoleon Joseph Charles 
Paul (1822-1891)—son of Jérôme 
Bonaparte, cousin of Napoleon III; 
took the name of Jérôme after the 
death of his elder brother (1847); 
commanded a division in the Crimea 
(1854).—70, 76, 77, 81, 86, 89, 90, 
110, 120, 146, 149 
Boniface, L.—secretary of the editorial 
board of Le Constitutionnel (1855).— 
594, 599 
Bonin, Eduard von (1793-1865)— 
Prussian general, War Minister 
(1852-54, 1858-59); advocated Prus­
sia's alliance with the Western powers 
during the Crimean war.—105 
Bosquet, Pierre (1810-1861)—French 
general, Marshal of France from 
1856,  Senator; took part in the con­
quest of Algeria in the 1830s-1850s; 
commanded a division and then a 
corps in the Crimea (1854-55).—  551, 
552 
Bourbons—royal dynasty in France 
(1589-1792, 1814-15, 1815-30), Spain 
(1700-1808, 1814-68, 1874-1931) and 
some of the Italian states.—122 
Boustrapa—see Napoleon III 
Bouverie, Edward Pleydell (1818-1889) — 
British statesman, Whig, member of 
the House of Commons; Vice-
President of the Board of Trade 
(1855);  President of the Poor-Law 
Board (1855-58)—319, 348, 352 
Boxer, Edward (1784-1855) —British ad­
miral; was in charge of Balaklava 
harbour (1855).—22 
Brandon, Adolphe Ernest de (1803-
1855) — French colonel, commanded 
the 50th Regiment of the line in the 
Crimea (1855).—329 Brant, James—British consul in Erzerum. 
—654 
Bratiano (Brätianu), Dimitri (1818-
1892) — Romanian politician; took 
part in the 1848 revolution in Wal-
lachia; lived in emigration in France 
and then in England (1852-57); 
Prime Minister of Romania (1881).— 
481 
Brennan—London police inspector 
(1855).—324 
Bright, John (1811-1889)—English man­
ufacturer; a leader of the Free Trad­
ers and founder of the Anti-Corn 
Law League; Left-wing leader of the 
Liberal Party from the early 1860s.— 
43-45,  100, 122, 143, 168, 209, 214, 
218, 258, 259, 356, 378, 381, 382, 
472, 558, 561 
Brougham and Vaux, Henry Peter, Baron 
(1778-1868)—British lawyer and 
writer, Whig; Lord Chancellor (1830-
34).—295,  379, 380, 392 
Brown, Sir George (1790-1865)—British 
lieutenant-general; commanded a di­
vision on the Danube and in the 
Crimea (1854-55).—216, 219 
Brown, John—sailor from the British 
frigate  Cossack.—  293 
Bruat, Armand Joseph (1796-1855)— 
French admiral; commanded a 
squadron (1854) and the French navy 
in the Black Sea (1855).—634 
Brummell, George Bryan (1778-1840) — 
English aristocrat nick-named Buck 
Brummell for his dandyism.—479 
Brune, Guillaume Marie Anne  (1763-
1815) — French general, Marshal of 
France from 1804; took part in the 
wars of the French Republic and 
Napoleonic France; commanded the 
French forces in Holland (1799).— 
663-64 
Brunnow, Filipp Ivanovich, Baron von, 
Count (1797-1875)—Russian dip­
lomat; envoy (1840-54, 1858-60) and 
ambassador (1860-70, 1870-74) to 
London; took part in the Paris Peace 
Congress (1856).—235, 396 
Brunswick (Braunschweig), House of— 
dynasty of German dukes  (1203-
1884).—663,  666, 669 

=====第798页=====
768 Name Index 
Brutus (Marcus Junius Brutus) (c. 85-42 
B. C.)—Roman republican politician; 
an organiser of a conspiracy against 
Julius Caesar.—338 
Buchanan, Sir Andrew, Baronet (1807-
1882)—British diplomat, envoy to 
Denmark (1853-58).—294 
Bulwer—see Lytton, Edward George 
Bunsen, Christian Karl Josias, Baron 
von (1791-1860) — Prussian diplomat, 
writer and theologian; envoy to Lon­
don (1842-54).—105,335 
Bunsen —son of Baron Christian Karl 
Josias Bunsen. —335 
Buol-Schauenstein, Karl Ferdinand, Count 
von (1797-1865)—Austrian states­
man and diplomat; envoy to St. 
Petersburg (1848-50) and to London 
(1851-52), Prime Minister and 
Foreign Minister (1852-59).—142, 
230, 354, 398, 399 
Burdett, Sir Francis (1770-1844)— 
British Radical and later Tory politi­
cian, member of the House of Com­
mons.—168,  242, 502 
Burgh, John de (b. 1841)—son of Eliza 
Josephine Handcock and the Earl of 
Clanricarde.—62 
Burgh, Ulick de—see Clanricarde, Ulick 
John,  de Burgh, Marquis and Earl of, 
Baron Somerhill 
Burgoyne, Sir John Fox, Baronet (1782-
1871)—British field marshal, military 
engineer; military adviser and colonel-
commandant of engineers in the 
Crimea (1854-55).—26 
Burke, Edmund (1729-1797) —British 
statesman and political writer, Whig 
M. P.; supported the Tories from 1791 
onwards; at the beginning of his career 
advocated liberal principles, subse­
quently opponent of the French Re­
volution.—373,  587 
Burnes, Sir Alexander (1805-1841) — 
British lieutenant-colonel; was sent on 
a mission to Kabul (1836-38); adviser at 
the British headquarters during the 
Anglo-Afghan war (1839-41).—513 
Burnes, James—writer to the signet and 
provost of Montrose; father of Sir 
Alexander Burnes.— 513 Butler, James Armar (1827-1854)— 
British army officer, an organiser of 
the defence of Silistria (1854).—455 
Butt, Isaac (1813-1879)—Irish lawyer 
and Liberal politician, member of the 
House of Commons; an organiser of 
the Home Rule movement in the 
1870s.—29 
C 
Caligula, Gaius Caesar (12-41)—Roman 
Emperor (37-41).—49 
Cambridge, George William Frederick 
Charles, Duke of (1819-1904)—British 
general; commanded a division in the 
Crimea (1854); commander-in-chief 
of the British army (1856-95).—124, 
126, 128, 596 
Camou, Jacques (1792-1868)—French 
general, Senator; commanded a divi­
sion (1855) and a corps (1855-56) in 
the Crimea.—507, 508 
Canning, George (1770-1827)—British 
Tory statesman and diplomat; 
Foreign Secretary (1807-09, 1822-27) 
and Prime Minister (1827).—15, 16, 
44, 188, 376 
Canrobert, François Certain (1809-
1895)—French general, Marshal of 
France from 1856, Senator, Bonapart-
ist; division commander (1854), com­
mander-in-chief of the French army 
(September 1854-May 1855) and corps 
commander in the Crimea.—81, 
87, 91, 115, 116, 132-33, 135, 137, 
138, 149, 153, 171, 173, 180, 181, 
201, 205, 212, 215-16, 219-20, 249, 
264, 416 
Cantillon—French non-commissioned 
officer; brought to trial in 1818 for 
an attempt on the life of the Duke of 
Wellington, commander-in-chief of 
the British occupation army in 
France, but acquitted.—177 
Cardigan, James Thomas Brudenell, Earl 
of (1797-1868)—British general; 
commanded a light cavalry brigade in 
the Crimea (1854).—102 
Cardwell, Edward Cardwell, Viscount 
(1813-1886)—British statesman, Peel-

=====第799页=====
Name Index 769 
ite, later Liberal; President of the 
Board of Trade (1852-55), Secretary 
for Ireland (1859-61), Secretary for 
the Colonies (1864-66) and Secretary 
of State for War (1868-74).—43, 60, 
131 
Carlisles—English aristocratic family.— 
187 
Carnot, Lazare Nicolas Marguerite  (1753-
1823)—French mathematician; politi­
cal and military leader of the French 
Revolution, Jacobin; took part in the 
coup  d'état  of Thermidor 9th, 
1794.—262, 626 
Cartwright, John (1740-1824)—English 
Radical; championed parliamentary 
reform.— 242 
Castellane, Esprit Victor Elisabeth 
Boniface, comte de (1788-1862)— 
Marshal of France, Bonapartist; took 
part in the coup  d'état  of December 
2, 1851.—220 
Castlereagh, Robert Stewart, Marquis of 
Londonderry, Viscount Castlereagh 
(1769-1822) — British statesman, 
Tory; Secretary for War and for the 
Colonies (1805-06, 1807-09) and 
Foreign Secretary (1812-22).—104, 
283, 376 
Cathcart, Sir George (1794-1854)— 
British general; commanded the 
Fourth Division in the Crimea 
(1854).—102, 444 
Cathcart, Lady Georgina —wife of Sir 
George Cathcart.—102 
Catherine II (1729-1796)—Empress of 
Russia (1762-96).—104, 569, 584-86 
Cato,  Marcus Porcius, the Elder (234-149 
B. C.)—Roman statesman notable for 
his severity in exposing the oppo­
nents of the Roman Republic.—103, 
654 
Cavaignac, Louis Eugene (1802-1857) — 
French general and moderate repub­
lican politician; took part in the 
conquest of Algeria; War Minister 
from May 1848; suppressed the June 
1848 uprising of the Paris proletariat; 
head of the Executive (June-December 
1848).—221,  616 
Cavendish, William, Duke of Devonshire, 
Marquis of Hartington, Earl of Devon­shire and of Burlington (1808-1891) — 
British politician, member of the 
House of Lords.—100 
Cecil, Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne, 
Viscount Cranborne, Marquis of Salis­
bury (1830-1903)—British statesman, 
M. P., Tory, later Conservative; held 
the posts of Prime Minister and 
Foreign Secretary several times.— 357 
Cesena, Amédée Barthélémy Gayet de 
(1810-1889)—French journalist, 
Bonapartist during the Second Em­
pire,  editor-in-chief of Le Con­
stitutionnel (1852-57).—267, 278, 287, 
544 
Chads, Sir Henry Ducie (1788-1868) — 
British admiral; took part in the 
operations of the British fleet in the 
Baltic (1854-55).—517 
Changarnier, Nicolas Anne Théodule 
(1793-1877) —French general and 
politician, monarchist; took part in 
the conquest of Algeria (1830s-
1840s);  deputy to the Constituent 
and Legislative Assemblies (1848-51); 
expelled from France after the coup 
d'état  of December 2, 1851.—87, 
221, 364 
Charles III (1716-1788) —King of Spain 
(1759-88).—466, 468 
Charles XII (1682-1718)—King of Swe­
den (1697-1718).—464 
Charles Albert (Carlo Alberto) (1798-
1849)—King of Sardinia (1831-49).— 
459 
Charles the Great (Charlemagne) (c. 742-
814).—  Frankish King (768-814) and 
Emperor of the West (800-814).— 
109 
Chesney, Francis Rawdon (1789-1872)— 
British colonel, general from 1855.— 
423 
Chevalier, Michel (1806-1879) —French 
engineer, economist and writer; fol­
lower of Saint-Simon; supported 
Napoleon Ill's economic policy; con­
tributed to the Journal des Débats.— 
556 
Christie, P. (d. 1855) — British captain; 
Principal Agent of the Transport 
Service (Army of the East) up to 
March 31, 1855.—273, 514 
26-3754 

=====第800页=====
770 Name Index 
Cialdini, Enrico, duca di Gaeta  (1811-
1892) — Italian general; commanded 
the Third Brigade of the Sardinian 
corps in the Crimea (1855).—548 
Clanricarde, Ulick John, de Burgh, Mar­
quis and Earl of, Baron Somerhill 
(1802-1874) —British politician and 
diplomat, Whig; ambassador to St. 
Petersburg (1838-41) and Post­
master-General (1846-52).—30, 62, 
310, 662, 671 
Clarendon, Earls of—English aristocratic 
family.—45 
Clarendon, George William Frederick Vil-
liers, Earl of, Baron Hyde (1800-
1870)—British statesman, Whig, later 
Liberal; Lord Lieutenant of Ireland 
(1847-52), Foreign Secretary (Feb­
ruary 1853-1858).—8, 25, 49, 67, 73, 
106-08,  228, 294-95, 300, 353, 386, 
391, 398, 399,  481,  482, 499, 606, 609, 
610, 611, 613, 614, 623-29, 633-52, 
654, 673-76, 677-80 
Clarke, Mary Anne (1776-1852)— 
mistress of the Duke of York.—  503, 
668-70 
Clausewitz, Karl von (1780-1831)— 
Prussian general and strategist.—435 
Clutterbuck, Edmund Lewis (b. 1824) — 
sheriff of the county of Wiltshire 
(1854-55).—21,  22 
Cobbett, John Morgan (1800-1877)— 
English lawyer and politician, 
member of the House of Commons; 
son of William Cobbett.—96 
Cobbett, William (1763-1835)—British 
politician and radical writer; pub­
lished Cobbett's Weekly Political Regis­
ter from 1802.—47, 96-97, 167, 242, 
376, 502, 663, 665, 667 
Cobden, Richard (1804-1865) —English 
manufacturer and politician; a leader 
of the Free Traders and founder of 
the Anti-Corn Law League; member 
of the House of Commons.—100, 
168, 209, 247, 258, 382, 582 
Cochrane, Thomas, Earl of Dundonald 
(1775-1860)—British admiral; took 
part in the wars against Napoleon I; 
member of the House of Commons.— 
273, 502 Codrington, Sir William John (1804-
1884)—British general, member of 
the House of Commons; division 
commander (1854-55) and comman­
der-in-chief of the British army 
(November 1855-July 1856) in the 
Crimea; Governor of Gibraltar (1859-
65).—550, 573, 654 
Colchester, Charles Abbot, Baron (1798-
1867)—British admiral, Tory, 
member of the House of Lords.— 
295 
Collet, Collet Dobson—English radical 
journalist and public figure.—478, 
479 
Colloredo-Waldsee (Wallsee), Franz de 
Paula, Count von (1799-1859)— 
Austrian diplomat, ambassador to St. 
Petersburg (1843-47), minister to 
London (1852-56).—108 
Combermere, Sir Stapleton-Cotton, Baronet, 
Viscount of (1773-1865)—British gen­
eral, field marshal from 1855; took 
part in the wars against Napoleon 
I.—558 
Congreve, Sir William (1772-1828)— 
English officer and military inventor; 
invented a rocket which was named 
after him (1808).—404 
Constantine (Konstantin Nikolayevich) 
(1827-1892)—Russian Grand Duke, 
second son of Nicholas I; admiral-
general; was in charge of the defence of 
the Baltic coast (1854-55); Naval Minis­
ter (1855-81), President of the Council 
of State (1865-81).—537 
Constantine (Konstantin Pavlovich) (1779-
1831) — Russian Grand Duke, brother 
of Nicholas I; virtual vicegerent of 
Poland (1814-31).—19 
Conway, Henry Seymour (1721-1795)— 
British statesman and general, field 
marshal from 1793; Whig, member 
of the House of Commons.—377 
Cordoba (Cordova)—Spanish brigadier-
general.—469 
Cormontaigne, Louis de (c. 1696-1752) — 
French general, military engineer.— 
262 
Courtois, A.—French writer.—535 
Cowley, Henry Wellesley, Baron of, Earl of 
(1804-1884) —British diplomat, 

=====第801页=====
Name Index 771 
ambassador to Paris (1852-67). 
—614,  636, 637, 640, 649, 677, 678 
Crawshay, George—English journalist, 
supporter of David Urquhart, editor 
of The Free Press (1856-60).—561, 
672 
Croesus (d. 546 B. C.) —last  king of 
Lydia (560-46 B. C); according to 
the legend, he misinterpreted the 
ambiguous prophesy of the oracle of 
Delphi and was defeated by the 
Persians under Cyrus.—109 
Curzon, Robert, Baron Zouche of Harring-
worth (1810-1873) —English traveller 
and writer; took part in the demarca­
tion of the border between Turkey and 
Persia in Transcaucasia (1843-44).— 
592 
Custine, Astolphe, Marquis de (1790-
1857)—French traveller and 
writer.—442 
Czartoryskis—Polish princely family.— 
476 
Czartoryski, Adam Jerzy, Prince (1770-
1861) — Polish magnate; Foreign 
Minister of Russia (1804-06); head of 
the Provisional Government during 
the Polish insurrection of  1830-31; 
leader of Polish monarchist émigrés 
in France.—20, 477 
D 
Dairnvaell, Georges Marie — French 
writer.— 558 
Dante Alighieri (1265-1321)—Italian 
poet.— 355 
Darkin—police inspector in London 
(1855).—324 
Dosent, Sir George Webbe (1817-1896)  — 
English philologist and journalist; as­
sistant editor of The Times (1845-70); 
had connections in diplomatic cir­
cles.—122 
David d'Angers, Pierre Jean (1788-
1856) — French sculptor, Left repub­
lican; expelled from France after the 
coup  d'état  of December 2, 1851, but 
soon returned.— 602 
Dawkins, Edward—English diplomat, 
resident in Greece (1827-34).—18 
26* Delane, John Thaddens (1817-1879)— 
editor-in-chief of The Times  (1841-
77).—122 
Demosthenes (c. 384-322 B. C.)— Greek 
orator and politician, leader of the 
anti-Macedonian party in Athens.— 
77 
Derby, Edward Geoffrey Smith Stanley, 
Earl of (1799-1869) —British states­
man, Tory leader; Prime Minister 
(1852,  1858-59, 1866-68).—29, 57, 79, 
140, 188, 191, 192, 195, 290, 349, 
382, 389, 391, 394, 562 
Derjavin (Derzhavin), Gavrila Roma-
novich (1743-1816) — Russian poet.— 
569 
Devonshire, Duke of—see Cavendish,  Wil­
liam,  Duke of Devonshire 
Devonshire, Dukes of—English noble 
family.—187 
Diebich-Zabalkansky, Ivan Ivanovich 
(Diebitsch, Hans Karl Friedrich Anton), 
Count (1785-1831) —Russian field 
marshal-general, commander-in-chief 
of the Russian army during the 
Russo-Turkish war of 1828-29; 
crushed the Polish insurrection of 
1830-31.—446 
Disraeli, Benjamin, Earl of Beaconsfield 
(1804-1881)  — British statesman and 
writer, a Tory leader; Chancellor 
of the Exchequer (1852, 1858-59, 
1866-68), Prime Minister (1868, 
1874-80).—24, 26, 27, 29, 30, 50, 
118, 188,213-14,218,222-25,227-31, 
234, 235, 237, 238, 245, 246, 290, 341, 
352-54, 356, 482, 497-98 
Dobrovsky (Dobrowsky), Josef  (1753-
1829) — Czech scholar and public fig­
ure; founder of the scientific philology 
of the Slavonic languages.—158, 691 
Douglas, Sir  Howard,  Baronet (1776-
1861) — British general and author of 
works on artillery and fortifica­
tion.—423 
Dowler, William—British officer.—669 
Drouyn de Lhuys, Edouard (1805-1881) — 
French diplomat and politician; Or-
leanist in the 1840s, Bonapartist after 
1851;  Foreign Minister (1848-49, 
1851,  1852-55, 1862-66); ambassador 
to England (1849-50); represented 

=====第802页=====
772 Name Index 
France at the Vienna Conference 
(1855).—139, 141-42, 397, 603 
Drummond,  Henry (1786-1860)—British 
politician, Tory, member of the 
House of Commons; member of the 
Select Committee of Inquiry into the 
Condition of the British Army in the 
Crimea (1855).—29, 122, 310 
Duke, Sir James, Baronet (b. 1792) — 
member of the House of Commons, 
Free Trader.— 98 
Dulac—French general; commanded a 
division in the Crimea (1855).—547 
Dumouriez, Charles François (1739-
1823) — French general, prominent 
figure in the French Revolution,was 
close to the Girondists; betrayed the 
revolution in March 1793.—285 
Duncombe, Thomas Slingsby (1796-
1861) — British radical politician; 
Chartist in the 1840s; member of the 
House of Commons.—24, 27, 273, 
308, 311, 333 
Dundas, Henry, Viscount Melville (1742-
1811)—British statesman; Home Sec­
retary (1791-94), President of the 
Board of Control for India  (1793-
1801),  Secretary of State for War 
(1794-1801), First Lord of the Ad­
miralty (1804-05).—663 
Dundas, Sir James Whitley Deans (1785-
1862) — British admiral, command­
er-in-chief of the British fleet in 
the Mediterranean (1852-January 
1855).—69, 247 
Dundas, Richard Saunders (1802-1861) — 
British vice-admiral, commander-in-
chief of the British fleet in the Baltic 
(1855).—273,  293, 308-09, 488, 490, 
493, 494 
Dundonald—see Cochrane, Thomas, Earl 
of Dundonald 
Dunlop, Alexander Graham—English 
writer.— 286 
Duns Scotus, John (c. 1265-1308) — 
Scottish scholastic philosopher and 
theologian.—12 
Dupont de  l'Etang,  Pierre Antoine, comte 
(1765-1840) — French general; ca­
pitulated with his division at 
Bailen during the war in Spain (1808). 
— 147 E 
Ebner —Austrian general, commandant 
of the Przemysl fortress during the 
Crimean war.—497 
Ebrington, Hugh, Viscount of, Earl Fortes-
cue (1818-1905) —British politician, 
Whig, member of the House of 
Commons.—99, 239, 327, 479 
Ellenborough, Edward Law, Baron (1750-
1818)—British statesman and lawyer, 
Whig, later Tory; member of the 
House of Lords; Lord Chief Justice of 
the King's Bench (1802-1818).—190 
Ellenborough, Edward Law, Earl of 
(1790-1871)—British statesman, 
Tory, member of the House of 
Lords;  Governor-General of India 
(1842-44), First Lord of the Admiral­
ty (1846), President of the Board of 
Control for India (1858); son of 
Baron Ellenborough.—187, 189, 191, 
192, 194, 195, 483, 499 
Ellice, Edward (1781-1863)—British 
statesman, Whig, member of the 
House of Commons; member of the 
Select Committee of Inquiry into 
the Condition of the British Army 
in the Crimea (1855).—29 
Elliot, Sir George Augustus  (1813-
1901)—British naval officer, admiral 
from 1870; commanded a battleship 
in the Baltic (1854-55).—654 
Engels, Frederick (1820-1895)—3, 6, 11, 
32, 35, 62, 113, 132, 135, 137, 151, 
164, 180, 201, 216, 328, 334, 344, 
359, 504, 519, 521, 523, 538, 542, 
588, 597, 683 
Espartero, Baldomero, duque de la Vittoria 
(1793-1879)—Spanish general and 
politician; leader of the Progresista 
Party; Regent of Spain (1841-43), 
head of government (1854-56).—467 
Espinasse, Charles Marie Esprit (1815-
1859) — French general, Bonapartist; 
took part in the conquest of Algeria 
in the 1830s and 1840s and in the 
coup  d'état  of December 2, 1851; 
commanded a division in Dobruja 
(1854) and a brigade in the Crimea 
(1854-55).—109, 212 

=====第803页=====
Name Index 773 
Euclid (late 4th-early 3rd cent. 
B. C.)—Greek mathematician.—422 
Eugène Louis Jean Joseph, Prince Imperial 
(1856-1879)—son of Napoleon III, 
killed in the war against the Zulus.— 
615, 617, 619, 620 
Eugène, Prince of Savoy (François Eugène 
de Savoie-Carignan) (1663-1736) — 
Austrian general and statesman.— 
284, 405 
Eugénie Marie Ignace Augustine de Mon-
tijo de Guzmân, comtesse de Teba 
(1826-1920)—French Empress, wife 
of Napoleon III.—603 
Evans, David Morier (1819-1874) — 
British economist.—209 
Evans, Sir George de Lacy (1787-1870)— 
British general and Liberal politician, 
member of the House of Commons; 
commanded a division in the Crimea 
(1854).—22, 74, 75, 98, 635 
Exeter, Brownlow Cecil, Marquess of 
(1795-1867)—English aristocrat, 
Tory, member of the House of 
Lords.—353 
Eyre, Sir William (1805-1859)—British 
general; fought in the Crimean 
War.—332 
F 
Fabius (Quintus Fabius Maximus 
Verrucosus Cunctator) (c. 275-203 
B. C.) — Roman general who de­
feated Hannibal by avoiding a full-
scale battle; for his delaying tactics he 
was nicknamed Cunctator.— 663 
Failly, Pierre Louis Charles Achille de 
(1810-1892) —French general, Sena­
tor; commanded a division in the 
Crimea (1855).—572 
Farrer, Mr. Henry—churchwarden of 
St. Paneras, member of the Adminis­
trative Reform Association.—241 
Faucheux —French general; com­
manded a division in the Crimea 
(1855).—507-09 
Fawkes, Guy (1570-1606)—British of­
ficer, organiser of the Catholic Gun­
powder plot of November 5, 1605.— 
392 Ferdinand I (1751-1825)—King of the 
Two Sicilies (1816-25).—461 
Ferdinand II (1810-1859)—King of the 
Two Sicilies (1830-59), nicknamed 
King Bomba for the bombardment of 
Messina in 1848.—460, 461, 474 
Ferguson, Ronald Croford (1773-1841)— 
British general, member of the 
House of Commons; opposed the 
Duke of York's abuse of his posi­
tion.—670 
Filder (b. 1790) — British Commissary-
General; head of the army Commis­
sariat in the Crimea (1854-55) —  75, 
654 
Finlen, James—a Chartist leader; 
member of the Executive of the 
National Charter Association (1852-
58).—305 
Fitzgerald,  John  David,  Lord Fitzgerald 
(1816-1889)—Irish Liberal politician 
and lawyer, member of the House of 
Commons.—79, 80 
Fitzpatrick, Richard (1747-1813)— 
British general and politician, Whig 
M. P.; Chief Secretary for Ireland 
(1782),  Secretary for War  (1783, 
1806-07).—665 
Folkestone— British Radical M. P.—502 
Forey, Elie Frederic (1804-1872)— 
French general, later Marshal of 
France, Senator, Bonapartist; took 
part in the coup  d'état  of December 2, 
1851;  commanded a reserve force in 
the Crimea (1854-early 1855); ap­
pointed Governor of the Oran prov­
ince (North Africa) in April 1855.— 
116, 212 
Fox, Charles James (1749-1806)—British 
statesman, Whig leader; Foreign Sec­
retary (1782, 1783, 1806).—584, 586, 
587, 665 
Francis Joseph I (1830-1916)—Emperor 
of Austria (1848-1916).—119, 165, 
178, 425, 474, 482, 495, 498, 690, 
693 
Frederick II (the Great) (1712-1786) — 
King of Prussia (1740-86).—106, 405, 
414, 434 
Frederick VII (1808-1863)—King of 
Denmark (1848-63).— 395=96 
Frederick William III (1770-1840)  — 

=====第804页=====
774 Name Index 
King of Prussia (1797-1840).—283, 
659 
Frederick William IV (1795-1861)— 
King of Prussia (1840-61).—94, 105, 
537, 553, 659, 660 
French—British colonel.— 669 
Fuad Pasha, Mehemmed (1814-1869) — 
Turkish statesman; commissioner in 
the Danubian Principalities (1848); 
repeatedly held the posts of Grand 
Vizier and Foreign Minister in the 
1850s and 1860s.—609, 642, 675 
G 
Gaj, Ljudevit (1809-1872)—Croatian 
journalist, philologist and politician; 
adhered to the programme of Aus-
tro-Slavism.—158, 691 
Garibaldi, Giuseppe (1807-1882)— 
Italian revolutionary and democrat; 
headed a unit of volunteers in Lom-
bardy fighting against the Austrians 
(1848);  organised the defence of the 
Roman Republic between April and 
June 1849; led the struggle for Italy's 
national liberation in the 1850s and 
1860s.—460 
Gazee-Hassan (Gazi-Hassan) (d. 1790) — 
Turkish admiral; fought in the 
Russo-Turkish wars; Grand Vizier 
(1789-90).—700 
George III (1738-1820)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1760-1820).— 
383, 585-86, 666, 667 
George IV (1762-1830)—Prince Regent 
(1811-20), King of Great Britain and 
Ireland (1820-30).—303, 383, 670 
Gibbs—London police superintendent 
(1855).—324 
Gibson, Thomas Milner (1806-1884)— 
British statesman, Free Trader.— 
213-14, 223, 224, 247, 341 
Girardin, Emile de (1806-1881) — 
French journalist and politician; re­
publican during the 1848-49 revolu­
tion and later Bonapartist; editor of 
La Presse in the 1830s-1860s (with 
intervals); lacked principles in poli­
tics.—120 
Gladstone, William Ewart (1809-1898) — British statesman, Tory and later 
Peelite; leader of the Liberal Party in 
the second half of the nineteenth 
century; Chancellor of the Exchequer 
(1852-55,  1859-66), Prime Minister 
(1868-74, 1880-85, 1886, 1892-94).— 
8, 9, 12, 13, 25, 43, 45, 50, 70, 71, 
103, 126, 131, 143, 214, 225, 227, 
228, 231, 233, 234, 237, 239, 246, 258, 
259, 277, 278, 290, 353, 354, 356, 398, 
472-73,  475, 554, 555, 560 
Gläser —Austrian lieutenant-field mar­
shal; commandant of the Zaleszczyki 
fortress during the Crimean 
war.—497 
Goderich—see Robinson, Frederick John 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-
1832)—German poet.—306 
Gorchakoff  (Gorchakov),  Alexander Mikhai-
lovich, Prince (1798-1883)—Russian 
statesman and diplomat; envoy in 
Vienna (1854-56), Foreign Minister 
(1856-82), State Chancellor (1867-
82).—141,  142, 225, 234, 398 
Gorchakoff (Gorchakov), Mikhail Dmit-
rievich, Prince (1793-1861)—Russian 
general; commanded the Russian 
troops on the Danube (1853-54); 
commander-in-chief of the Southern 
army (September 1854—February 
1855) and of the army in the Crimea 
(February-December 1855); Gover­
nor-General of the Kingdom of Po­
land (1856-61).—178, 205, 255, 484, 
504, 508, 509, 522, 525-27, 529, 532, 
533, 539, 541, 552, 563, 564, 572, 
694, 695 
Gordons—English aristocratic family.— 
664 
Gordon, Alexander—British colonel, son 
of Lord Aberdeen.—664-65 
Gordon, Sir James Willoughby, Baronet 
(1773-1851)—British general, the 
Duke of York's secretary (1804-09).— 
664 
Gordon, John—British major; served on 
Dominica (1801).—664 
Gordon, Sir John William (1814-1870) — 
British officer, later general, military 
engineer; commander of the en­
gineering troops in the Crimea 
(1854-55).—654 

=====第805页=====
Name Index 775 
Gordon, Sir Robert (1791-1847)—British 
diplomat, brother of Lord Aberdeen; 
envoy extraordinary at Constan­
tinople (1828-31) and at Vienna 
(1841-46).—664 
Grach, Friedrich (1812-1854)—Prussian 
colonel; served in the Turkish army 
from 1841; a leader of the defence 
of Silistria (1854).—455 
Graham, Sir James Robert George (1792-
1861)—British statesman, Whig and 
later Peelite; Home Secretary in the 
Peel Government (1841-46); First 
Lord of the Admiralty (1830-34, 
1852-55).—8, 25, 43, 44, 50, 69, 71. 
118, 218, 225, 246-48, 258, 273, 
277, 353, 354, 356, 357, 493, 494, 
512-18 
Graham, Lord Montagu William 
(b. 1807)—British politician, member 
of the House of Commons (1852-
57)._  108 
Granby, Charles Cecil John Manners, Mar­
quis of, Duke of Rutland (1815-1888) 
— English politician, Tory, member of 
the House of Commons.— 227 
Granier de Cassagnac, Bernard Adolphe 
(1806-1880)—French journalist, Or-
leanist until the 1848 revolution and 
later Bonapartist; deputy to the 
Corps  législatif;  editor-in-chief of Le 
Pays in the 1850s.—139 
Grantham, Thomas Robinson, Baron 
(1738-1786) — British statesman and 
diplomat, Whig; ambassador to Ma­
drid (1771-79), Foreign Secretary 
(1782-83).—586 
Granville, Augustus Bozzi (1783-1872) — 
English physician of Italian des­
cent.—68 
Granville, George Leveson-Gower, Earl of 
(1815-1891) — British statesman, 
Whig and later Liberal; Foreign Sec­
retary (1851-52, 1870-74, 1880-85), 
President of the Council (1852-54, 
1855-58).—49, 57, 295, 300 
Granville, Marie Louisa Pellini de Dal-
berg (d. 1860) — first wife of the Earl 
of Granville.—306 
Grenville, William Wyndham, Baron 
(1759-1834) —British statesman, To­
ry and later Whig; Foreign Secre­tary (1791-1801), Prime Minister 
(1806-07).—666 
Grey, Earls of—English noble family.— 
49 
Grey, Charles, Earl of, Viscount Howick, 
Baron Grey (1764-1845)—British 
statesman, a Whig leader; First Lord 
of the Admiralty (1806), Prime 
Minister (1830-34).—377, 587 
Grey, Sir George (1799-1882)—British 
statesman, Whig; Home Secretary 
(1846-52, 1855-58, 1861-66), Colonial 
Secretary (1854-55).—49, 349, 369 
Grey, Sir Henry George, Viscount Howick, 
Earl of (1802-1894) —British states­
man, Whig; Secretary at War (1835-
39), Colonial Secretary (1846-52); son 
of Charles Grey.—49, 391 
Griffiths, W.— English clergyman.— 258 
Grosvenor,  Richard,  Marquis of Westmins­
ter (1795-1869) —English aristocrat, 
Whig.—323 
Grosvenor, Lord Robert, Baron Ebury 
( 1801  -1893) — British politician, 
Whig, member of the House of 
Commons.—218, 239, 304, 307, 308, 
320, 323, 327 
Guizot, François Pierre Guillaume (1787-
1874) — French historian and states­
man; virtually directed the home and 
foreign policy of France from 1840 
to the February 1848 revolution; 
expressed the interests of the finan­
cial bourgeoisie.—139, 209 
Gurney, Samuel (1786-1856)—English 
banker, head of the big London 
discount bank of Overend, Gurney 
and Co. (1825-56).—335, 336 
Gurowski, Adam, Count von (1805-
1866) — Polish journalist; lived in 
emigration in the USA from 1849 
onwards; contributed to the New-York 
Daily Tribune in the 1850s.—689 
Gustavus II Adolphus (1594-1632)— 
King of Sweden (1611-32).—464 
Guyon, Richard Debaufre (Khourschid 
Pasha) (1803-1856)—Turkish general 
of British descent; took part in the 
Hungarian revolution of 1848-49; 
commanded Turkish troops in the 
Caucasus (1853).—629 

=====第806页=====
776 Name Index 
H 
Hafiz Pasha—Turkish general; com­
manded Turkish troops in the 
Caucasus (1855).—632 
Hale, William—owner of a rocket fac­
tory in the suburbs of London in the 
early 1850s.—404 
Halford,  Sir Henry, Baronet (b. 1798) — 
member of the House of Commons 
(1832-57).—96 
Hall, Sir Benjamin, Baron Llanover 
(1802-1867)—British statesman, 
member of the House of Commons; 
Mayfair Radical; President of the 
Board of Health (August 1854-July 
1855),  First Commissioner of Works 
and Public Buildings (1855-58).—26, 
368 
Hall, Sir John (1795-1866)—British 
army doctor; principal medical of­
ficer and inspector-general of hospi­
tals in the Crimea (1854-56).—12 
Haller, Karl Ludwig von (1768-1854)— 
Swiss lawyer and historian, ab­
solutist.—660 
Handcock, John Stratford—plaintiff in 
the case of the inheritance of Eliza 
Josephine Handcock, mistress of the 
Earl of Clanricarde.—62 
Hanka, Wenceslaus (Vaclav)  (1791-
1861)—Czech philologist and his­
torian; held conservative pan-Slavist 
views.—158, 691 
Hanover, House of—English royal 
dynasty (1714-1901)—596 
Hardinge, Sir Henry, Viscount Hardinge 
of Lahore (1785-1856) —British gen­
eral, field marshal from 1855, states­
man, Tory; Secretary at War (1828-
30, 1841-44), Governor-General of 
India (1844-January 1848), command­
er-in-chief of the British army 
(1852-56).—102, 130, 558 
Hardwicke, Charles Philip Yorke, Earl of 
(1799-1873) —British admiral and 
politician, Tory, member of the 
House of Lords.— 190 
Harrington, Leicester Fitzgerald Charles, 
Stanhope, Earl of (1784-1862) — 
British colonel and politician, Whig.— 
478, 479 Harris—see Malmesbury, James Harris, 
Earl of and Viscount Fitzharris 
Harrison, George—English worker, 
Chartist.—99 
Hart, Jakob James—British consul in 
Leipzig.— 561 
Hart, Richard—English lawyer, support­
er of David Urquhart.—478, 480 
Hassan-Pasha—see Gazee-Hassan 
Haxthausen, August Franz Ludwig Maria, 
Baron von (1792-1866) — Prussian 
conservative official and writer; au­
thor of works on the agrarian system 
and the peasant commune in 
Russia.—166 
Haynau, Julius Jakob, Baron von (1786-
1853) — Austrian general; took part in 
suppressing the 1848-49 revolutionary 
movements in Italy and Hungary.— 
251 
Heathcote, Sir William (1801-1881) — 
member of the House of Com­
mons.—227, 228, 245 
Henry IV (1367-1413) —King of Eng­
land (1399-1413).—12, 480, 486 
Henry VII (1457-1509) —King of Eng­
land (1485-1509).—374 
Henry VIII (1491-1547) —King of Eng­
land (1509-47).—274, 615 
Herbert, Sidney, Baron Herbert of Lea 
(1810-1861) —British statesman, Tory 
and later Peelite; Secretary to the 
Admiralty (1841-45), Secretary 
at War (1845-46, 1852-55).—8, 21, 
22, 43-45, 50, 69, 126, 131, 214, 353, 
354, 356, 357, 397 
Herbillon, Emile (1794-1866) —French 
general; commanded a division in the 
Crimea (1855).—507, 508 
Herwegh, Georg Friedrich (1817-1875) — 
German democratic poet.— 258 
Hess, Heinrich Hermann  Josef,  Baron von 
(1788-1870)—Austrian general, later 
field marshal; took part in suppress­
ing the 1848-49 revolution in Italy; 
commander-in-chief of the Austrian 
troops in Hungary, Galicia and the 
Danubian Principalities (1854-55).— 
178, 482, 496, 498 
Hobbes, Thomas (1588-1679) —English 
materialist philosopher.—247 

=====第807页=====
Name Index 777 
Holstein-Gottorp, House of—ducal dynas­
ty (1544-1918)—396 
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) (65-8 
B.C.)—Roman poet.—158, 571, 691 
Horner, Leonard (1785-1864)—English 
geologist and public figure; factory 
inspector (1833-56), championed 
the workers' interests.—96, 370 
Horsman, Edward (1807-1876) —British 
statesman, Liberal, member of the 
House of Commons; Chief Secretary 
for Ireland (1855-57).—24 
Hotham, Sir Charles (1806-1855)— 
British naval officer; Governor of 
Victoria (Australia) in  1854-55.—  65, 
66 
Houchard, Jean Nicolas (1740-1793)— 
French general; commanded the 
Northern army which defeated the 
Duke of York's troops (1793).—663 
Howard, George William Frederick, Earl 
of Carlisle (1802-1864) —British states­
man, Whig, member of the House of 
Lords;  Lord Lieutenant of Ireland 
(1855-58,  1859-64).—79 
Hughes, T. M. — English writer; lived in 
Spain for several years; Lisbon cor­
respondent of The Times.—469 
Hugo,  Victor Marie (1802-1885)— 
French writer, republican; deputy to 
the Constituent and Legislative As­
semblies (1848-51); lived in emigra­
tion on Jersey (one of the Channel 
Islands) after the coup d'état of 
December 2, 1851; expelled by the 
local authorities at the end of 1855.— 
479, 582 
Hume, Joseph (1777-1855)—British 
politician, a Radical leader, member 
of the House of Commons.—17, 47, 
48, 209, 243, 377, 381 
I 
Ibrahim Pasha (1789-1848) — foster-son 
of the Viceroy of Egypt Mehemet 
Ali; Egyptian commander-in-chief 
during the wars against Turkey 
(1831-33,  1839-41); virtual ruler of 
Egypt from 1847.—18 Iskender (Iskander) Bey (Alexander Ilinski) 
(1810-1861)—Turkish general of Pol­
ish descent; took part in the 1848-49 
revolution in Hungary; commanded 
Turkish troops on the Danube  (1853-
54), in the Crimea (1855) and in the 
Caucasus (1855-56).—136, 455 
Ismail Pasha (György Kmety) (1810-
1865)—Turkish general of Magyar 
descent; took part in the 1848-49 
revolution in Hungary; commanded 
Turkish troops on the Danube  (1853-
54) and in the Caucasus (1854-55).— 
591 
J 
Jeffreys, George, Baron Jeffreys of Wem 
(1648-1689)—English lawyer, Tory; 
Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench 
(1683-85), known for his extremely 
harsh sentences.—190 
Johnson—police commissioner in Bal-
larat, Victoria (Australia).— 66 
Johnstone, Andrew James Cochrane (b. 
1767)—British colonel, member of 
the House of Commons, Governor of 
Dominica (1797-1803).—663, 666 
Jomini, Henri, Baron (1779-1869)  — 
Swiss-born general in the French and 
later in the Russian army; author of 
works on strategy and military his­
tory.—435,  539, 540, 613, 627 
Jones, Ernest Charles (1819-1869) — 
prominent figure in the English 
labour movement, proletarian poet 
and journalist, Left-wing Chartist 
leader; editor of the Notes to the 
People and The People's Paper; friend 
of Marx and Engels.— 71, 100, 168, 
195-97,  241, 394, 524 
Jones, Sir Harry David (1791-1866) — 
British general, military engineer; 
commander of the engineering 
troops in the Crimea  (1855).—  26, 
114 
Jones, Mrs. Jane Ernest (d. 1857) — wife 
of Ernest Jones.—524 
Jones, John Gale (1769-1838) —British 
Radical politician, surgeon.—190-91 

=====第808页=====
778 Name Index 
Jones, John Paul (1747-1792)—Scottish-
born American naval officer, pre­
viously a contrabandist and slave-
trader; fought in the American 
War of Independence (1775-83) and, 
as a rear-admiral, in the Russo-
Turkish war on the side of the 
Russians (1788).—700, 701 
Jones, William—Chartist, secretary of 
the committee appointed to organise 
Feargus O'Connor's funeral (Sep­
tember 1855).—524 
Juvenal (Decimus Junius Juvenalis) 
(c. 60-d. after  127)  — Roman satirical 
poet.— 259 
K 
Kelly—British lieutenant-colonel; com­
manded a regiment in the Crimea 
(1855).—153 
Keogh, William Nicholas (1817-1878)— 
Irish lawyer and politician, a leader 
of the Irish Brigade in Parliament; 
held several high judicial posts in 
Ireland.— 79 
King, Peter John Locke (1811-1885) — 
British politician, Radical, member of 
the House of Commons.—381, 392 
Kmety—see Ismail Pasha 
Knesebeck, Karl Friedrich, Baron von 
(1768-1848)—Prussian field marshal-
general; took part in the wars against 
Napoleon I.—284, 285 
Knight, Charles (1791-1873) —English 
liberal journalist and publisher.— 281 
Kollâr (Kolar), Jân (1793-1852) —Slovak 
poet and philologist, representative 
of the Slovak and Czech Enlighten­
ment; supported the programme of 
Austro-Slavism.—158, 691 
Kopitar, Bartholomäus (Bartlomiej) 
(1780-1844)—Slovenian scholar, au­
thor of works on the language, litera­
ture and history of the Slavs.—158, 
691 
Korff,  Fyodor Khristoforovich, Baron 
von—Russian general; commanded a 
cavalry division in the Crimea 
(1855).—564, 694, 695 
Korniloff (Kornilov), Vladimir Alexeyevich 
(1806-1854) —Russian admiral, chief of staff of the Black Sea fleet (1849-
53); an organiser of the defence of 
Sevastopol—134, 135, 137 
Kosciusko, Thaddens (Kosciuszko, Tadeusz 
Andrzej Bonawentura) (1746-1817)  — 
prominent figure in the Polish na­
tional liberation movement; took part 
in the American War of Indepen­
dence in 1776-83; leader of the 
Polish uprising of 1784.—285 
Kossuth, Lajos (1802-1894)—leader of 
the Hungarian national liberation 
movement; head of the Hungarian 
revolutionary government (1848-49); 
emigrated to Turkey after the defeat 
of the revolution and later to Eng­
land and the USA.—581 
Kroushoff (Khrushchov), Alexander Pet-
rovich (1806-1875)—Russian general; 
commanded troops in the Crimea 
(1853-56); took part in the defence 
of Sevastopol.—116 
L 
Labouchere, Henry, Baron Taunton (1798-
1869) — British statesman, Whig; 
President of the Board of Trade 
(1839-41,  1847-52); Secretary of State 
for the Colonies (1855-58).—560 
La Marmora (Lamarmora), Alfonso F er­
rer o, marchese de (1804-1878)—Italian 
general and politician; War Minister 
of Piedmont (1848, 1849-55, 1856-
59); commanded a Sardinian corps in 
the Crimea (1855); Prime Minister of 
Piedmont and of the Italian King­
dom (1859, 1860, 1864-66).—507 
Lamb (born c. 1785) — rector, held 
two benefices in Sussex.—  51, 52 
Lamb, Edward Augustus—patron of the 
livings in Sussex, son of the above.— 
52 
Lamb—rector and owner of the living 
in West Hackney, brother of Edward 
Augustus Lamb.—52 
Lamoricière, Christophe Léon Louis 
Juehault de (1806-1865)—French gen­
eral and politician, moderate republi­
can; took part in the conquest of 
Algeria in the 1830s and 1840s; 
suppressed the uprising of Paris 

=====第809页=====
Name Index 779 
workers in June 1848; War Minister 
in the Cavaignac Government (June-
December 1848); banished after the 
coup  d'état  of December 2,  1851.— 
87, 109, 221 
La Motterouge (La Motte Rouge), Joseph 
Edouard de (1804-1883) —French gen­
eral; commanded a division in the 
Crimea (1855).—547 
Langford,  John Alfred (1823-1903)— 
English journalist, Liberal; co-editor 
of The Birmingham Daily Press 
(1855).—394-96 
Lansdowne, Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, Mar­
quis of (1780-1863) — British states­
man, Whig; Chancellor of the Exche­
quer (1806-07); President of the Coun­
cil (1830-41,  1846-52); Minister with­
out portfolio (1852-63).—8, 300, 662, 
666, 671 
Lanskoi, Sergei Stepanovich, Count from 
1861 (1787-1862)—Russian states­
man; Minister of the Interior (1855-
61).—576 
Las Cases, Emmanuel Augustin Dieudon-
né, comte de (1766-1842)—French his­
torian, author of Memorial de Sainte-
Hélène, a book about Napoleon I. 
—286 
Lawley, Francis Charles (1825-1901) — 
British journalist, Gladstone's private 
secretary (1852-54); correspondent of 
The Times in the USA (1854-65).—62 
Layard,  Sir Austen Henry (1817-1894) — 
British archaeologist and politician, 
Radical, subsequently Liberal, 
member of the House of Commons; 
member of the Select Committee of 
Inquiry into the Condition of the 
British Army in the Crimea (1855).— 
24-25,29,40,57,58,98, 131, 167, 187, 
191, 214, 218, 237, 238, 258, 272, 274, 
277, 299, 340, 341, 368, 514 
Ledger—publisher of the weekly Penny 
Times.—281 
Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre Auguste (1807-
1874)—French journalist and politi­
cian, a leader of the petty-bourgeois 
democrats, editor of La Réforme; 
Minister of the Interior in the Provi­
sional Government, deputy to the 
Constituent and Legislative Assem­blies (1848), where he headed the 
Montagne party; emigrated to Eng­
land after the demonstration of June 
13, 1849.—29 
Lee, James—English physician.— 68 
Leroy —see Saint-Arnaud, Armand Jac­
ques Achille Leroy de 
Lestocq (L'Estocq), Anton Wilhelm (1738-
1815)—Prussian general, com­
manded a corps in the war of 1806-
07.—569 
Le Vaillant (Levaillant)—French gener­
al; commanded an infantry division 
in the Crimea (1854-55).—547 
Lewis, Sir George Cornewall, Baronet 
(1806-1863) — British statesman, 
Whig; Financial Secretary to the 
Treasury (1850-52); editor of The 
Edinburgh Review (1852-55); Chan­
cellor of the Exchequer (1855-58), 
Home Secretary (1859-61), Secretary 
of State for War (1861-63).—49, 103, 
554, 555 
Lieven, Darya (Dorothea) Khristoforovna, 
Princess  (1785-1857)—wife of the Rus­
sian diplomat Khristofor Andreyevich 
Lieven; hostess of political salons in 
London and Paris.—  300,  561 
Ligne, Charles Joseph, Prince de (1735-
1814)—Austrian general, diplomat 
and writer; fought in the Seven 
Years'  War (1756-63).—283 
Lindsay, William Schaw (1816-1877) — 
English shipowner and merchant, 
Free Trader, member of the House 
of Commons.— 311 
Liprandi, Pavel Petrovich (1796-1864) — 
Russian general; commanded a divi­
sion on the Danube (1853-54) and a 
corps in the Crimea (1854-55).—486, 
487, 507 
Liverpool, Robert Banks Jenkinson, Earl of 
(1770-1828)—British statesman, a 
Tory leader; held a number of minis­
terial posts; Prime Minister (1812-
27).—16,  28, 104, 190, 311 
Loudon, Gideon Ernst, Baron von (1716-
1790) — Austrian field marshal-
general; commanded a cavalry corps 
in the Seven Years' War (1756-63); 
took part in the campaign against 
Turkey (1788-89).—569 

=====第810页=====
780 Name Index 
Louis XIV (1638-1715) —King of 
France (1643-1715).—405 
Louis XVI (1754-1793) —King of 
France (1774-92); guillotined during 
the French Revolution.— 293 
Louis XVIII (1755-1824)—King of 
France (1814-15, 1815-24).—659 
Louis Bonaparte—see Napoleon HI 
Louis Napoleon—see Napoleon III 
Louis Philippe (1773-1850) —Duke of 
Orleans, King of the French (1830-
48).—62,  71, 139, 141, 150, 190, 213, 
311, 558, 581 
Lovett, William (1800-1877)—English 
artisan, petty-bourgeois democrat- a 
Chartist leader in the 1830s.—243 
Lowe, Robert, Viscount Sherbrooke  (1811-
1892)—British statesman and jour­
nalist, contributor to The Times; 
Whig and later Liberal, member of 
the House of Commons; Vice-
President of the Board of Trade 
(1855-58).—29, 122, 218, 227, 228, 
245, 246, 357 
Lucan, George Charles Bingham, Earl of 
(1800-1888)—British general, later 
field marshal, Tory; commanded a 
cavalry division in the Crimea (1854-
early 1855).—102 
Lüders, Alexander Nikolayevich, Count 
(1790-1874)—Russian general; com­
manded a corps on the Danube 
(1853-54) and the Southern army 
(1855);  commander-in-chief of the 
army in the Crimea (early 1856).— 
361, 577, 578, 579 
Lyndhurst, John Singleton Copley, Baron of 
(1772-1863) — British statesman and 
lawyer, Tory; Lord Chancellor (1827-
30, 1834-35, 1841-46).—104-06, 228, 
482, 498 
Lyons,  Edmund,  Baron Lyons (1790-
1858) — British admiral; commander-
in-chief of the British fleet in the 
Black Sea (1855).—216, 219, 634, 
638 
Lytton, Edward George Earle Lytton, 
Bulwer-Lytton (1803-1873)—British 
writer and politician, Whig, Tory 
from 1852; member of the House of 
Commons.—247, 289, 337-42, 348, 
352, 353, 367 M 
Macdonald,  John Cameron—contributor 
to The Times.—124 
MacGregor, John (1797-1857)—Scottish 
statistician and historian, Free 
Trader; Vice-President of the Board 
of Trade (1840-47); member of the 
House of Commons from 1847.— 
562 
MacMahon, Marie Edme Patrice Maurice, 
comte de, duc de Magenta (1808-
1893)—French general and subse­
quently marshal, Senator, Bonapart-
ist; took part in the wars waged by 
the Second Empire; commanded a 
division in the Crimea (1855); Presi­
dent of the Third Republic  (1873-
79).—547,  551, 552 
McNeill, Sir John (1795-1883)—British 
diplomat, envoy to Teheran (1836-
39, 1841-42); member of the Com­
mission of Inquiry into the Commis­
sariat Department and General Or­
ganisation of Troops in the Crimea 
(1855).—26 
Magnan, Bernard Pierre (1791-1865)— 
Marshal of France and Senator, 
Bonapartist; one of the leaders of the 
coup  d'état  of December 2,  1851.— 
220, 603 
Magne, Pierre (1806-1879)—French 
statesman, Bonapartist; Minister of 
Finance (1855-60, 1867-69, 1870, 
1873-74).—534 
Mahmud II (1785-1839)—Sultan of 
Turkey (1808-39).—18, 451 
Maistre, Joseph Marie, comte de  (1753-
1821)—French writer, monarchist, 
an ideologist of the aristocratic and 
clerical reaction.— 660 
Malet, Alexander, Baronet (1800-1886) — 
British diplomat, envoy to Frankfurt 
am Main (German Confederation) 
(1849-66).—553 
Malins, Sir Richard (1805-1882) — 
English lawyer, Tory, member of the 
House of Commons.— 311 
Malmesbury, James Harris, Earl of and 
Viscount Fitzharris (1746-1820)— 
British diplomat and statesman, 
Whig; ambassador to St. Petersburg 
(1777-82).—584-86 

=====第811页=====
Name Index 781 
Malmesbury, James Howard Harris, Earl 
of (1807-1889)—British statesman, 
Tory; Foreign Secretary (1852, 1858-
59).—118,  294-95, 394-97, 662 
Mansfield,  Sir William Rose, Baron  Sand­
hurst (1819-1876)—British general, 
military adviser to the British Embas­
sy at Constantinople (1855-56).—609, 
611, 653 
Manteuffel, Otto Theodor, Baron von 
(1805-1882)—Prussian statesman; 
Minister of the Interior (1848-50); 
Prime Minister and Minister of 
Foreign Affairs (1850-58).—105 
Maria Alexandrovna (1824-1880)— 
Princess of Hesse-Darmstadt; Em­
press of Russia, wife of Alexander II 
(from 1841).—537 
Marlborough, John Churchill, Duke of 
(1650-1722)—British general; com­
mander-in-chief of the British troops 
in the war of the Spanish Succession 
(1702-11).—514 
Martimprey, Edouard Charles, comte de 
(1808-1883)—French general, Se­
nator; chief of the General Staff of 
the French army in the Crimea 
(1854-55).—634 
Marx, Karl (1818-1883).—11, 33, 34, 
39, 62, 63, 195, 209, 297, 328, 359, 
394, 605, 615, 672 
Masséna, André, duc de Rivoli, prince d' 
Essling (1756-1817)—Marshal of 
France; fought in the Napoleonic 
wars.—569 
Maurice (Moritz) of Nassau, Prince of 
Orange and Count of Nassau (1567-
1625) — Stadtholder of the Nether­
lands (1585-1625); military leader in 
the war of independence.— 435 
Mayne, Sir Richard (1796-1868) —Chief 
Police Commissioner in London (from 
1850).—323,  324, 333 
Mayran, Joseph Decius Nicolas  (1801-
1855) — French general; took part in 
the siege of Sevastopol.— 330 
Mazzini, Giuseppe (1805-1872) — Italian 
revolutionary, democrat, a leader of 
the national liberation movement in 
Italy; head of the Provisional Gov­
ernment of the Roman Republic 
(1849).—581 M'Dickey— Chartist.—240 
Melbourne, William Lamb, Viscount 
(1779-1848)—British statesman, 
Whig; Home Secretary (1830-34), 
Prime Minister (1834, 1835-41).—22, 
30-31,  78, 384, 388, 560 
Mellinet, Emile (1798-1894)—French 
general, Senator; commanded a 
guards division in the Crimea 
(1855)—547 
Metastasio, Pietro Antonio Domenico 
Bonaventure Trapassi (1698-1782) — 
Italian poet, author of librettos.— 382 
Metternich-Winneburg, Clemens Wenzel 
Lothar, Prince von (1773-1859)— 
Austrian statesman and diplomat; 
Minister of Foreign Affairs (1809-
21), Chancellor (1821-48); an organ­
iser of the Holy Alliance.—159-60, 
247, 283, 691, 692 
Miall, Edward (1809-1881) —British Ra­
dical politician and writer; preacher 
of non-conformism; member of the 
House of Commons.—  581,  582 
Michael (Mikhail Nikolayevich) (1832-
1909) — Russian Grand Duke, fourth 
son of Nicholas I of Russia.— 67 
Michèle, C. E., de—owner and an editor 
of The Morning Post.—562 
Miklosich, Franz (Mikloszic, Franciszek) 
von (1813-1891)—professor of Slavic 
philology at Vienna University (1849-
86); founder of the comparative 
grammar of Slavic languages; Slove­
nian by birth.—158, 691 
Miles, William (1797-1878)—English 
financier, Tory, member of the 
House of Commons.— 29 
Milner Gibson—see Gibson, Thomas 
Milner 
Minié, Claude Etienne (1804-1879) — 
French colonel, inventor of a new 
type of rifle adopted by the French 
army in 1852.—412, 420, 421, 426, 
436, 458, 462 
Minto,  Gilbert Elliot, Earl of (1782-
1859) — British statesman and dip­
lomat, Whig; First Lord of the Ad­
miralty (1835-41), Lord Privy Seal 
(1846-52); was on a diplomatic mis­
sion in Italy (1847-48).—391 
Mitchely—see Michèle, C. E., de 

=====第812页=====
782 Name Index 
M'Mahon—see MacMahon, Marie 
Edme Patrice Maurice, comte de, duc de 
Magenta 
Mohammed (Muhammad, Mahomet) 
(c. 570-632)—founder of Islam.— 
584 
Mohammed-Shah (1810-1848) — Shah of 
Persia (1834-48).—19 
Molesworth, Sir William, Baronet (1810-
1855)—British statesman, Mayfair 
Radical, member of the House of 
Commons; First Commissioner of the 
Board of Works and Public Buildings 
(1853-55), Secretary of State for the 
Colonies (1855).—222, 223, 246-47, 
368 
Moltke, Helmuth Karl  Bernhard,  Count 
von (1800-1891) — Prussian army of­
ficer, subsequently field marshal-
general, military writer and strategist; 
served in the Turkish army (1835-
39).—147 
Monet, de—French general; com­
manded a brigade in the Crimea 
(1854-early 1855).—116 
Monsell, William, Baron Emly (1812-
1894) — Irish politician; a leader of 
the Irish Brigade in Parliament; Clerk 
of the Ordnance (1852-57).—58, 79 
Montalembert, Charles Forbes René de 
Tryon, comte de (1810-1870)—French 
politician and writer, deputy to the 
Constituent and Legislative Assem­
blies (1848-51); Orleanist, leader of 
the Catholic party; supported Louis 
Bonaparte during the coup  d'état  of 
December 2, 1851 but soon after­
wards joined the opposition.—139, 
601 
Montalembert, Marc René, marquis de 
(1714-1800) — French general, milit­
ary engineer, fortification special­
ist.—262,  435 
Montecucculi (Montecuccoli),  Raimund, 
Count, Prince of the Holy Roman Em­
pire, Duke of Melfi (1609-1680) — 
Austrian general and strategist of 
Italian descent, field marshal from 
1658;  took part in the Thirty Years' 
War (1618-48) and the wars against 
Turkey and France.— 284 
Monteith, R.—British official.— 562 Montesquieu, Charles Louis de Secondât, 
Baron de la Brède et de (1689-
1755) — French philosopher, an 
ideologist of the Enlightenment.— 300 
Montijo—see Eugénie Marie Ignace Au­
gustine de Montijo de Guzmân, comtesse 
de Teba 
Morley, S.—chairman of the meeting 
organised by the Association of Ad­
ministrative Reform in London on 
June 13, 1855.—290 
Morny, Charles Auguste Louis Joseph, due 
de (1811-1865)—French politician, 
Bonapartist; an organiser of the coup 
d'état  of December 2, 1851; Minister 
of the Interior (December 1851-
January 1852); President of the Corps 
législatif (1854-56, 1857-65).—139, 
601, 603 
Morris, Mowbray (1818-1874) — man­
ager of The Times (1847-73).—122 
Muntz, George Frederick (1794-1857) — 
British arms manufacturer and Radi­
cal politician, member of the House 
of Commons.— 79 
Muravieff (Muravyev), Nikolai Niko-
layevich (Karski) (1794-1866) — 
Russian general, commander-in-chief 
of the Russian Caucasian army and 
Governor-General of the Caucasus 
(1854-56).—269, 288, 567, 612, 627, 
640, 641, 644, 646, 696 
Murrough, John Patrick (b. 1822) — 
British Liberal politician, member of 
the House of Commons.—99 
Mustapha Pasha—Turkish general.— 
609 
N 
Napiers—English aristocratic family.— 
514 
Napier, Sir Charles, Count Cape St. 
Vincent (1786-1860) —British admi­
ral, member of the House of Com­
mons;  commanded the British fleet 
in the Baltic (1854).—247, 248, 273, 
310, 493, 494, 513-18 
Napier, Sir Charles James (1782-1853)— 
British general; fought in the Penin­
sular war (1808-14); commanded the 
British troops that conquered the 

=====第813页=====
Name Index 783 
Sind (1842-43); ruler of the Sind 
(1843-47).—514 
Napier, Edward Délavai Hungerford Elers 
(1808-1870) —British colonel, lieuten­
ant-general from 1864; organised 
the maintenance of the British army 
in the Crimea (1854-55).— 6 
Napier, Sir William Francis Patrick 
(1785-1860)—British general and 
military historian; fought in the 
Peninsular war (1808-14).—34, 42, 
413, 414, 419, 421, 423, 433, 514 
Napoleon I Bonaparte (1769-1821)— 
Emperor of the French (1804-14 and 
1815).—35,  50, 88,  91-93,  110, 111, 
122-23,  150, 177, 204, 248, 262, 272, 
285, 286, 330, 405, 406-08, 414, 469, 
476, 479, 502, 528, 544, 557, 570, 
571, 572, 579, 599, 601, 618, 627 
Napoleon HI (Châties Louis Napoleon 
Bonaparte) (1808-1873)—Napoleon 
I's nephew, President of the Second 
Republic (December 1848-1851), Em­
peror of the French (1852-70).—8, 
30, 50, 67-74, 76, 86-88, 90-94, 109, 
110, 111, 112,  117-21,  136, 139, 142, 
144, 146-49, 150, 177, 179, 205, 211, 
212, 220, 247, 251, 267-72, 278, 286, 
287, 289, 292, 293, 297, 317, 334, 
343, 347, 351, 357, 359, 364, 368, 
412, 416, 474, 478, 480, 484, 498, 
518, 534, 555, 557, 572, 581-82, 596, 
599-604, 613, 615-20, 639, 641, 649, 
677 
Narvâez, Ramon Maria, duque de Valen­
cia (1800-1868)—Spanish general 
and statesman, leader of the Mod-
erado party; head of government 
(1844-46,  1847-51,  1856-57, 1864-65, 
1866-68).—467, 468 
Nassau-Siegen, Karl Heinrich Nikolaus 
Otto,  Prince von (1745-1808) — 
Russian admiral; commanded a Russian 
rowing-boat flotilla during the Russo-
Turkish war of 1787-91.—700, 701 
Nesselrode, Karl Vasilyevich, Count 
(1780-1862)—Russian statesman and 
diplomat; Foreign Minister (1816-
56); State Chancellor from 1845.— 
104, 229, 230, 234, 235, 397 
Newcastle, Henry Pelham Fiennes Pelham 
Clinton, Duke of (1811-1864) —British statesman, Peelite, Secretary at War 
(1852-54), Secretary for War (1854-
55).—28,  44-45, 102, 126, 131, 353, 
354, 356, 357 
Nicholas I (1796-1855) —Emperor of 
Russia (1825-55).—17, 36-38, 54, 59, 
67, 68, 94, 104, 118, 147, 164, 229, 
235, 275, 288, 397, 484, 513, 578, 
579, 595, 689 
Nicolay, J.  A.—  British politician, Radi­
cal, champion of parliamentary re­
form; member of the Executive of 
the Reform League in the 1860s.— 
99 
Niel, Adolphe (1802-1869) —French 
general and later marshal; comman­
der of the engineering troops in the 
French expeditionary force in the 
Baltic (1854) and in the French army 
in the Crimea (1855).—87, 91, 98, 
114, 517, 542, 546-49, 686 
Nightingale, Florence (1820-1910)—an 
organiser of the medical service in 
the British army during the Crimean 
war.—125,  129 
Nisard,  Jean Marie Napoleon Desire 
(1806-1888)—French journalist and 
literary historian, professor at the 
Sorbonne in the 1850s; justified the 
coup  d'état  of December 2,  1851.— 
602 
Nordenstam, Johann Moritz, Baron— 
lieutenant-general, Governor of Hel-
singfors (1845).—309 
O 
O'Brien, William Smith (1803-1864) — 
Right-wing leader of the Young Ire­
land society; sentenced to death in 
1848 after an unsuccessful attempt to 
organise an uprising, commuted to 
life deportation; amnestied in 
1856.—386 
O'Connell,  Daniel (1775-1847)—Irish 
lawyer and politician, leader of the 
Liberal wing of the national libera­
tion movement.—47, 78, 79, 243, 
343, 383-84, 386 
O'Connor,  Feargus Edward (1794-
1855) — Left-wing Chartist leader, 

=====第814页=====
784 Name Index 
editor-in-chief of The Northern Star; 
reformist after 1848.—47, 524 
Oliphant, Laurence (1829-1888) — 
English traveller and journalist; the 
Times correspondent attached to 
Omer Pasha's expeditionary corps in 
the Caucasus (1855).—652 
O'Meara,  Barry Edward (1786-1836) — 
Irish physician and writer; Napoleon 
I's doctor during his exile on Saint 
Helena (1815-18).—122 
Omer Pasha (Michael Lattas) (1806-
1871)—Turkish general of Croatian 
descent; commanded the forces on 
the Danube (1853-54), in the Crimea 
(1855) and in the Caucasus (1855-
56).—5,  10, 33, 74, 132, 135, 136-38, 
180-82,  184, 185, 205, 217, 220, 250, 
265, 344, 349, 368, 454, 456, 485, 
528, 566-67, 591-93, 597, 609, 612, 
627, 629, 633-54, 674-80, 696 
Orleans—royal dynasty in France 
(1830-48).—110 
Orsi, Count (d. 1899)—stockbroker, 
Napoleon Ill's agent, of Corsican 
descent.—293 
Osten-Sacken, Dmitry Yerofeyevich, Count 
(c. 1789-1881)—Russian general, 
commander of a corps in the south 
of Russia during the Crimean war 
(1853-54) and of the Sevastopol gar­
rison (late 1854-1855).—685 
Ostrowski, Josaphat Boleslas (Jozefat Boles-
law) (1805-1871)—Polish historian 
and writer, author of works on Polish 
history.—477 
Otto I (1815-1867) —King of Greece 
(1832-62), member of the Bavarian 
ruling family of Wittelsbach.— 92 
Otway, Sir Arthur John, Baronet (1822-
1912) — British politician, Tory, mem­
ber of the House of Commons in 
the 1850s.—277, 308 
P 
Pacifico, David (1784-1854)—British 
trader of Portuguese origin in 
Athens.—17 
Paget, Lord George Augustus Frederick 
(1818-1880) —British general, Whig, 
member of the House of Commons; commanded a light cavalry brigade in 
the Crimea (1855).—572, 702 
Palacky (Palatzky), Frantisek (1798-
1876)—Czech historian and liberal 
politician; supported Austro-Slavism, 
a federation of autonomous Slav 
areas within the framework of the 
Habsburg monarchy.—158, 691 
Palmerston, Henry John Temple, Viscount 
(1784-1865)—British statesman, Tory, 
Whig from 1830; Foreign Sec­
retary (1830-34,  1835-41,  1846-51), 
Home Secretary (1852-55), Prime 
Minister (1855-58, 1859-65).—8, 14-
20, 24-28, 29, 40, 41, 43-46, 49, 50, 
58, 63, 67, 71-74, 76, 79, 80, 94, 102, 
103, 108, 130, 136, 139, 142, 167, 
168, 177, 186, 191, 192, 194, 213, 
214, 218, 222-24, 230, 237-39, 245, 
246, 257-59, 270, 275-78, 280, 290, 
291, 297-98, 300, 307-10, 334, 337, 
339-43,  348, 352-54, 356, 357, 363, 
367, 388, 396, 399, 470-74, 477-80, 
482, 489, 497-99, 513, 514, 558, 
560-62,  596, 599, 619. 623, 626, 628, 
637, 650, 652-53, 677, 678 
Paniutin, Fyodor Sergeyevich (1790-
1865)—Russian general, commanded 
a corps at the beginning of the 
Crimean war and a reserve army in 
the south-west of Russia (1855-56).— 
251, 507 
Panmure, Fox Maule, Baron Panmure, 
Earl of Dalhousie (1801-1874) — 
British statesman, Whig; Secretary at 
War (1846-52, 1855-58).—22, 25, 26, 
28, 44, 102, 140, 192, 320, 611, 612, 
614, 626-28, 649, 654 
Parseval-Deschênes, Alexandre Ferdinand 
(1790-1860) —French admiral, a 
squadron commander in the Baltic in 
1854.—517 
Paskiewitsch (Paskievich), Ivan Fyodorovich, 
Prince (1782-1856) —Russian field 
marshal-general; commander-in-chief 
on the western and southern bor­
ders of Russia (1854) and on the 
Danube (April to June 1854).—446 
Paul, Sir John Dean, Baronet (1802-
1868) — English banker, head of the 
banking house Strahan, Paul and 
Co.—310 

=====第815页=====
Name Index 785 
Paxton, Sir Joseph (1801-1865)—English 
architect, designer of the building for 
the 1851 Exhibition in London, 
member of the House of Com­
mons.—29 
Peel, Sir Frederick (1823-1906) —British 
politician, Peelite; Under-Secretary 
for War (1855-57).—22, 58, 492 
Peel, Jonathan (1799-1879)—British 
general, member of the House of 
Commons; member of the Select 
Committee of Inquiry into the Condi­
tion of the British Army in the Crimea 
(1855).—355-57 
Peel, Sir Robert, Baronet (1788-1850)— 
British statesman, moderate Tory; 
Home Secretary (1822-27, 1828-30), 
Prime Minister (1834-35, 1841-46).— 
18, 22, 45, 50, 71, 126, 131, 188, 
198, 199, 247, 357, 384-86, 388-90, 
392, 514, 560, 561 
Peel, Sir Robert, Baronet (1822-1895) — 
British politician and diplomat, son 
of Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel; 
Peelite, member of the House of 
Commons; Junior Lord of the Ad­
miralty (1855-57).—94, 108, 479, 480 
Pélissier, Aimable Jean Jacques, duc de 
Malakoff (1794-1864)—French gen­
eral, marshal from September 1855; 
participated in the conquest of 
Algeria in the 1830s-1850s; com­
mander of a corps (early 1855) and 
commander-in-chief of the French 
army in the Crimea (May 1855-July 
1856).—201,  206, 212, 213, 215-17, 
219-21, 249-51,  253-54, 260, 262-63, 
267, 293, 297, 298, 313, 315-18, 
328-30, 332, 335, 344, 347, 349, 351, 
486, 504, 508-10, 519, 532, 539, 541, 
542, 549, 563, 572, 573-75, 601, 619, 
633-35,  638, 648, 649, 651, 674, 686, 
694 
Pellatt, Apsley (1791-1863)—English 
businessman, Radical, member of 
the House of Commons.—99 
Penaud,  Charles (1800-1864) —French 
admiral; commanded the French 
squadron in the Baltic (1855).—488, 
490 
Perceval, Spencer (1762-1812) —British 
statesman, Tory; Chancellor of the Exchequer (1807-09), Prime Minister 
(1809-12).—16, 188, 190, 191, 311, 
670 
Péreire, Jacob Emile (1800-1875)— 
French banker, a founder and direc­
tor of the Crédit Mobilier; adhered 
to the Saint-Simonists (1825-31), later 
a Bonapartist.—555 
Peter I (the Great) (1672-1725)—Russian 
Tsar from 1682, Emperor of Russia 
from 1721.—104, 585 
Philip II of Macedon (c. 382-336 B.C.)— 
King of Macedon (359-36 B.C.).—77 
Phillimore, John George (1808-1865)— 
English lawyer and politician, Liberal, 
member of the House of Com­
mons.—357 
Pianori, Giovanni (1827-1855)—Italian 
revolutionary; took part in the rev­
olution of 1848-49 and in the de­
fence of the Roman Republic; exe­
cuted in May 1855 for his attempt to 
assassinate Napoleon III.—177 
Pierce, Franklin (1804-1869)—President 
of the USA (1853-57).—599 
Pindar (c. 522-c. 442 B.C.)—Greek 
lyric poet, famous for his odes.—16, 
190 
Pisani, Etienne —interpreter at the Brit­
ish Embassy in Constantinople (1854-
55).—635 
Pitt, William (1759-1806) —British 
statesman, a Tory leader; Prime Minis­
ter (1783-1801, 1804-06).— 50, 166, 
188, 190, 311, 599, 663 
Pius IX (Giovanni Maria Mastai-Ferretti) 
(1792-1878)—Pope (1846-78).—92, 
391-92,  473, 474 
Plessen, Othon, Baron von— Danish envoy 
to St. Petersburg (1849-67).—294 
Poniatowski, Joseph Anthony  (1763-
1813)—Polish general and politician; 
took part in the Polish insurrection 
of 1794 and Napoleon I's military 
campaigns of 1809-13.—285 
Porchester, Henry Herbert, Baron  (1741-
1811)—Whig, member of the House 
of Commons.—190 
Porter, George Richardson (1792-1852)— 
English economist and statistician, 
Free Trader; joint secretary to the 

=====第816页=====
786 Name Index 
Board of Trade from 1841.—560, 
562 
Portland, William Henry Cavendish Ben-
tinck, Duke of (1738-1809)—British 
statesman, a Whig leader; Home 
Secretary (1794-1801), Prime Minis­
ter (1783, 1807-09).—16 
Potemkin, Grigory Alexandrovich, Prince 
Tavrichesky (1739-1791)—Russian 
statesman, field marshal-general, 
commander-in-chief of the Russian 
army in the Russo-Turkish war of 
1787-91.—565, 697 
Pozzo di Borgo, Karl Osipovich, Count 
(1764-1842)—Russian diplomat of 
Corsican descent; envoy to Paris 
(1814-21), ambassador to Paris (1821-
35) and to London (1835-39).—104 
Pradt, Dominique Dufour de (1759-
1837)—French clergyman, diplomat, 
historian and writer.—283, 469 
Praslin, Altarice Rosalba Fanny, Duchess 
de (1807-1847)—wife of duc de 
Choiseul.—30 
Praslin, Charles Laure Hugues Theobald, 
duc de Choiseul (1805-1847)—Peer of 
France; committed suicide in conse­
quence of a trial in which he was 
accused of murdering his wife.—62 
Pritchett, Robert Taylor (1828-1907)— 
British gunsmith, perfected Minie's 
rifle.—420, 421 
Prokesch-Osten, Anton, Count von (1795-
1876)—Austrian general and dip­
lomat; Austrian representative at the 
Vienna Conference (1855).—398 
Pufendorf,  Samuel, Baron von (1632-
1694)—German historian and 
lawyer, a theoretician of "natural 
law".—156, 164 
R 
Radetzky,  Josef,  Count of Radetz (1766-
1858)—Austrian field marshal; sup­
pressed the national liberation move­
ment in Italy (1848-49); Governor-
General of the Kingdom of Lombar-
dy-Venetia (1850-56).—160, 425, 
619,  692 
Raglan, Lord Fitzroy James Henry Somer­
set, Baron (1788-1855)—British field marshal, commander-in-chief of the 
British forces in the Crimea (1854-
55).—4-5,  10, 26, 75, 81, 86, 87, 90, 
91, 102, 116, 127, 130, 135, 138, 144, 
149, 153, 216, 219, 251, 260, 297, 
329, 331, 335, 484, 549, 650 
Raspail, François Vincent (1794-1878)— 
French naturalist and writer; socialist 
close to the revolutionary proletariat; 
took part in the revolutions of 1830 
and 1848.—655 
Read,  Nikolai Andreyevich (c. 1793-
1855)—Russian general, commanded 
a corps in the Crimea (1855).—507, 
564, 695 
Rede—Ballarat police commissioner, 
Victoria (Australia).—66 
Redington, Sir Thomas Nicholas (1815-
1862)—British politician, Whig; 
Under-Secretary for Ireland (1846). 
Secretary to the Board of Control for 
India (1852-56).—57 
Reed,  Joseph Haythorne—British major, 
member of the House of Com­
mons.—471 
Regnault (Regnaud) de Saint-Jean d'Angé-
ly, Auguste Michel Etienne, comte 
(1794-1870)—French general, later 
marshal, Bonapanist; War Minister 
(1851),  commander of the guards 
(1854-69) and of a reserve corps in the 
Crimea (1855).—358-59, 364 
Richard II (1367-1400)—King of Eng­
land (1377-99).—25, 40 
Richard III (1452-1485)—King of Eng­
land (1483-85).—49 
Richards, Alfred Bale (penname: An En­
glishman) (1820-1876) — English 
playwright and journalist.—70 
Richards, George Henry—British admir­
al, Lord of the Admiralty (1854-
55).—273 
Richmond, Charles Gordon-Lennox, Duke 
of (1791-1860)—British Tory politi­
cian, protectionist.—320 
Rickmann, Pyotr Ivanovich (1790-
1845)—Russian Privy Councillor, 
chargé d'affaires in Greece (1830-
33).—18 
Robespierre, Maximilien François Marie 
Isidore de (1758-1794)—leader of the 

=====第817页=====
Name Index 787 
Jacobins in the French Revolution, 
head of the revolutionary govern­
ment (1793-94).—29 
Robinson, Frederick John, Viscount 
Goderich, Earl of Ripon (1782-1859)— 
British statesman, Tory; Chancellor 
of the Exchequer (1823-27), Prime 
Minister (1827-28).—16, 63 
Rodwell, Josiah—English clergyman.— 
51, 52 
Roebuck, John Arthur (1801-1879)— 
British politician and journalist, Radi­
cal, member of the House of Com­
mons;  Chairman of the Select Com­
mittee of Inquiry into the Condition of 
the British Army in the Crimeia 
(1855).—25,  27-30, 43-45, 73, 126, 
131, 223, 224, 258, 273-75, 291, 295, 
299, 300, 321, 337-39, 352-57, 363, 
367, 370, 374, 480 
Roguet, Christophe Michel, comte de 
(1800-1877)—French general, 
Bonapartist, took part in the coup 
d'état  of December 2, 1851.—220 
Rokeby, Henry Robinson-Montagu, Baron 
(1798-1883)—British general; com­
manded a division in the Crimea 
(1855).—22 
Romanoffs (Romanovs)—Russian royal 
dynasty (1613-1917).—596 
Ross, D.—witness called before the 
Urquhartist Committee in Newcastle-
upon-Tyne on the issue inves­
tigating the "Action of Diplomacy".— 
561 
Rothschilds—a family of bankers.— 558 
Rothschild,  Lionel Nathan, Baron (1808-
1879)—head of the Rothschild bank­
ing house in London, Whig, member 
of the House of Commons (from 
1858).—331,  392 
Rüdiger, Fyodor Vasilyevich, Count 
(1784-1856)—Russian general, acted 
as Governor-General of the Kingdom 
of Poland (1854); commanded the 
forces on the western border of 
Russia (1855).—361 
Rushdi Pasha (Mehemet) (1809-1879)— 
Turkish statesman; held the post of 
War Minister (Seraskier) several 
times in the 1850s and 1860s.—  606, 
609, 611, 629, 632, 635, 637, 644, 
646, 653, 654, 678 Russell—participant in the demonstra­
tion against the bill on banning 
Sunday trade, held in London on 
July 1, 1855.—327 
Russells—English aristocratic family.— 
373, 379 
Russell, John  Russell,  Earl (1792-1878)— 
British statesman, Whig leader; 
Prime Minister (1846-52, 1865-66), 
Foreign Secretary (1852-53, 1859-65), 
President of the Council (1854-55); 
British representative at the Vien­
na Conference (1855).—9, 24, 26, 
27, 31, 44-45, 47, 50, 57, 58, 118, 
120, 130, 131, 139, 141, 142, 163, 
223-25,  228-31, 234-36, 238, 246-48, 
258, 275, 277, .300, 311, 339, 341, 
342, 348, 352-54, 371, 373-82, 384-
86, 388-93, 398, 399, 472-74, 482, 
483, 497, 499, 514, 584, 662 
Russell,  Sir William Howard (1820-
1907)—the Times correspondent at­
tached to the British army in the 
Crimea (1854-55).—10, 134, 137, 
154, 584 
S 
Sadleir, John (1814-1856)—Irish banker 
and politician, a leader of the Irish 
Brigade in Parliament; Junior Lord of 
the Treasury (1853).—62, 343, 654 
Safafik (Schaf arik), Pavel Josef (1795-
1861)—Slovak philologist, historian 
and archaeologist; a Liberal-Wing 
leader in the movement for national 
independence; supported the prog­
ramme of Austro-Slavism.—156, 689 
Saint-Arnaud, Armand Jacques Achille 
Leroy de (1801-1854)—Marshal of 
France, Bonapartist; took part in the 
conquest of Algeria (1830s-1840s); 
one of the organisers of the coup 
d'état  of December 2, 1851; War 
Minister (1851-54); commander-in-
chief of the French army in the 
Crimea (1854).—76, 86, 88, 90, 109, 
130, 146-49, 211, 212, 220, 411, 484 
Saint-Georges — eighteenth-century 
French adventurer.—76 
Saint-Germain, comte —a celebrated ad­
venturer who enjoyed influence at 

=====第818页=====
788 Name Index 
the court of Louis XV and of other 
European monarchs in the eigh­
teenth century.—76 
Saint-Simon, Claude Henri de Rouvroy, 
comte de (1760-1825)—French Uto­
pian socialist.—555 
Salles, Charles Marie, comte de  (1803-
1858)—French general and Senator; 
commanded a division in the Crimea 
(1855).—521,  549 
San Luis, Luis José Sartorius, conde de 
(1820-1871)—Spanish statesman and 
writer; a leader of the Moderado 
party; Minister of the Interior (1847-
51); head of government  (1853-
54).—468 
Sartorius—see San Luis, Luis José Sar­
torius, conde de. 
Scharnhorst, Gerhard Johann David von 
(1755-1813)—Prussian general and 
politician; War Minister (1807-10) 
and Chief of the General Staff (1807-
13); engaged in reorganising the 
Prussian army.— 435 
Schilder, Karl Andreyevich (1785-1854)— 
Russian general, military engineer 
and inventor; directed siege-works on 
the Danube during the wars against 
Turkey (1828-29, 1854).—134 
Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich von 
(1759-1805)—German poet, play­
wright, historian and philosopher.— 
357 
Scholefield,  William (1809-1867)—Brit­
ish politician, Radical, member of 
the House of Commons.—369, 370 
Schönhals, Karl, Baron von (1788 
1857) — Austrian field marshal and 
military writer; took part in suppress­
ing the revolution of 1848-49 in 
Italy.—459 
Scribe, Augustin Eugène (1791-1861) — 
French playwright and librettist.— 
141 
Scully, Vincent (1810-1871)—Irish law­
yer and politician, M.P.—480 
Seaton, Sir John Colborne, Baron (1778-
1863) — British general, later field 
marshal; fought in the wars against 
Napoleon I (1808-14, 1815); com­
manded the British troops in Ireland 
(1855-60).—22 Sedlmayer—Austrian general, comman­
dant of the Karlsburg fortress during 
the Crimean war.—497 
Selim Pasha (c. 1797-1855)—Turkish 
general; commanded Turkish forces 
in the Caucasus (1855).—654 
Selvan (d. 1854)—Russian general; 
commanded Russian forces on the 
Danube (1854).—564, 695 
Serrano y Dominguez, Francisco, conde de 
San Antonio, duque de la Torre (1810-
1885)—Spanish general and states­
man; Minister of War (1843); took 
part in the coup  d'état  in 1856; 
Foreign Minister (1862-63), head of 
government (1868-69, 1871, 1874) 
and Regent (1869-71).—469 
Seymour, George Hamilton (1797-
1880)—British diplomat, envoy to 
St. Petersburg (1851-54).—229, 235 
Shaftesbury, Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl 
of (1801-1885)—British politician; 
head of the parliamentary faction of 
Tory philanthropists (1840s); Whig 
from 1847; Chairman of the Sanitary 
Commission in the Crimea (1855).— 
302, 491 
Shakespeare, William (1564-1616) — Eng­
lish playwright and poet.—12, 49, 
247, 383, 480, 486, 615, 656, 662, 
666, 670 
Shee, Sir William (1804-1868) —Irish 
lawyer and Liberal politician; mem­
ber of the House of Commons.— 79, 
341, 342 
Shelley, John Villiers, Baronet (1808-
1867) — British politician, Free Trad­
er, member of the House of Com­
mons.—98 
Shoberl, Frederick, Junior (1804-1852) — 
owner of a printshop in London.— 
20 
Sidmouth, Henry Addington, Viscount 
(1757-1844) — British statesman, To­
ry, Prime Minister and Chancellor of 
the Exchequer (1801-04); Home Sec­
retary (1812-21).—16, 188, 582 
Sievers, Vladimir Karlovich, Count 
(1790-1862) — Russian general; com­
manded the Russian forces in the 
Baltic provinces (1854-55).—361 

=====第819页=====
Name Index 789 
Sieyès, Emmanuel Joseph, comte de (1748-
1836)—  abbot, prominent figure in 
the French Revolution; deputy of the 
Convention, moderate constitutional­
ist (Feuillant).— 293 
Simmons, Sir John Lintorn Arabin  (1821-
1903) — British lieutenant-colonel, 
subsequently field marshal; British 
military commissioner attached to the 
Turkish Headquarters during the Cri­
mean war.—633-36, 641, 644, 646-47, 
649-51,  674, 677, 679, 680 
Simolin, Ivan Matveyevich, Baron (1720-
1790) — Russian diplomat, ambassa­
dor to London (1779-85).—586 
Simpson, Sir James (1792-1868) — 
British general, chief of staff (Feb­
ruary to June 1855), commander-
in-chief (June to November 1855) of 
the British army in the Crimea.—22, 
26, 470, 504, 542-44, 549-50, 558, 
573, 633-35, 637,  649-51,  654, 678, 
679, 680 
Simpson, John—stockbroker.—  51,  52 
Slocombe, William—Chartist, took part 
in the movement in the 1850s.—194 
Smith,  Adam (1723-1790)—Scottish 
economist.—531 
Smith,  Sir Andrew (1797-1872) — 
British medical officer, director-
general of the army and ordnance 
medical departments (1846-58).—125, 
129, 654 
Smith,  Robert Vernon, Baron Lyve-
den (1800-1873)—British statesman, 
Whig; Secretary at War (1852); Presi­
dent of the Board of Control for 
India (1855-58).—49, 472 
Sobieski, John (Jan) (1624-1696)—King 
of Poland (1674-96); commanded the 
Polish and Austro-German forces 
which defeated the Turkish army at 
Vienna (1683).—284 
Soimonoff (Soymonov), Fyodor Ivanovich 
(1800-1854) — Russian general; com­
manded an infantry division on the 
Danube and in the Crimea during 
the Crimean war; killed at the battle 
of Inkerman.—564, 695 
Solon (c. 638-c. 558 B.C.)—Athenian 
politician and legislator.—480 
Somerset, Sir Henry (1794-1862) — 
British general; appointed comman­der-in-chief of the forces of the East 
India Company in Bombay in 
1855.—22 
Stackelberg, Ernest, Count (1813-1870)— 
Russian diplomat and general.— 571 
Stafford,  Augustus  O'Brien  (1811-
1857)—Tory, member of the House 
of Commons.—131 
Stanley—see Derby, Edward Geoffrey 
Smith Stanley, Earl of 
Stanley, Edward Henry, Earl of Derby 
(1826-1893)—British statesman, son 
of Edward Derby; Tory, subsequently 
Liberal; Under-Secretary for Foreign 
Affairs (1852), Secretary of State for 
India (1858-59).—29, 57, 227 
Sterling, Edward (1773-1847)—cor­
respondent (1811-15) and an editor 
(1815-40) of The Times.—122 
Steuart, Sir James, afterwards Denham 
(1712-1780)—Scottish economist, one 
of the last representatives of mercan­
tilism.—531 
Stevens, Francis I.—British vice-consul 
in Trebizond during the Crimean 
war.—632 
Stewart, Sir Houston (1791-1875)— 
British admiral, Whig; Lord of the 
Admiralty (1850-52); second in com­
mand in the Black Sea (1855).—634 
Stonor, Henry—British official, judge 
in the State of Victoria (Aus­
tralia).—  62 
Stormont, David Murray, Viscount Stor-
mont, Earl of Mansfield (1727-
1796)—British statesman and dip­
lomat, Tory; secretary of state for the 
southern departments (1779-82).— 585 
Strafford,  Sir John Byng, Viscount  Enfield, 
Earl of (1772-1860)—British general, 
field marshal from 1855; fought in 
the wars against Napoleon I (1808-
14, 1815).—558, 559 
Strahan, William (born c. 1808) — 
English banker, head of the banking 
house Strahan, Paul and  Co.—  310, 
335 
Stratford de Redcliffe, Stratford Canning, 
Viscount (1786-1880) —British dip­
lomat, envoy to Constantinople 
(1810-12, 1825-28, 1841-58).—19, 

=====第820页=====
790 Name Index 
594, 605, 606, 609-12, 623-25, 628-
29, 635-38, 640-44, 646-49, 651-53, 
673-74, 675-79 
Strutt,  Edward,  Baron Belper  (1801-
1880)—British politician, Whig, 
member of the House of Com­
mons.—382 
Stuart, Lord Dudley Coutts  (1803-
1854)—British politician, Whig, 
member of the House of Commons; 
was connected with conservative-
monarchist Polish emigrants.—17, 
477 
Sugden, Edward Burtenshaw, Baron St. 
Leonards (1781-1875) — British lawyer 
and statesman, Tory; Lord Chancel­
lor (1852).—393 
Suleau—French lieutenant-colonel; rep­
resentative at the British headquar­
ters in the Crimea (1855).—635 
Sumner, John Bird (1780-1862)— 
English priest, bishop of Chester 
(1828-48), Archbishop of Canterbury 
(1848-62).—95 
Sutherland,  Dukes of—English aristo­
cratic family.—47, 187 
Sutherland,  John (1808-1891) —English 
physician, in charge of the Select 
Committee of Inquiry into the Condi­
tion of the British Army in the Crimea 
(1855).—491 
Suvaroff (Suvorov), Alexander Vasilyevich 
(Count Suvorov Rimniksky, Prince Italiis-
ky) (1729 or 1730-1800) —Russian 
general.—565, 569, 571, 697, 700 
Szulszewski—Polish colonel, émigré; 
Secretary of the Literary Association 
of the Friends of Poland in London 
(1855).—479 
T 
Tahir Pasha—Turkish general; com­
manded Turkish forces in the 
Caucasus (1855).—654 
Talleyrand-Périgord, Charles Maurice, 
prince de (1754-1838) —French dip­
lomat; Foreign Minister (1797-99, 
1799-1807, 1814-15); represented 
France at the Vienna Congress 
(1814-15).—141,  283 Tassilier—French printer; exiled to 
Cayenne in June  1848.—  615 
Taylor, James—British politician, cham­
pion of parliamentary reform.—  98, 
100 
Terentianus Maurus (end of the 2nd 
cent. A.D.) — Roman grammarian.— 
556 
Thompson, George (1804-1878)—British 
politician, Radical; prominent figure 
in the National Association of Par­
liamentary and Financial Reform 
(1850s).—  209,  479 
Thouvenel, Edouard Antoine (1818-
1866)—French diplomat, ambassador 
to Turkey (1855-60).—647 
Tiberius (Tiberius Claudius Nero Caesar) 
(42 B.C.—37 A.D.)—Roman Em­
peror (14-37).—602 
Timur (Tamerlane) (1336-1405)— 
Central Asian conqueror, founder of 
a large state in the East with Samar­
kand as its capital.—67 
Tite, Sir William (1798-1873)—English 
architect and politician; member of 
the House of Commons; Vice-
Chairman of the Association of Ad­
ministrative Reform (1855).—240, 
480 
Titoff (Titov), Vladimir Pavlovich (1805-
1891)—Russian diplomat, ambas­
sador to Constantinople (1843-53); 
represented Russia at the Vienna 
Conference (1855).—225, 234 
Todtleben (Totleben), Eduard Ivanovich, 
Count (1818-1884)—Russian military 
engineer, colonel, general from April 
1855;  an organiser of the defence of 
Sevastopol.—135, 175, 443, 446, 484, 
487, 570, 597 
Toussenel, Alphonse (1803-1885) — 
French writer.—558 
Toussoum Pasha—Turkish general, 
commanded Turkish forces in the 
Caucasus (1855).—632 
Travers, Ingraham—British politician, 
leader of the movement by the com­
mercial and financial bourgeoisie for 
administrative reform (1855).—196 
Trotti—Italian general; commanded a 
division of the Sardinian corps in the 
Crimea (1855).—507, 509 

=====第821页=====
Name Index 791 
Tyler, Wat (or Walter) (d. 1381)—leader 
of the peasants' revolt in England 
(1381).—25,  40 
U 
Urquhart, David (1805-1877)—British 
diplomat, writer and politician, Tur-
kophile; carried out diplomatic mis­
sions in Turkey in the 1830s; Tory, 
member of the House of Commons 
(1847-52); opponent . of Palmer-
ston.—20, 68, 243-45, 248, 274, 348, 
394, 395, 561, 562 
V 
Vaillant, Jean Baptiste Philibert, comte 
(1790-1872)—Marshal of France, 
Senator, Bonapartist; War Minister 
(1854-59).—86, 90, 251 
Vandamme, Dominique René, comte d'Une-
bourg (1770-1830) — French general; 
fought in Napoleon I's wars.—147 
Vane, Lord Harry George—member of 
the House of Commons.—214 
Vassif Pasha—Turkish general, com­
mander-in-chief (Mushir) of the army 
in Anatolia (1853-56)—606, 623 
Vattel, Emerich von (Emer de Vattel) 
(1714-1767)—Swiss lawyer and dip­
lomat in Saxon service; theoretician 
of international law.—156, 164 
Vauban, Sébastien Le Prêtre (Prestre) de 
(1633-1707)—Marshal of France, 
military engineer and economist; 
worked out new methods of fortifica­
tion and siege.— 149, 261-63 
Victoria (1819-1901)—Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1837-1901).— 
120, 192, 274, 299,  301,  305, 320, 348, 
380, 390, 481, 490, 610, 611, 625, 
675-76,  679 
Vivian, Sir Robert John Hussey (1802-
1887) — British general; commanded 
the Turkish troops on the Kerch 
Peninsula (1855-56).—609-11, 614, 
624, 626, 628-30, 634,  639-41,  643, 
647, 649, 650, 673, 678, 679 
Voltaire, François Marie Arouet de (1694-
1778)—French philosopher, writer 
and historian of the Enlightenment.— 
303, 334 W 
Wakley, Thomas (1795-1862)—British 
politician and doctor, Radical; cham­
pion of parliamentary reform.—98 
Walewski, Alexandre Florian Joseph Co-
lonna, comte (1810-1868)—French 
statesman, son of Napoleon I and the 
Polish Countess Marie Walewska; took 
part in the Polish insurrection of 
1830-31;  emigrated to France after its 
suppression; French Foreign Minister 
(1855-60).—640 
Walker—London police superintendent 
(1855).—324 
Walmsley, Sir Joshua (1794-1871)— 
British politician, Radical member of 
the House of Commons; a founder 
and Chairman of the National Associa­
tion of Parliamentary and Financial 
Reform.—209 
Walpole, Horatio (Horace), Earl of Orford 
(1717-1797)—English author and art 
historian.— 377 
Walpole, Spencer Horatio (Horace) (1806-
1898) — British statesman, Tory; 
Home Secretary (1852, 1858-59 and 
1866-67).—259 
Walters—English family whose members 
were the main shareholders of The 
Times.—122 
Ward,  Lord William, Baron (b. 1817)— 
English politician, Tory, member of 
the House of Lords.— 355 
Wardle, Gwyllym Lloyd (c. 1762-1833) — 
British colonel, member of the House 
of Commons; exposed the Duke of 
York's abuses  (1809).—  668,  670 
Warwick, Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick 
and Salisbury (1428-1471) —English 
feudal lord nicknamed "the King­
maker"; fought in the Wars of the 
Roses (1455-85).—47, 338 
Wedell, Leopold Heinrich, von (1784-
1861) — Prussian general; visited Paris 
on a diplomatic mission in 1855.— 
94 
Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, Duke of 
(1769-1852)—British general and 
statesman, Tory; commanded the 
British forces in the wars against 
Napoleon I (1808-14, 1815); com­
mander-in-chief (1827-28, 1842-52); 

=====第822页=====
792 Name Index 
Prime Minister (1828-30).—5, 6, 16, 
51, 130, 177, 297, 377, 405, 415, 418, 
501, 549 
Westminster—see Grosvenor, Richard, 
Marquis of Westminster 
Westmorland, John Fane, Earl of (1784-
1859)—British diplomat, ambassador 
to Vienna (1851-55).—223, 224 
Whateley, Mr. Q. C.—Tory; stood for 
election to Parliament from Bath 
(1855).—240 
Whiteside, James (1804-1876)—Irish 
lawyer and politician, Tory, member 
of the House of Commons; held 
several high judicial posts in Ire­
land.—29 
Wieland, Christoph Martin (1733-1813) — 
German writer of the Enlighten­
ment.—167 
Wilks, Washington (c. 1826-1864)— 
English radical journalist, an editor of 
The Morning Star.—582 
Willet—publisher of the weekly Penny 
Times.— 281 
William I (1797-1888)—Prince of Prus­
sia, Prince Regent (1858-61), King of 
Prussia (1861-88) and Emperor of 
Germany (1871-88).—660 
William III (1650-1702)—Prince of 
Orange, Stadtholder of the Nether­
lands (1672-1702), King of England, 
Scotland and Ireland (1689-1702).— 
24, 51 
William IV (1765-1837)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1830-37).—19-
20, 385 
Williams, Nathaniel—agricultural work­
er.— 544 
Williams, Sir William Fenwick, Baronet "of 
Kars" (1800-1883)—British general, 
Commissioner with the Turk­
ish army in the Caucasus (1854-55); 
took a leading part in the defence of 
Kars.— 566, 589, 591, 593, 605, 606, 
611-12,  623, 624, 626, 628, 633, 640, 
648, 652, 654, 695 
Willisen, Karl Wilhelm, Baron von (1790-
1879) — Prussian general and strateg­
ist; was in the Austrian army that 
suppressed the national liberation 
movement in Italy in 1848-49.—460 
Wilson, James (1805-1860)—British economist and politician, Free Trader; 
founder and editor of The Economist; 
Financial Secretary to the Treasury 
(1853-58).—30 
Wilson, Sir Robert Thomas (1777-1849)— 
British general and military writer, 
Radical, member of the House of 
Commons; Governor of Gibraltar 
(1842).—502 
Windham, Sir Charles Ash (1810-1870)— 
British colonel, general from October 
1855,  brigade commander in the 
autumn of 1855; chief of staff in the 
Crimea (November 1855-July 1856).— 
543, 550 
Windischgrätz, Alfred Candidus Ferdinand, 
Prince zu (1787-1862)—Austrian field 
marshal; commanded the troops 
which crushed the uprisings in Prague 
and Vienna (1848); led the Austrian 
army against the Hungarian revolu­
tion (1848-49).—160, 425, 692 
Wise, John Ayshford (b. 1810)—member 
of the House of Commons.— 213 
Wiseman, Nicholas (1802-1865) — 
English Catholic priest; Archbishop of 
Westminster and Cardinal from 
1850.—391 
Wolter, Johann, Edler von Eckwehr (1789-
1857) — Austrian general, military en­
gineer; commandant of the Cracow 
fortress (1853-1857).—497 
Wood,  Sir Charles, Viscount Halifax of 
Monk Bretton (1800-1885)—British 
statesman, Whig; Chancellor of the 
Exchequer (1846-52), President of the 
Board of Control for India (1852-55), 
First Lord of the Admiralty (1855-58), 
Secretary for India (1859-66).—24, 
49, 118, 308, 311, 356, 357 
Wood,  Lady Mary Charles (d. 1884).— 
wife of Sir Charles Wood.—49 
Workman—Chartist, active in- the move­
ment in the 1850s.—196 
Woronzoff (Vorontsov), Mikhail Semyo-
novich, Prince (1782-1856) —  Rus­
sian field marshal-general, com­
mander-in-chief of the Russian 
Caucasian army and Governor-
General of the Caucasus (1844-March 
1854);  brother of Sidney Herbert's 
mother, Y. S. née Vorontsova. —22 

=====第823页=====
Name Index 793 
Wright, Sir Nathan (1654-1721)—British 
lawyer and statesman; Lord Keeper of 
the Great Seal and Privy Councillor 
(1700-05).—64 
Y 
Yea, Lacy Walter Giles (1808-1855) — 
British colonel; commanded a regi­
ment in the Crimea (1854-55).—331 
York, Frederick Augustus, Duke of York and 
Albany, Earl of Ulster (1763-1827) — 
second son of the British king George 
III; field marshal from 1795, com­
mander-in-chief of the British army 
(1798-1809, 1811-27).—503, 662-71 
Achilles (Gr. Myth.) — the bravest of the 
Greek heroes in Homer's  Iliad,  invul­
nerable except in the heel.—620 
Agamemnon (Gr. Myth.) — a king of 
Mycenae, a character in Homer's  Iliad, 
leader of the Greeks in the Trojan 
War; sacrificed his daughter Iphigenia 
to Artemis to obtain a safe passage of 
the Greek fleet to Troy.—382 
Alba, Duke of—a character in Schiller's 
Don Carlos.— 357 
Caliban—a character in Shakespeare's 
play The  Tempest.—  670 
Cerberus (Gr. Myth.) — a three-headed 
dog guarding the entrance to 
Hades.—503 
Cokbourg, Lord—a character in Auber's 
opera Era Diavolo written to Scribe's 
libretto.—141 
Danaides (Gr. Myth.)—the daughters of 
Danaus, a king of Argos, who at their 
fathers command murdered their 
bridegrooms on the wedding night 
and were condemned in Hades to 
pour water eternally into a bottomless 
vessel.—654 Yorke, Charles Philip (1764-1834)— 
British statesman, Tory; Secretary at 
War (1801-03), Home Secretary 
(1803-04), First Lord of the Admiralty 
(1810-11).—190, 191 
Z 
Zamoyski, Ladislas (Wladyslaw), Count 
(1803-1868)—Polish magnate; took 
part in the insurrection of  1830-31; 
later a leader of the Polish conserva­
tive monarchist refugees in Paris; 
• made attempts to muster a Polish 
legion against Russia during the Cri­
mean war.—19 
Don Quixote de la Mancha—the title 
character in Cervantes' novel.—16, 
191 
Dromio (Dromio of Ephesus and Dromio of 
Syracuse)—characters in Shakespeare's 
The Comedy of  Errors,  twin brothers as 
like as two peas.—27 
Eugene Aram—the title character of 
Bulwer-Lytton's novel, a scholar who 
disregards reality and becomes a 
victim of an encounter with it.— 
247 
Falstaff,  Sir John—a fat, merry, ribald 
and boastful knight in Shakespeare's 
Henry IV and The Merry Wives of 
Windsor.—12, 480 
Habakuk (Habacuc) (Bib.) — a Hebrew 
prophet.— 334 
Hamlet—the title character of a tragedy 
by Shakespeare.—247, 297 
Hesperides (Gr. Myth.) — the nymphs, 
daughters of Hesperus, who, together 
with a dragon, guarded the garden of 
the golden apples in the Isles of the 
Blest.—311 INDEX OF LITERARY AND MYTHOLOGICAL NAMES 

=====第824页=====
794 Name Index 
Hotspur, Percy—a gay, jesting, fiery-
tempered soldier in Shakespeare's 
Henry IV—486 
Iphigenia—a daughter of King 
Agamemnon; the title character of a 
tragedy by Euripides.—382 
Issachar (Bib.) — one of the twelve sons of 
the Hebrew patriarch Jacob, ancestors 
of the twelve tribes of Israel; because 
of his exceptional patience and endur­
ance Jacob compared him to a bony 
ass.—280 
John Bull—a generic name for the 
English, from John Arbuthnot's The 
History of John Bull (1712).—34, 141, 
142, 211, 269, 444, 664 
Lumpkin, Tony—a character in 
Goldsmith's comedy She Stoops to Con­
quer; or, the Mistakes of a Night; a 
provincial nobleman's son, an ignorant 
and rude fellow who gives himself 
airs.—479 
Manu —legendary law-giver of ancient 
India; the Laws of Manu were com­
piled by Brahmins between the first 
and fifth centuries A. D.—472 
Mephistopheles—a character in Goethe's 
Faust.—306 
Moloch (Molech)—a Semitic deity whose 
cult involved human sacrifices, espe­
cially of first-born children.— 95 
Pallas Athena (Pallas Athene) (Gr. 
Myth.)—one of the greater Olympian 
deities, pre-eminent as a civic goddess, 
wise in the industries of peace and the 
arts of war; tutelary goddess of 
Athens.—620 
Pilate, Pontius (Bib.)—the Roman pro­
curator of Judea (c. 26-c. 36 A.D.) who 
gave Jesus up to be crucified.— 309 
Pontius Pilatus —see Pilate, Pontius. Robin Goodfellow—a genial domestic 
spirit in English popular mythology; a 
character in Shakespeare's comedy 
A Midsummer Night's Dream.— 656 
Samson (Bib.)—an Israelite judge of 
extraordinary strength; hence person 
of great strength.—22 
Shallow—a character in Shakespeare's 
Henry IV and The Merry Wives of 
Windsor, a haughty and mercenary 
village judge, a litigious person.—480 
Sibyl—one of a number of women 
regarded as oracles or prophetesses by 
the ancient Greeks and Romans. The 
best known of them was the sibyl of 
Cumae, a Greek colony in Southern 
Italy. The oracles and prophecies 
attributed to her were collected in the 
Sibylline Books kept in ancient 
Rome.—68 
Siegfried (Sigfrid)—hero of the 
Nibelungenlied and other old German 
epics.  He slayed a dragon and ren­
dered himself invulnerable by bathing 
in his blood.—225 
Sindbad (Sinbad) the Sailor—a character 
in the Arabian Nights.—339 
5/}i, Christopher—a character in Shake­
speare's comedy The Taming of the 
Shrew.— 383 
Tantalus (Gr. Myth.)—a king who for 
his crimes was condemned in Hades to 
stand in water that receded when he 
tried to drink, and with fruit hanging 
above him that receded when he 
reached for it.— 125, 129 
Thersites—a character in Homer's Iliad 
and in Shakespeare's Troilus and Cres-
sida, a cantankerous and abusive per­
son.—300, 654 
Warwick—the hero of Bulwer-Lytton's 
novel The Last of the Barons, idealised 
image of a participant in fifteenth-
century internecine feudal wars.—47, 
247 

=====第825页=====
795 
INDEX OF QUOTED 
AND MENTIONED LITERATURE 
WORKS BY KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
Marx, Karl 
Agitation over the Tightening-up of Sunday Observance (this volume) 
— Die Aufregung gegen die Verschärfung der Sonntagsfeier. In: Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, No. 307, July 5, 1855.—333 
Anti-Church Movement. [—Demonstration in Hyde Park] (this volume) 
— Kirchliche Agitation. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 295, June 28, 1855.—  333 
The British Constitution (this volume) 
— Die britische Constitution. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 109, March 6, 
1855.—95 
A Critique of the Crimean Affair.—From Parliament (this volume) 
— Zur Kritik der Krim'schen Angelegenheiten. Aus dem Parlamente. In: Neue 
Oder-Zeitung, No. 241, May 26, 1855.—220, 253 
From Parliament. [—Roebuck's and Bulwer's Motions] (this volume) 
— Aus dem Parlamente. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 323, July 14, 1855.—348, 
352 
Herbert's Re-election.— The First Measures of the New Ministry.—News from India (this 
volume) 
— Herberts Wiederwahl. Die ersten Schritte des neuen Ministeriums. Nach­
richten aus Ostindien. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 85, February 20, 
1855.—55 
Kars Papers Curiosities (this volume). In: The Free Press, May 3,  1856.—  672 
A Meeting (this volume) 
— Ein Meeting. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 141, March 24, 1855.—195 
The Mishap of June 18.—Reinforcements (this volume) 
— Der Unfall des 18. Juni. Verstärkungen u.s.w. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 291, 
June 26, 1855.—350 
The Morning Post versus Prussia.— The Character of the Whigs and Tories (this volume) 
— "Morning Post" gegen Preussen. Charakter der Whigs und Tories. In: 
Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 227, May 18, 1855.—193 

=====第826页=====
796 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Napoleon and Barbes. — The Newspaper Stamp (this volume) 
— Napoleon und Barbes. Zeitungsstempel. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 151, 
March 30, 1855.—120 
On the History of Political Agitation (this volume) 
— Zur Geschichte der Agitationen. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 215, May 10, 
1855.—195 
On the New Ministerial Crisis (this volume) 
— Zur neuen Ministerkrisis. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 97, February 27, 
1855.—50 
Palmerston (this volume) 
— Palmerston. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 105, March 3, 1855.—187 
Parliament (this volume) 
— Das Parlament. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 88, February 22, 1855.—29 
Parliamentary News (present edition, Vol. 13) 
— Parlamentarisches. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 49, January 30, 1855.—63 
Engels, Frederick 
The Armies of Europe (this volume). In: Putnam's Monthly, Nos. XXXII, XXXIII, 
XXXVI, August, September, December, 1855.—588 
The Battle of the Alma (present edition, Vol. 13). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 
4219,  October 26, 1854.—3 
A Battle at Sevastopol (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4358, April 7, 
1855.—133,  317 
A Battle at Sevastopol (this volume) 
— Ueber die letzten Vorgänge in der Krim. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 143, 
March 26, 1855.—137 
The Crimean War (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4411, June 8, 
1855.—216, 316, 344 
The European War (present edition, Vol. 13). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4316, 
February 17, 1855.—35 
The Fall of Sevastopol (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4506, 
September 28, 1855.—548 
The Fall of Sevastopol (this volume) 
— Zur Einnahme von Sebastopol. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 429, September 
14, 1855.—548 
From the Crimea (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4424, June 23, 
1855.—318 
From Sevastopol (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4401, May 28, 
1855.—206 
From Sevastopol (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4439, July 12, 
1855.—344, 549 
From Sevastopol (this volume) 
— Ueber die Ereignisse in der Krim. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 301, July 2, 
1855.—549 

=====第827页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 797 
The Late Repulse of the Allies (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4447, 
July 21, 1855.—549 
The Late Repulse of the Allies (this volume) 
— Ueber den Sturm vom 18ten. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 317, July 11, 
1855.—549 
Movements of the Armies in Turkey (present edition, Vol. 12). In: New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 3919, November 8, 1853.—597 
Napoleon's Last Dodge (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4358, April 7, 
1855.—317 
Napoleon's War Plans (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4431, July 2, 
1855.—567 
The New French Commander (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4414, 
June 12, 1855.—317 
The New Move in the Crimea (this volume) 
— Der Feldzug in der Krim. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 221, May 14, 
1855.—253 
The New Move in the Crimea (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4402, 
May 29, 1855.—201 
Progress of the War (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4538, November 
5, 1855; New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 739, November 10, 1855.—590 
The Results in the Crimea (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No.  4353,  April 
2, 1855.—132, 136 
Sevastopol (this volume) 
— Kritik der Krim'schen Unternehmungen. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 273, 
June 15, 1855.—298 
Sevastopol (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4429, June 29, 
1855.—317-18 
The Siege of Sevastopol (present edition, Vol. 13). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 
4236,  November 15, 1854.—6 
The Situation in the Crimea (this volume) 
— Ueber die Situation in der Krim. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 155, April 2, 
1855.—212 
The Struggle in the Crimea (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No.  4323, 
February 26, 1855.—32, 113 
The War That Looms on Europe (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4332, 
March 8, 1855.—135, 164 
Marx, Karl and Engels, Frederick 
The Anglo-French War against Russia (this volume). 
— The War. In: New-York Daily Tribune, No.  4483,  September 1,  1855.—  588 
Critical Observations on the Siege of Sevastopol (present edition, Vol. 13) 
— Zur Kritik der Belagerung Sebastopols. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 37, 
January 23, 1855.—11 

=====第828页=====
798 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
From Parliament.—From the Theatre of War (this volume) 
— Aus dem Parlamente. Vom Kriegsschauplatze. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 
337, July 23, 1855.—487 
The Late British Government (present edition, Vol. 13). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 
4321,  February 23, 1855.—62 
The Local War.—  Debate  on Administrative Reform.— Report of  the Roebuck  Committee, etc. 
(this volume) 
— Der lokale Krieg. Debatte der Administrativ-Reform. Bericht des 
Roebuck-Comites u.s.w. In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 287, June 23, 1855.—  279 
Progress of the War (present edition, Vol. 13). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4276, 
January 1, 1855.—164 
Prologue at Lord Palmerston's.—Course of the Latest Events in the Crimea (this volume) 
— Das Vorspiel bei Lord Palmerston. Verlauf der letzten Ereignisse in der Krim. 
In: Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 243, May 29, 1855.—222 
State of the Russian War (present edition, Vol. 13). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 
4125,  July 8, 1854.—597 
WORKS BY DIFFERENT AUTHORS 
Aberdeen, G. [Speech in the House of Lords, April 10, 1856.] In: The Times, No. 
22339,  April 11, 1856.—662, 671 
Adair, R. A. S. [Speech in the House of Commons, July 17, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22109, July 18, 1855.—355-56 
Althorpe, J. Ch. [Speech in the House of Commons, March 20, 1809.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates. First series, Vol. XIII, London, 1812.—670 
Arnim, L. A. Isabella von Ägypten. Kaiser Karl des Fünften erste Jugendliebe. — 651 
Auber, D.-F.-E. Fra-Diavolo, ou l'hôtellerie de Terracine. Opéra-comique en trois actes 
(libretto by A. E. Scribe).—141 
Babbage, Ch. On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, London, 1832.— 247 
Baillie, H. [Speech in the House of Commons, May 22, 1855.] In: The Times, No. 
22061,  May 23, 1855.—213 
[Bakewell, R. H.] The Wounded before  Sebastopol.  To the Editor of "The Times". In: 
The Times, No. 22098, July 5, 1855.—492 
Baring, F. [Speech in the House of Commons, May 24, 1855.] In: The Times, No. 
22063,  May 25, 1855.—227-28, 245, 257 
Batrachomyomachia.—618 
Bauer, B. Deutschland und das Russenthum, Charlottenburg, 1854.—162 
— Die jetzige Stellung Russlands, Charlottenburg, 1854.—162 
— Russland und England, Charlottenburg, 1854.—162 
— Russland und das Germanenthum, Charlottenburg, 1853.—162 
Bellini, V. La Sonnambula. Opera (libretto by F. Romani).— 292 

=====第829页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 799 
Beresford, J. C. [Speech in the House of Commons, February 3, 1809.] In: 
Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. First series, Vol. XII, London, 1812.—670 
Bible 
The New Testament. 
Matthew —393 
Luke—302 
[Bird, T.O'M.] Vienna, May 4. In: The Times, No. 22049, May 9, 1855.—178-79 
Bodenstedt, F. Die Völker des Kaukasus und ihre Freiheitskämpfe gegen die Russen. Ein 
Beitrag zur neuesten Geschichte des Orients, Frankfurt am Main,  1848.—  592 
Bonaparte, Napoléon-Louis. Des idées napoléoniennes. The first edition appeared in 
Paris in 1839.—120, 212, 286, 289 
Boniface, L., D'après les nouvelles qui viennent de Constantinople... In: Le Constitution­
nel, No. 8, January 8, 1855.—594 
— Une question intéressante.... In: Le Constitutionnel, No. 37, February 6, 
1856.—599 
Bouverie, E. P. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— June 29, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22094, June 30, 1855.—321 
— July 16, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22108, July 17, 1855.—352 
Bright, J. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— fune 5, 1849. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. CV, 
London, 1849.—378 
— February 23, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21986, February 24, 1855.—44 
— June 7, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22075, June 8, 1855.—259 
— July 17, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22109, July 18, 1855.—356 
— August 7, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22127, August 8, 1855.—472 
[Brougham, H. P.] Lord Brougham's Reply to Lord John Russell's Letter to the  Electors  of 
Stroud,  on the Principles of the Reform Act, Grafton-Street, May 4, 1839. In: The 
Times, No.  17041,  May 14, 1839.—380, 393 
Brougham, H. P. [Speech in the House of Lords, June 21, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22087, June 22, 1855.—295 
Brussels Mémoire —see De la conduite de la guerre d'Orient... 
Bulwer-Lytton, E. J. L. Eugene Aram. A Tale. Paris, 1832.—247 
— The Last of the Barons, Vols. I-II, Leipzig, 1843.—47, 247 
— [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— June 4, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22072, June 5, 1855.—247 
— June 15, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22082, June 16, 1855.—289 
— July 10, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22103, July 11, 1855.—338-39, 341, 348, 
352, 353, 367 
— July 12, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22104, July 13, 1855.—341 
— July 16, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22108, July 17, 1855.—353 
[Burke, E.] A Letter from the Right Honourable Edmund Burke to a Noble  Lord,  on the 
Attacks Made upon Him and His Pension, in the House of Lords, by the Duke of 
Bedford and the Earl of Lauderdale Early in the present Sessions of Parliament, 
London, 1796.—373 
— [Speech in the House of Commons, March 29, 1791.] In: The Parliamentary 
History of England, from the Earliest Period to the Year 1803, Vol. XXIX, London, 
1817.—587 

=====第830页=====
800 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Canning, Ch. J. [Speech in the House of Commons, May 3, 1827.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates. New series, [2], Vol. XVII, London, 1828.—376 
Canrobert, F. [Dispatch to the Minister of War, dated the 27th of  February.]  In: The 
Times, No. 22008, March 22, 1855.—135 
Cathcart, G. Commentaries on the War in Russia and Germany in 1812 and 1813, 
London, 1850.—444 
Cecil, R. A. T. [Speech in the House of Commons, July 17, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22109, July 18, 1855.—357 
Cervantes de Saavedra, M. Vida y hechos del ingenioso hidalgo Don Quixote de la 
Mancha....—16 
Cesena, A. de. On ne peut pas dire.... In: Le Constitutionnel, No. 267, September 24, 
1855.—544 
— Un des phénomènes les plus instructifs.... In: Le Constitutionnel, No. 169, June 18, 
1855.—267-68, 278-79, 287, 289 
Chesney, [F. R.] Observations on the past and present State of Fire-arms, and on the 
probable Effects in War of the new Musket: with a Proposition for Reorganizing the 
Royal Regiment of Artillery by a Subdivision into Battalions in each special Arm of 
Garrison,  Field,  and Horse Artillery, with Suggestions for Promoting its Efficiency, 
London, 1852.—423 
Clanricarde, U. J. [Speech in the House of Lords, April 10, 1856.] In: The Times, 
No. 22339, April 11, 1856.—662, 671 
Clarendon, G. W. F. [Speeches in the House of Lords] 
— March 20, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22007, March 21, 1855.—106-08 
— June 21, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22087, June 22, 1855.—294 
— June 26, 1855. In: The Times, No.  22091,  June 27, 1855.—482-83, 499 
Cobbett, J. M. [Speech in the House of Commons, March 15, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22003, March 16, 1855.—96-97 
[Cobbett, W.] Duke of York. In: Cobbett's Weekly Political Register, Vol. XIV, No. 8, 
August 20, 1808.—667 
— Mr. Cochrane Johnstone [I]. In: Cobbett's Weekly Political Register, Vol. X, No. 1, 
July 5, 1806.—663-65 
— Mr. Cochrane Johnstone [II]. In: Cobbett's Weekly Political Register, Vol. X, No. 
8, August 23, 1806.—667 
Cobden, R. [Speech in the House of Commons, June 5, 1855.] In: The Times, No. 
22073,  June 6, 1855.—247-48, 259 
Colchester, Ch. A. [Speech in the House of Lords, June 21, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22087, June 22, 1855.—295 
A Colonial Reformer. The Future Conduct of the War. To the Editor of "The Times". 
In: The Times, No. 21977, February 14, 1855.—21-22 
Courtois fils, A. Des opérations de Bourse ou Manuel des fonds publics français et 
étrangers et des actions et obligations de  sociétés  françaises et étrangères négociés à Paris. 
Précédé d'une appréciation des opérations de bourse dites de jeu, et de rapports de la 
bourse avec le crédit public et les finances de  l'état,  Paris,  1855.—  535 

=====第831页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 801 
Curzon, R. Armenia: A Year at Erzeroom, and on the Frontiers of Russia, Turkey and 
Persia. The first edition appeared in London in 1854.—593 
Custine, [A.] de. La Russie en 1839, T. I-IV, Paris, 1843.—442 
[Dairnvaell, G.] Grand Procès entre Rothschild I er, Roi des Juifs, et Satan Dernier, Roi 
des Imposteurs. Arrêt rendu sur le réquisitoire de Junius, rapporteur général. The first 
edition appeared in Paris in  1846.—  558 
Dairnvaell, G. Histoire édifiante et curieuse de Rothschild Ier, Roi des Juifs, par Satan. 
The first edition appeared in Paris in 1846.— 558 
— Rothschild Ier , ses valets et son peuple. The first edition appeared in Paris in 
1846.—558 
Dante, Alighieri. La Divina Commedia.—355 
De la conduite de la guerre d'Orient. Expédition de Crimée. Mémoire adressé au 
gouvernement de S. M. l'Empereur Napoléon III par un officier général. Bruxelles, 
février 1855 (the pamphlet was attributed to Prince Napoleon, Jérôme 
Bonaparte Jr., the French journalist Tavernier and the Belgian officer, Sterckx, 
aide-de-camp of the War Minister).—70, 76, 81, 86, 90, 146, 149 
Derby, E. G. [Speeches in the House of Lords] 
— February 8, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21973, February 9, 1855.—8 
— May 14, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22054, May 15, 1855.—191-92 
Derzhavin, G. R. On the Capture of Warsaw.—569, 571 
Disraeli, B. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— February 28, 1845. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. 
LXXVIII, London, 1845.—50 
— February 16, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21980, February 17, 1855.—26-27 
— May 24, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22063, May 25, 1855.—213, 218, 222-25, 
227-30, 237 
— May 25, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22064, May 26, 1855.—222, 238 
— June 18, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22084, June 19, 1855.—290 
— July 12, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22104, July 13, 1855.—341 
— July 16, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22108, July 17, 1855.—352-54 
— July 23, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22114, July 24, 1855.—482, 498 
Douglas, H. A Treatise on Naval Gunnery, London, 1820.—423 
Drummond, H. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— March 26, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22012, March 27, 1855.—122 
— June 18, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22084, June 19, 1855.—310 
Duncombe, Th. S. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— February 16, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21980, February 17, 1855.—27-28 
— June 25, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22090, June 26, 1855.—311 
Dundas, R. S. Duke of Wellington, before Sweaborg. Aug. 13. In: The Times, No. 
22138,  August 21, 1855.—490, 493, 494 
— Off Sweaborg, Aug. 11. In: The Times, No. 22134, August 16, 1855.—488 
Dunlop, A. G. Cossack Rule, and Russian Influence in Europe, and over Germany. A few 
Notes and Suggestions for the present Crisis, London, 1855.—286 
Ellenborough, E. L. [Speeches in the House of Lords] 
27-3754 

=====第832页=====
802 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— May 14, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22054, May 15, 1855.—187, 189-92 
— June 26, 1855. In: The Times, No.  22091,  June 27, 1855.—483, 499 
Euclidis Elementorum libri XIII.—422 
[Evans, D. M.] The City; or, the Physiology of London Business; with Sketches on 'Change, 
and the Coffee Houses, London,  1845.—  209 
Evans, G. de Lacy. [Speech in the House of Commons, February 29, 1856.] In: 
The Times, No. 22304, March 1, 1856.—635 
— [Statements to the Committee of Inquiry into the Condition of the British Army 
in the Crimea.] In: The Times, No. 21994, March 6, 1855; No. 21995, March 7, 
1855.—74-75 
Ferguson, R. C. [Speech in the House of Commons, March 17, 1809.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates. First series, Vol. XIII, London, 1812.—670 
Fitzpatrick, R. [Speech in the House of Commons, June 28, 1805.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates. First series, Vol. V, London, 1812.—665 
[Fox, Ch. J.] Memorials and Correspondence of Charles James Fox. Ed. by Lord John 
Russell. Vols. I-III, London, 1853-1854 (the last, fourth, volume appeared in 
1857).—584 
Fox, Ch. J. [Speech in the House of Commons, March 29, 1791.] In: The 
Parliamentary History of England, from the Earliest Period to the Year 1803, Vol. 
XXIX, London, 1817.—586 
Gibson, Th. M. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— May 11, 1855. In: The Times, No 22052, May 12, 1855.—223, 341 
— May 25, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22064, May 26, 1855.—224 
— June 4, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22072, June 5, 1855.—246 
Girardin, E. de. La Paix, Paris, 1855.—120 
Gladstone, W. E. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— July 1, 1853. In: Hansard's Parliamentary  Debates.  Third series, Vol. CXXVIII, 
London, 1853.—103 
— February 8, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21973, February 9, 1855.—12-13 
— February 23, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21986, February 24, 1855.—45, 69 
— May 24, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22063, May 25, 1855.—225, 231-34 
— June 15, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22082, June 16, 1855.—277-78, 290 
— July 20, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22112, July 21, 1855.—472 
Goderich, F. J. [Speech in the House of Commons, March 1, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 21991,  March 2, 1855.—63 
God Save the Queen (British national anthem).—292, 305, 519 
Goethe, J. W. von. Faust. Der Tragödie erster Teil. —306 
Goldsmith, O. She Stoops to Conquer; or, The Mistakes of a Night. A Comedy. 479 
Gorchakov, M. D. [Dispatch, dated the 11th of  September,]  In: Russky  Invalid,  No. 211, 
September 16, 1855.—552 
— [Dispatch, dated the 17th of  September,]  In: The Times, No. 22169, September 26, 
1855.—539 
Graham, J. R. G. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 

=====第833页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 803 
— February 23, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21986, February 24, 1855.—43-44, 
69 
— March 8, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21997, March 9, 1855.—515 
— May 18, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22058, May 19, 1855.—514 
— May 25, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22064, May 26, 1855.—225 
— July 17, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22109, July 18, 1855.—357 
Graham, W. [Speech in the House of Commons, March 20, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22007, March 21, 1855.—108 
Granville, G. [Speech in the House of Lords, June 21, 1855.] In: The Times, No. 
22087,  June 22, 1855.—295 
Grosvenor, R. The Sunday Trading Bill. To the Editor of "The Times". In: The Times, 
No. 22093, June 29, 1855.—323 
— [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— June 13, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22080, June 14, 1855.—304 
— June 26, 1855. In: The Times, No.  22091,  June 27, 1855.—320 
Gurowski, A. von. Die letzten Ereignisse in den drei Theilen des alten Polens, München, 
1846.—689-90 
— Le Panslawisme, son histoire,  ses véritables  éléments:  religieux, sociaux, philosophiques 
et politiques, Tome 1, Florence, 1848.—689-90 
— La Vérité sur la Russie et sur la révolte des provinces polonaises, Paris, 
1834.—689-90 
Halford, H. [Speech in the House of Commons, March 8, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 21997, March 9, 1855.—96 
[Harris, J.] Diaries and Correspondence of James Harris, First Earl of Malmesbury; 
Containing an Account of His Missions to the Courts of  Madrid,  Frederick the Great, 
Catherine the  Second,  and the Hague; and His Special Missions to Berlin, Brunswick, 
and the French Republic. Edited by his grandson, the third Earl. The first edition 
in four volumes appeared in London in 1844.—584-86 
Haxthausen, A. Studien über die innern Zustände, das Volksleben und insbesondere die 
ländlichen Einrichtungen Russlands, Dritter Theil, Berlin, 1852.—166 
Heathcote, W. [Speech in the House of Commons, May 24, 1855.] In: The 
Times, No. 22063, May 25, 1855.—227, 228, 245 
Herbert, S. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— January 26, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21962, January 27, 1855.—44 
— February 23, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21986, February 24, 1855.—44-45, 
69-70 
Herodoti Halicarnassei Historiarum libri IX.—109 
Herwegh, G. Aus den Bergen (from the cycle Gedichte eines Lebendigen). — 258 
[Hobbes, Th.] The English Works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury; now first  collected 
and edited by Sir William Molesworth, Bart. Vols. I-XI, London,  1839-1845.—  247 
— Thomae Hobbes Malmesburiensis opera philosophica quae latine scripsit omnia in 
unum corpus nunc primum  collecta  studio et labore Gulielmi  Molesworth,  Vols. I-V, 
Londini, 1839-1845.—247 
Homer. Iliad.—382, 618 
27* 

=====第834页=====
804 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Horatius Flaccus, Quintus. Carminum liber  III.—  573 
— Satirarum liber I.—158, 691 
[Horner, L.] Report of Leonard Horner, Esq., Inspector of Factories, for the Half Year 
ended the 31st of October, 1854. In: Reports of the Inspectors of Factories to Her 
Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department, for the Half Year 
Ending 31st October 1854. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command 
of Her Majesty. London, 1855.—96 
[Hughes, T. M.] Revelations of Spain in 1845. By an English Resident. Vols. I-II, 
London, 1845.—469 
Hume, J. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— May 31, 1827. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. New series [2], Vol. XVII, 
London, 1828.—377 
— June 20, 1848. In: Hansard's Parliamentary  Debates.  Third series, Vol. XCIX, 
London, 1848.—47, 381 
— June 5, 1849. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. CV, 
London, 1849.—381 
— March 25, 1852. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. CXX, 
London, 1852.—47 
Jones,  E. Political Felony. Infamous Chicanery and Fraud of the Administrative Reform 
Association. In: The People's Paper, No. 158, May 12,1855.-197 
— [Speech in St. Martin's Hall, February 27, 1855.J In: The People's Paper, 
No. 148, March 3, 1855.—71 
Juvenalis. Satirae.—259 
[Knesebeck, K. F.] Denkschrift, betreffend die Gleichgewichts-Lage Europa's, beim 
Zusammentritte des Wiener Congresses verfasst, von den damaligen Königlich 
Preussischen General, nachmaligen Feldmarschall von dem Knesebeck, Berlin, 
1854.—284-85 
Lansdowne, H. [Speeches in the House of Lords] 
— February 8, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21973, February 9, 1855.—8 
— April 10, 1856. In: The Times, No. 22339, April 11, 1856.—662, 671 
Las Cases, [E.] Mémorial de Sainte-Hélène, ou Journal où se trouve consigné, jour par 
jour, ce qu'a dit et fait Napoléon durant dix-huit mois. The first edition in 
eight volumes appeared in Paris in 1823-1824.— 286 
Layard, A. H. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— January 26, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21962, January 27, 1855.—131 
— April 27, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22040, April 28, 1855.—341 
— May 25, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22064, May 26, 1855.—238 
— June 15, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22082, June 16, 1855.—277, 368 
Lee, J. The Emperor of Russia's Death—Remarkable Circumstance. To the Editor of "The 
Morning Advertiser". In: The Morning Advertiser, No. 19877, March 6,  1855.—  67 
Lewis, G. C. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— March 8, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21997, March 9, 1855.—103 
— March 19, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22006, March 20, 1855.—103 
Lowe, R. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— May 25, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22064, May 26, 1855.—228, 245, 246 
— July 17, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22109, July 18, 1855.—357 
Lucan, G. Ch. [Speech in the House of Lords, March 19, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22006, March 20, 1855.—102 

=====第835页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 805 
Lyndhurst, J. S. [Speeches in the House of Lords] 
— March 20, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22007, March 21, 1855.—104-06 
— June 26, 1855. In: The Times, No.  22091,  June 27, 1855.—482, 498 
Malins, R. [Speech in the House of Commons, June 25, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22090, June 26, 1855.—311 
Malmesbury, J. H. H. [Speeches in the House of Lords] 
— June 21, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22087, June 22, 1855.—294-95 
— April 10, 1856. In: The Times, No. 22339, April 11, 1856.—662 
Manteuffel, O. Th. von. [Speech in the Credit Committee of the First Chamber of the 
Prussian Diet, April 22, 1854.] In: Berlinische Nachrichten von Staats- und gelehrten 
Sachen, No. 95, April 23, 1854.—105 
— [Speech in the First Chamber of the Prussian Diet, April 25, 1854.] In: 
Berlinische Nachrichten von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen, No. 97, April 26, 
1854.—105 
La Marseillaise (French patriotic song, later the national anthem of the French 
Republic; text and music by C. J. Rouget de Lisle).—292 
[McNeill, J.] Progress and Present Position of Russia in the East, London,  1836.—  26 
Moltke, H. K. B. The Russians in Bulgaria and Rumelia in 1828 and 1829: during the 
Campaigns of the Danube, the Sieges of Brailow, Varna, Silistria and the Passage of  the 
Balkan by Marshal Diebitch, London, 1854.—147 
— Der russisch-türkische Feldzug in der europäischen Türkei 1828 und 1829, Berlin, 
1845.—147 
Montalembert, Ch. [Speech at the sitting of the Legislative Assembly, May 22, 
1850.] In: Le Moniteur universel, No. 143, May 23, 1850.—601 
Montesquieu, Ch.-L. de. De l'Esprit des lois. The first edition in two volumes 
appeared anonymously in Geneva in  1748.—  300 
Napier, Ch. [Correspondence with Sir James Graham.] In: The Times, Nos. 22149, 
22150, 22152, 22154, September 3, 4, 6, 8, 1855.—493, 513, 515-18 
— [The first letter about the Baltic fleet.] In: The Morning Advertiser, June 15, 
1855.—273 
— Sir Charles Napier on the Bombardment of  Sweaborg.  To the Editor of "The Times". 
In: The Times, No.  22141,  August 24, 1855.—493-94, 515, 517 
Napier, E. E. The  Prospects  of the Crimean Campaign. To the Editor of "The Times". In: 
The Times, No. 21970, February 6, 1855.—6 
Napier, W. F. P. History of the War in the Peninsula and in the South of  France,  from the 
year 1807 to the year 1814. The first edition in six volumes appeared in London in 
1828-1840.—34, 42, 415, 419, 423, 433, 514 
Das Nibelungenlied (German epic of the early Middle  Ages).—  225 
Niel, A. Sebastopol, Sept. 11. In: The Times, No. 22170, September 27, 1855.—542, 
546 
No Bitter Observer. To the Editor of "The Times". In: The Times, No. 22165, 
September 21, 1855.—544 
O'Connell, D. [Speech in the House of Commons, February 5, 1833.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. XV, London,  1833.—  383 

=====第836页=====
806 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
[Oliphant, L.] Suchum Kaleh, Oct. 6. In: The Times, No. 22195, October 26, 
1855.—652-53 
O'Meara, B. E. Napoleon in Exile; or, A Voice from St. Helena. The Opinions and 
Reflections of Napoleon on the Most Important Events of His Life and Government, in 
His Own Words, Vols. I-II, London, 1822.—122 
Ostrowski, J. B. The History of  Poland,  Vols. I-II, London, 1841.—478 
Otway, A. J. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— June 15, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22082, June 16, 1855.—277 
— June 25, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22090, June 26, 1855.—308 
Ovidius. Remédia amoris. —63 
Palmerston, H. J. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— June 1, 1829. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. New series [2], Vol. XXI, 
London, 1829.—18 
— February 5, 1830. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. New series [2], Vol. 
XXII, London, 1830.—18 
— February 16, 1830. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. New series [2], Vol. 
XXII, London, 1830.—18 
— July 11, 1833. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. XIX, 
London, 1833.—18 
— August 24, 1833. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. XX, 
London, 1833.—18 
— March 17, 1834. In: Hansard's Parliamentary  Debates.  Third series, Vol. XXII, 
London, 1834.—18 
— February 16, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21980, February 17, 1855.—23-24, 45 
— February 19, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21982, February 20, 1855.—40-41 
— February 23, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21986, February 24, 1855.—44 
— March 1, 1855. In: The Times, No.  21991,  March 2, 1855.—63 
— March 20, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22007, March 21, 1855.—108 
— May 21, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22060, May 22, 1855.—213-14, 224-25 
— May 22, 1855. In: The Times, No.  22061,  May 23, 1855.—213 
— May 25, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22064, May 26, 1855.—222-24, 237-39 
— June 8, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22076, June 9, 1855.—257 
— June 18, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22084, June 19, 1855.—290 
— June 22, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22088, June 23, 1855.—298 
— June 25, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22090, June 26, 1855.—308 
— July 10, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22103, July 11, 1855.—341 
— July 12, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22104, July 13, 1855.—341 
— July 17, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22109, July 18, 1855.—356 
— July 20, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22112, July 21, 1855.—480, 653 
— July 23, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22114, July 24, 1855.—482, 498 
— August 7, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22127, August 8, 1855.—472-73 
Panmure, F. [Speeches in the House of Lords] 
— May 14, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22054, May 15, 1855.—192 
— June 28, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22093, June 29, 1855.—320 
Partant pour la Syrie (official anthem of the Second Empire in France, text by A. de 
la Borde, music by L. Drouet).—  292,  519 
Peel, J. [Speech in the House of Commons, July 17, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22109, July 18, 1855.—355-57 

=====第837页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 807 
Peel, R. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— February 16, 1830. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. New series [2], 
Vol. XXII, London, 1830.—18 
— August 10, 1842. In: Hansard's Parliamentary  Debates.  Third series, Vol. LXV, 
London, 1842.—71 
Pélissier, A. Crimée, 9 septembre, huit heures du soir. In: Le Moniteur universel, 
No. 254, September 11, 1855.—519 
— Grand quartier général à Sébastopol, le 11 septembre 1855. In: Le Moniteur 
universel, No. 268, September 25, 1855.—539 
— Grand quartier général, à Sébastopol, le 1 er octobre 1855. In: Le Moniteur 
universel, No. 289, October 16, 1855.—563, 694 
— Head-Quarters, Sébastopol, Sept. 11; Head-Quarters, Sébastopol, Sept. 14. In: The 
Times, No. 22170, September 27, 1855.—542 
— Sébastopol,  le 10 septembre,  à onze heures du  soir.  In: Le Moniteur universel, No. 256, 
September 13, 1855.—532 
Penaud, Ch. Vaisseau de Sa Majesté Impériale le Tourville, devant Sweaborg, le 11 août 
1855. In: Le Moniteur universel, No. 230, August 18, 1855.—490 
— Vaisseau le Tourville, le 11 août 1855. In: Le Moniteur universel,No. 227, August 
15, 1855.—488 
Perceval, S. [Speech in the House of Commons, March 20, 1809.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates. [First series], Vol. XIII, London,  1812.—  670 
Phillimore, J. G. [Speech in the House of Commons, July 17, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22109, July 18, 1855.—357 
A Plain Statement of the Conduct of the Ministry and the Opposition, towards His Royal 
Highness the Duke of York, London, 1808.—666 
Porter, G. R. The Progress of the Nation, in its Various Social and Economical Relations, 
from the Beginning of  the Nineteenth Century to the Present Time. The first complete 
edition in three volumes appeared in London in 1843.—560 
Pradt, [D.] de. Du Congres de Vienne. Tomes I-II, Paris, 1815.—283 
— Mémoires historiques sur la révolution d'Espagne, Paris, 1816.—469 
Pufendorf,  S. De Jure naturae et gentium libri octo. The first edition appeared in 
London in 1672.—156, 164 
Reed, J. H. [Speech in the House of Commons, August 2, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22123, August 3, 1855.—471 
R. G. A. The Boat's Grew  Destroyed  at Hangoe. To the Editor of  the Morning Chronicle. In: 
The Morning Chronicle, No. 27607, June 20, 1855.—291 
[Richards, A. Letters of] An Englishman. In: The Times, No. 20990, December 20, 
1851;  No. 21007, January 9, 1852; No. 21020, January 24, 1852; No. 21044, 
February 21, 1852; No.  21091,  April 16, 1852; No.  21231,  September 27, 1852; 
No. 21262, November 2, 1852.—70 
Richmond, Ch. [Speech in the House of Lords, June 28, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22093, June 29, 1855.—320 
Roebuck, J. A. History of the Whig Ministry of 1830, to the Passing of the Reform Bill, 
Vols.  I-II, London, 1852.—374 
— [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— February 16, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21980, February 17, 1855.—25, 27 

=====第838页=====
808 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— May 25, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22064, May 26, 1855.—223, 224 
— June 22, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22088, June 23, 1855.—300, 337, 352 
— July 10, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22103, July 11, 1855.—335-36 
— July 16, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22108, July 17, 1855.—352 
— July 17, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22109, July 18, 1855.—355-57, 363, 367, 
480 
Rule Britannia (patriotic song from J. Thomson's drama The Mask of  Alfred,  music 
by Th. A. Arne).— 292 
Russell, J. Don Carlos, or, Persecution; a tragedy in five acts and in verse, London, 
1822.—374 
— An Essay on the History of the English Government and Constitution, from the 
Reign of Henry VII to the Present Time. The first edition appeared in London 
in 1821.—374 
— Letter to the Electors of Stroud on the Reform Act, London, 1839.—378, 380 
— Lord John Russell to the Electors of the City of London. Edinburgh, Nov. 22. In: 
The Times, No. 19092, November 27, 1845.—390 
— Memoirs of the Affairs of Europe from the Peace of Utrecht, Vols. I-II, London, 
1824-1829.—374 
— To the Right Reverend the Bishop of Durham. Downing street, Nov. 4. In: The 
Times, No. 20640, November 7, 1850.—392 
— [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— May 3, 1827. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. New series [2], Vol. XVII, 
London, 1828.—376 
— June 7, 1827. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. New series [2], Vol. XVII, 
London, 1828.—391 
— March 1, 1831. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. II, 
London, 1831.—374, 377-80 
— February 6, 1833. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. XV, 
London, 1833.—385 
— June 6, 1833. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. XVIII, 
London, 1833.—380 
— November 20, 1837. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. 
XXXIX, London, 1838.—381 
— November 21, 1837. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. 
XXXIX, London, 1838.—381 
— June 7, 1841. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. LVIII, 
London, 1841.—388-90 
— February 13, 1844. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. 
LXXII, London, 1844.—386 
— July 9, 1845. In: Hansard's Parliamentary  Debates.  Third series. Vol. LXXXII, 
London, 1845.—392 
— August 17, 1846. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. 
LXXXVIII, London, 1846.—386 
— June 20, 1848. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. XCIX, 
London, 1848.—381 
— July 22, 1848. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. C, 
London, 1848.—386 
— June 5, 1849. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. CV, 
London, 1849.—381 
— February 23, 1852. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. 
CXIX, London, 1852.—382 

=====第839页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 809 
— January 26, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21962, January 27, 1855.—131 
— February 8, 1855. In: The Times, No. 21973, February 9, 1855.—9, 27 
— May 24, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22063, May 25, 1855.—225, 228, 234-36, 339 
— June 5, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22073, June 6, 1855.—248 
— July 6, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22100, July 7, 1855.—342 
— July 12, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22104, July 13, 1855.—341 
— July 16, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22108, July 17, 1855.—352 
— July 19, 1855. In: The Times, No.  22111,  July 20, 1855.—482, 483, 498, 499 
— July 23, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22114, July 24, 1855.—482, 498, 499 
— August 7, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22127, August 8, 1855.—472, 473 
— April 10, 1856. In: The Times, No. 22339, April 11, 1856.—662 
[Russell, W. H.] Before Sebastopol, Jan. 22. In: The Times, No.  21971,  February 7, 
1855.—10 
— Camp before Sebastopol, March 10. In: The Times, No. 22324, March 25, 
1856.—619 
— Fourth Division Camp, Friday Night, March 30. In: The Times, No. 22028 (second 
edition), April 14, 1855.—154 
Saint-Arnaud, A. de. Au quartier general à Alma. Champ de bataille dAlma, le 21 
septembre 1854. In: Le Moniteur universel, No. 280, October 7, 1854.—411 
[Scharnhorst, G. J. D. von.] Kriegs-Artikel für das  Preussische  Heer, Amtliche-Ausgabe, 
Berlin, 1853.—435 
Schiller, J. Ch. F. von. Don  Carlos. — 357 
[Schönhals, K.] Erinnerungen eines österreichischen Veteranen aus dem italienischen 
Kriege der Jahre 1848 und 1849, Bd. MI, Stuttgart und Tübingen, 1852.—460 
Scully, V. [Speech in the House of Commons, July 10, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22103, July 11, 1855.—480 
Shaftesbury, A. A. C. [Speech in the House of Lords, June 12, 1855.] In: The 
Times, No. 22079, June 13, 1855.—302 
Shakespeare, W. The Comedy of Errors.—27 
— Hamlet, Prince of Denmark.—247, 297 
— King Henry IV.—12, 480, 486 
— King Henry tf—480 
— King Henry VIII.—615 
— King Richard III.—49 
— Measure for Measure.— 666 
— A Midsummer Night's Dream.—656, 662 
— The Taming of the Shrew.— 383 
— The Tempest.—670 
Shee, W. [Speech in the House of Commons, July 12, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22104, July 13, 1855.—341 
Simpson, J. Before Sebastopol, Sept. 9. In: The Times, No. 22166, September 22, 
1855.—542 
Sire de Franc Boissy, (French  song).—  603 
Smith, A. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. The first 
edition in two volumes appeared in London in  1776.—  530 

=====第840页=====
810 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Smith, R. V. [Speech in the House of Commons, August 7, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 22127, August 8, 1855.—472 
Stafford, A. [Speech in the House of Commons, January 29, 1855.] In: The Times, 
No. 21964, January 30, 1855.—131 
Steuart, J. An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Oeconomy: Being an Essay on the 
Science of Domestic Policy in Free Nations. In which are particularly considered, 
Population, Agriculture, Trade, Industry, Money, Coin, Interest, Circulation, Banks, 
Exchange, Public Credit, and Taxes. The first edition in two volumes appeared in 
London in 1767.—531 
Stuart, D. C. [Speech in the House of Commons, March 17, 1837.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. XXXVII, London, 1837.—17 
Sutherland, J. Balaklava, July 19. [Letter to Lord Shaftesbury.] In: The Times, No. 
22139,  August 22, 1855.—491-92 
Tassilier. To the Minister of Marine. In: The People's Paper, No. 206, April 12, 1856; 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4676, April 14, 1856.—615 
Terentianus Maurus. De litteris, syllabis et metris (from the cycle Carmen heroicum).— 
556 
Thousand and One Nights.— 339 
Toussenel, A. Les Juifs rois de l'époque, histoire de la féodalité financière. The first 
edition appeared in Paris in 1845.—558 
Urquhart, D. [Correspondence with J. Backhouse.] In: The Times, No. 16948, 
January 25, 1839.—19 
— On the Death of the Emperor Nicholas. To the Editor of "The Morning 
Advertiser". In: The Morning Advertiser, No. 19877, March 6,  1855.—  68 
Vattel, [E.] de. Le Droit des gens ou principes de la loi naturelle. Appliqués à la Conduite 
et aux Affaires des Nations et des Souverains. Ouvrage qui conduit à developer les 
véritables Intérêts des Puissances. The first edition in two volumes appeared in 
Leyden in 1758.—156, 164 
Wardle, G. L. [Speech in the House of Commons, January 27, 1809.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates. [First series]. Vol. XII, London,  1812.—  668 
Wieland, Ch. M. Die Abderiten, eine sehr wahrscheinliche Geschichte. The first edition 
appeared in Weimar in 1774, the first complete edition in 1781.—165 
Willisen, W. Der Italienische Feldzug des Jahres 1848; Berlin, 1849.—460 
Wilson, R. Th. Inquiry into the  Present  State of the Military  Force  of the British Empire with a 
View to its Reorganization, London,  1804.—  502 
Wise, J. A. [Speech in the House of Commons, May 22, 1855.] In: The Times, No. 
22061,  May 23, 1855.—213 
[Wiseman, N.] Cardinal Wiseman's Manifesto. In: The Times, No.  20651,  November 
20, 1850.—391 
Wood, Ch. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— June 25, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22090, June 26, 1855.—308-09 
— July 17, 1855. In: The Times, No. 22109, July 18, 1855.—356, 357 

=====第841页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 811 
DOCUMENTS 
An act for better enabling Her Majesty to confer certain powers and immunities on trading 
and other companies  [1837].—  322 
An act for confirming and continuing, for a limited time, the restriction contained in the 
minute of council on the twenty-sixth of February one thousand seven hundred and 
ninety-seven, on payments of cash by the bank [1797].—166 
An act for continuing two former acts for punishing officers and soldiers who shall mutiny 
or desert their Majesties service and for punishing false musters and for payment of 
quarters for one year longer [Mutiny Act,  1694].—  63 
An act for enlarging the time of continuance of parliaments, appointed by an act made in 
the sixth year of the reign of King William and Queen Mary, intituled, An act for the 
frequent meeting and calling of parliaments [1716].—188 
An act for the more effectual preserving the King's person and government by disabling 
papists from sitting in either house of parliament [Second Test Act,  1678].—  390 
An act for preventing dangers which may happen from popish recusants [First Test Act, 
1673].—390 
An act for preventing tumults and riotous  assemblies,  and for the more  speedy  and effectual 
punishing of rioters [Riot Act, 1715].—66 
An act for the well-governing and regulating of corporations [Corporation Act, 
1661].—390 
An act to amend the acts relating to labour in factories  [1850].—  97, 188 
An act to amend the laws for the importation of corn  [1842].—  388 
An act to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the militia in England [1852].—140 
An act to continue the restrictions contained in several acts on payments in cash by the 
Bank of England, until the first day of May one thousand eight hundred and 
twenty-three, and to provide for the gradual resumption of such payments; and to permit 
the exportation of gold and silver  [1819].—  387 
An act to limit the hours of labour of young  persons  and females in factories  [1847].—  95 
An act to regulate the issue of bank notes, and for giving to the governor and company of 
the Bank of England certain privileges for a limited period [1844].—198-99 
Address in Answer to the King's Speech. House of Commons. Tuesday, February 4, 
1834.  In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. XXI, London, 
1834.—385 
Birmingham Conference. Report of Committee on the Danish Treaty, London, 
1855.—394-96 
Birmingham Conference. Report of Committee on the  Proposed  Bases of Pacification known 
as "The Four Points", London, 1855.—394, 396-400 
Constitution fédérale de la Confédération suisse, délibérée par la Diète dans ses séances du 
15 mai au 27 juin 1848 et déclarée acceptée le 12 septembre 1848, Genève, 
1848.—461 
Corn Laws.—16, 51, 54, 60, 166, 195, 386-90, 392, 563 

=====第842页=====
812 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. [First series], Vol. XII, London,  1812.—  668-70 
Kars Papers—see Papers Relative to Military Affairs in Asiatic Turkey.... 
King's Speech by William IV [at the opening of the session of Parliament. February 
4, 1834.] In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, Third series, Vol. XXI, London, 
1834.—385 
Lanskoy, S. S. [Circular to the Nobility, August 28, 1855.] In: Severnaya Pchela, No. 
223, October 12, 1855.—576 
Ordenanzas de S. M. para el regimen, disciplina, subordinacion, y servico de sus ejercitos. 
T. III, Madrid, 1768.—493 
Papal Brief by Pius P. P. IX. [On the 30th day of September, in the year 1850.] In: 
The Annual Register, or a View of  the History and Politics of the Year 1850, London, 
1851.—391-92 
Papers Relative to Military Affairs in Asiatic Turkey, and the Defence and Capitulation of 
Kars. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command of Her Majesty, 
London, 1856.—605-14, 623-54, 673-80 
The People's Charter; being the Outline of an Act to provide for the Just 
Representation of the People of Great Britain in the Commons' House of 
Parliament. Embracing the principles of Universal Suffrage, No Property 
Qualification, Annual Parliaments, Equal Representation, Payment of Members, 
and Vote by Ballot. Prepared by a committee of twelve persons, six members of 
Parliament and six members of the London Working Men's Association and 
addressed to the People of the United Kingdom, London, 1838.—46,  99-101, 
241-43 
Poor Law [1834].—54, 188 
The Portfolio; or a Collection of State Papers, etc., etc. Illustrative of the History of Our 
Times, Vols. I-VI, London, 1836-1837.—19 
Report of Committee on the Salaries and Emoluments of Offices held during the pleasure of 
the Crown by Members of Parliament, Judicial Offices in the Law Courts, and on the 
Expense of Diplomatic Establishments; Evidence, Appendix and Index, [London] 
1850.—213 
Reports of the Inspectors of Factories to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the 
Home Department, for the Half Year Ending 30th April 1855. Presented to both 
Houses of Parliament by Command of Her Majesty. London, 1855.—369-70 
Thronrede von Friedrich Wilhelm IV. Vom 30. November 1854. In: Königlich 
Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger, No. 283, December 1, 1854.—105 
ANONYMOUS ARTICLES AND REPORTS 
PUBLISHED IN PERIODIC EDITIONS 
Allgemeine Zeitung (Augsburg), No. 125 (supplement), May 5, 1855: Von der 
polnischen Gränze, 30 April.—183 
The Argus (Melbourne), No. 2359, December 1, 1854: Ballaarat. Wednesday, 
November 29th, 1854.—65 
Le Constitutionnel, No. 192, July 11, 1855: Devant Sébastopol, 26 juin.— 359, 364 
The Daily News, No. 2731, February 19, 1855. Representative Government is on its 
trial...—30 

=====第843页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 813 
— No. 2742, March 3, 1855: The Death of the Csar. (Communicated).— 68 
— June 13, 1855: [Prince Albert's toast.] —280 
The Economist, No. 599, February 17, 1855: Two Much Needed Reforms.— 30 
— No. 630, September 22, 1855: Paris Banks.— 536 
The Globe and Traveller, June 23, 1855: [On the defeat of the Allies on June 
18.] —298 
The Leader, No. 260, March 17, 1855: Humiliation "ex-officio".— 95 
— No. 260, March 17, 1855: A Proclamation. For a Day of Solemn Fast, 
Humiliation and Prayer. Victoria R.—95 
— No. 274, June 23, 1855: News of the Week— 298 
Manchester Daily Examiner and Times, No. 193, September 24, 1855: The condition of 
the money market...— 534-35 
The Manchester Guardian, No. 2724, February 14, 1855: Markets for Manufacture.— 
23 
Le Moniteur universel, No. 48, February 17, 1855: Paris, le 16 février.— 170 
— No. 88, March 27, 1855: Paris, le 26 mars.—147 
— No. 101, April 11, 1855: Paris, le 10 avril. Expédition d'Orient— 146-50, 211 
— No. 126, May 6, 1855: Paris, le 5 mai. Rapport à VEmpereur. —177 
— No. 198, July 17, 1855: Francfort, le 14 juillet 1855.—357, 364 
— No. 263, September 20, 1855: Paris, le 19 septembre.—  535 
— No. 80, March 20, 1856: Paris, le 19 mars.—616-17 
— No. 81, March 21, 1856: Paris, le 20 mars.— 617 
— No. 84-85, March 24-25, 1856: Paris, le 24 mars.— 618 
The Morning Advertiser, No. 19863, February 17, 1855: A Minister must be 
ambitious....— 41 
— No. 19864, February 19, 1855: Faithful are the wounds of a  friend....—  41 
— No. 19872, February 28, 1855: The Ministry of Titles.— 149 
— No. 19875, March 3, 1855: No event of greater importance....— 67 
— No. 19875, March 3, 1855: Secret History of the Crimean Expedition.—70 
— No. 19878, March 7, 1855: The Reported Dissolution.— 73 
— No. 19887, March 17, 1855: The National and Constitutional Association.—98 
The Morning Chronicle, No. 27504, February 19, 1855: It is  useless  to disguise....— 29-
30, 40-41 
— No. 27504, February 19, 1855: The prudence, fairness and consistency of 
nominating Mr. Roebuck's committee....— 29-30 
— No.  27541,  April 3, 1855: The British public....—139-40 
— No.  27571,  May 9, 1855: Banks of the Spree, May 6.—178 
— No.  27571,  May 9, 1855: The trial of the assassin....—177 
The Morning  Herald,  No. 22372, March 6, 1855: England and France. Probable 
Dissolution of Parliament.— 69 
— No. 22373, March 7, 1855: A more audacious and unconstitutional attempt....— 
73-74 
— No. 22378, March 13, 1855: It is quite right that the Conservative people....— 80 
— No 22383, March 19, 1855: Portsmouth—Saturday. (From our own correspon­
dent.)—  94 
— No. 22385, March 21, 1855: So astonished we were....—118 
— No. 22432, May 16, 1855: The public has been disappointed....—194 
— No. 22438, May 23, 1855: Siege of Sevastopol— 212 

=====第844页=====
814 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— No. 22450, June 6, 1855: Gulf of Finland, 16 Miles off Cronstadt.— 259 
— No. 22450, June 6, 1855: Visit to Bomarsund. Faro, May  21.—  259 
— No. 22465, June 23, 1855: Evil tidings—the truth of which was  denied....—  298 
The Morning Post, No. 25325, March 3, 1855-Nicholas Paulovitch, Emperor and 
Autocrat of All the Russias....—67 
— No. 25328, March 7, 1855: "By a General Officer". This much is on the 
title-page....—  76-77 
— No. 25328, March 7, 1855: Memoir Addressed to the Government of H. M. the 
Emperor Napoleon III. By a General Officer.— 76 
— No. 25338, March 19, 1855: National and Constitutional Association.—98-100 
— No. 25338, March 19, 1855: Paris, Friday Evening.—94 
— No. 25348, March 30, 1855: The discussion upon the Third Point....—136 
— No. 25386, May 14, 1855: A paper has lately been presented to Parliament....— 
186 
— No. 25422, June 25, 1855: A scene in the highest degree disgraceful and 
dangerous....—307 
— No. 25455, August 2, 1855: The Command of the Army in the East.—470 
Le Nord,  No. 19, January 19, 1856: Paris, 17 janvier. — 600 
— No. 37, February 6, 1856: Paris, 4 février. — 603 
The People's Paper, No. 157, May 5, 1855: London Organisation Committee.—168 
— No. 170, August 11, 1855: The Two "Shams".-— 477-80 
The Press, No. 99, March 24, 1855: Paris, Thursday.—120 
— No. 99, March 24, 1855: "Press" Office. Friday Night, March 23.—119-21 
Russky  Invalid,  No. 118, June 1, 1855: News from the Baltic. No. 209.— 304 
Severnaya Pchela, No. 11, January 14, 1856: [Article on the results of the Crimean 
war].— 600 
The Times, No. 16949, January 26, 1839: It is not for us to understand....—19 
— No.  21941,  January 3, 1855: There is a singular but not real consolation for 
failure....—103 
— No. 21964, January 30, 1855: [Report on the sitting of the House of Commons on 
January 29, 1855.] — 26 
— No. 21972, February 8, 1855: The Sick and Wounded  Fund.  (From our own 
Correspondent.)— 12 
— No. 21979, February 16, 1855: All that we yet know of our present 
Government...—  21, 22 
— No. 21979, February 16, 1855: Among all the political changes....—23, 53, 59 
— No. 21979, February 16, 1855: Re-election of Mr. Sidney Herbert—21-22 
— No.  21981,  February 19, 1855: In the gloomy autumn of 1847....— 30-31 
— No. 21982, February 20, 1855: Marylebone.—Conduct of the War.— 30 
— No. 21988, February 27, 1855: Court of Queen's Bench. Guildhall*  Feb.  26.—51 
— No. 21990, March 1, 1855: Mr. Layard and His Constituents.— 57-58 
— No. 21992, March 3, 1855: The Emperor of Russia is  Dead.—  67 
— No. 21992, March 3, 1855: Scarcely had the intelligence....— 67 
— No. 22005, March 19, 1855: If any reliance is to be placed on the last 
intelligence....—103 
— No. 22006, March 20, 1855: The Chancellor of the Exchequer last night 
propounded his measure for restricting the circulation of "The Times"....—103 
— No. 22006, March 20, 1855: The Conferences at Vienna were opened in due 
form....—102 

=====第845页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 815 
— No. 22007, March 21, 1855: The State of the Army before Sebastopol—125-26, 
129 
— No.  22011,  March 26, 1855: The issue raised upon the question....—122 
— No. 22012, March 27, 1855: The last accounts from the Crimea....—135, 138 
— No. 22014, March 29, 1855: Camp near Kadikoi, Friday, March 16.—135, 138 
— No. 22028, April 14, 1855: Nobody can deny....—154 
— No. 22028, April 14, 1855: Paris, Thursday, April 12, 6 p. m.—150 
— No. 22040, April 28, 1855: Administrative Reform.—196 
— No. 22043, May 2, 1855: [Report in "Latest Intelligence".] —170 
— No. 22044, May 3, 1855: [Report in "Latest Intelligence".]—170 
— No. 22045, May 4, 1855: [Report in "Latest Intelligence".]—170 
— No. 22054, May 15, 1855: State of the Army before Sebastopoi—515 
— No. 22063, May 25, 1855: The Ministry and Its Supporters.— 218 
— No. 22080, June 14, 1855: Prince Albert on Public Affairs.—274-76, 280 
— No. 22084, June 19, 1855: State of the Army before SebastopoL—  290,  296, 299, 
300 
— No. 22086, June 21, 1855: The Massacre at Hango.—293 
— No. 22087, June 22, 1855: it is not often that such a display of feeling....—  294, 
296 
— No. 22087, June 22, 1855: The Sebastopol Committee.—296 
— No. 22090, June 26, 1855: Hyde Park on Sunday was the scene....—308 
— No. 22095, July 2, 1855: The Demonstration in Hyde Park.—326-27 
— No. 22095, July 2, 1855: Surely at the present moment we have got real 
troubles....—  324 
— No. 22104, July 13, 1855: In the course of a very short speech Lord John 
Russell....—Ml 
— No. 22115, July 25, 1855: House of Commons, Tuesday, July 24.—470 
— No. 22120, July 31, 1855: House of Commons, Monday, July 30.—470-71 
— No. 22123, August 3, 1855: House of Commons, Thursday, August 2.—470-71 
— No. 22128, August 9, 1855: Poland and a Polish Legion.—477-80 
— No. 22135, August 17, 1855: Paris, Wednesday, Aug. 15, Mid-day.—490 
— No. 22139, August 22, 1855: We never felt more strongly the  necessity  of guarding 
ourselves....—492 
— No. 22172, September 29, 1855: [An account of Alexander Malet's 
speech.]—553 
— No. 22173, October 1, 1855: The Revenue.—554-55 
— No. 22177, October 5, 1855: [An account of John Bright's speech at the 
meeting of October 3, 1855.]—558 
— No. 22195, October 26, 1855: When the first news....—573 
— No. 22200, November 1, 1855: Paris, Wednesday Evening.— 572 
— No. 22200, November 1, 1855: Russian Army of the South.—  577,  578 
— No. 22210, November 13, 1855: The Rights of Refugees.—581 
— No. 22254, January 3, 1856: Constantinople, Dec. 24.-592 
— No. 22275, January 28, 1856: The seat of the forthcoming negotiations....— 600 
— No. 22277, January 30, 1856: Assuredly Russia....—600 
— No. 22278, January 31, 1856: We are informed....—600 
— No. 22320, March 20, 1856: The Capitulation of Kars [I].—605, 606 
— No. 22322, March 22, 1856: The Capitulation of Kars [II].—605, 606 
— No. 22323, March 24, 1856: The Capitulation of Kars [III].—605, 606 

=====第846页=====
816 
INDEX OF PERIODICALS 
Advertiser—see The Morning Advertiser 
Allgemeine Zeitung —a conservative daily founded in 1798; it was published in 
Augsburg from 1810 to 1882.—183 
The Argus—a liberal daily published in Melbourne from 1846(7) to 1934.—65 
Augsburg Gazette—see Allgemeine Zeitung 
The Birmingham Journal and Commercial Advertiser—a daily published from 1825 to 
1869.—601 
The Birmingham Daily Press—a daily founded in May 1855.—395 
Chronicle—see The Morning Chronicle 
Cobbett's Weekly Political Register—a radical weekly published in London from 1802 
to 1835 under different  titles.—  663,  665, 667 
Le Constitutionnel —a daily published in Paris from 1815 to 1817 and from 1819 to 
1870;  the mouthpiece of the monarchist bourgeoisie (Thiers party) during the 
1848 revolution; a Bonapartist newspaper after the 1851 coup d'état. — 267, 
278, 287, 358, 594, 599 
The Daily News—a liberal newspaper, organ of the industrial bourgeoisie, 
published in London from 1846 to 1928.—30, 68, 167, 177, 280, 310, 481, 554 
The Economist. Weekly Commercial Times, Bankers' Gazette, and Railway Monitor: a 
Political, Literary, and General Newspaper—organ of the big industrial bourgeoisie 
published in London from 1843 onwards.—  30, 536 
The Edinburgh Review, or Critical Journal—a liberal literary and political journal 
published in Edinburgh and London from 1802 to 1929, quarterly in die 
Ï 850s.—103 

=====第847页=====
Index of Periodicals 817 
The Free Press. Journal of the Foreign Affairs Committees—a journal opposed to the 
Palmerston Government, published by David Urquhart and his followers in 
London from 1855 to 1865, weekly till April 1858, and later monthly; it was 
renamed Diplomatic Review in 1866; it carried a number of works by 
Marx.—672 
Gazzetta di Roma—a daily, official organ of the Papal States government, published 
in 1848-49.—391 
Gazzetta Ufficiale di Milano—a daily published from 1816 to 1875 under different 
titles;  official organ of the Austrian authorities in Northern Italy till 
1859.—619 
Globe—see The Globe and Traveller 
Le Globe.  Journal Politique, Philosophique et Littéraire —a daily published in Paris from 
1824 to 1832; organ of the Saint-Simon school from January 18, 1831.—139 
The Globe and Traveller—a daily published in London from 1803 to 1921; organ of 
the Whigs till 1866, and later of the Conservatives.—298, 334 
Herald—see The Morning Herald 
Illustrated Times Weekly Newspaper—a newspaper published in London from 1855 to 
1862 and from 1862 to 1872 (a new series).—281 
L'Indépendance belge. Journal mondial d'informations politiques et littéraires —a daily 
founded in Brussels in 1831, organ of the liberals.—657 
Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires —a daily published in Paris from 1789 to 
1944;  organ of the moderate Orleanist opposition after the 1851 coup 
d'état. — 556 
The Lancet—a medical journal published in London from 1823 onwards.— 310 
The Leader—a liberal weekly founded in London in 1850.—95, 298 
Lloyd's Weekly London Newspaper—a liberal newspaper founded in 1842; it came out 
under this title from 1843 to 1918.—291 
Manchester Daily Examiner and Times—a liberal newspaper founded in 1848 by the 
merger of the Manchester Times and Manchester Examiner; supported the Free 
Traders in the 1840s and in 1850s; published till 1894 under different 
titles.—534, 535 
The Manchester Guardian—a daily founded in 1821; organ of the Free Traders, and, 
from the mid-nineteenth century, of the Liberal Party.—23 
Melbourne Argus—see The Argus 
Le Moniteur universel —a daily founded in Paris in 1789; published under this title 

=====第848页=====
818 Index of Periodicals 
from 1811; official government organ from 1799 to 1869.—70, 146, 147, 149, 
150, 177, 211, 359, 364, 411, 488, 490, 519, 532, 535, 539, 563, 616-20, 694 
The Morning Advertiser—a daily published in London from 1794 to 1934; organ of 
the radical bourgeoisie in the  1850s.—41,  49, 67, 68, 70, 73, 98, 167, 177, 342, 
512, 619 
The Morning Chronicle—a daily published in London from 1770 to 1862; organ of 
the Whigs in the 1840s, of the Peelites in the early 1850s, and later of the 
Conservatives.—29, 30, 122, 139, 167, 177, 178, 291, 667 
The Morning Herald—a conservative daily published in London from 1780 to 
1869.—69, 73, 80, 94, 118, 194, 212, 216, 259, 281, 298, 606 
The Morning Post—a conservative daily published in London from 1772 to 1937; 
organ of the Right-wing Whig supporters of Palmerston in the mid-nineteenth 
century.—41,  67, 76, 77, 94, 98, 136, 186, 214, 307, 470, 619 
Neue Oder-Zeitung —a democratic daily published in Breslau (Wroclaw) from March 
1849 to 1855; founded as a result of the split in the editorial board of the 
opposition Catholic Allgemeine Oder-Zeitung established in 1846; came out twice 
a day, morning and afternoon; the most radical German newspaper in the 
1850s. Marx was its correspondent in 1855.—18, 33, 34, 37-39, 81, 83, 84, 85, 
110, 111, 113-16, 137, 146, 147,  148-51,  153, 154, 170-74, 180, 181-85, 254, 
264-65,  298, 313, 315-18, 328-32, 380, 394, 396, 398-99, 421, 422, 504, 509-12, 
519, 521-23, 537, 538, 539-40, 542, 546-49, 550-52 
New-York Daily Tribune—a daily published from 1841 to 1924; organ of the 
Left-wing American Whigs till the mid-1850s, and later of the Republican Party; 
expressed progressive views, and denounced slavery; Marx and Engels 
contributed to it from August 1851 to March 1862.—6, 33, 37, 41, 81, 141, 147, 
205, 207, 286, 377-82, 383-86, 388-90, 392-93, 398, 486-88, 489, 542, 615-20 
New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune—a special issue of the New-York Daily Tribune whose 
most important articles it reprinted; it came out on Tuesdays and Fridays.— 
504, 592, 619 
New-York Weekly Tribune—a special issue of the New-York Daily Tribune, whose 
most important articles it reprinted; it came out on Saturdays.—504, 592 
Le Nord.  Journal International—a daily published in Paris and Brussels from 1855 to 
1892 and from 1894 to 1899.—600, 603 
The People's Paper—a Chartist weekly founded by Ernest Jones in London in May 
1852 and appearing till 1858; Marx and Engels contributed to it from October 
1852 to December 1856; Marx and Engels helped in its editing.—  71, 168, 197, 
208, 240, 241, 281, 477, 615, 655, 668 
The Pilot—a Catholic weekly published in London.— 281 
Political Register—see Cobbett's Weekly Political Register 
The Portfolio—a collection of diplomatic documents and papers published by David 
Urquhart in London; the series The Portfolio; or a Collection of State Papers came 
out from 1835 to 1837, and a new series, The Portfolio. Diplomatic Review, from 
1843 to 1845.—19 

=====第849页=====
Index of Periodicals 819 
Post—see The Morning Post 
The Press—a weekly, organ of the Tories published in London from 1853 to 
1866.—118-20 
Preussische Lithographische Correspondenz—a semi-official daily of the Prussian 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs published in Berlin from 1849 to  1865.—  657 
Punch, or the London Charivari—a comic weekly paper voicing liberal views, 
founded in London in 1841.—16, 212, 514 
Putnam's Monthly Magazine of American Literature, Science and Art—a Republican 
magazine published in New York from 1853 to 1857; it carried Engels' series of 
articles The Armies of Europe in 1855.—402 
Reynolds' Newspaper. A Weekly Journal of Politics, History, Literature and General 
Intelligence—a radical newspaper published by George Reynolds in London 
from 1850; it was closely connected with the labour movement, and supported 
the Chartists in the early 1850s.—280, 281 
Russky Invalid («PyccKHH HHBaAH4T>»)—organ of the War Ministry published in St. 
Petersburg from 1813 to 1917, daily from 1816.—293, 552 
Severnaya Pchela («CT>BepHaH nneAa»)—a political and literary newspaper, semi­
official organ of the Tsarist Government, published in St. Petersburg from 1825 
to 1864.—600 
The Times—a conservative daily founded in London in  1785.—  6, 8, 9, 10, 12,  21-23, 
25-27,  29-31,40,43,44, 51, 53, 57, 59, 63, 67, 69, 70, 74,96, 102-03, 108, 122, 123, 
125, 129, 131, 133-35, 137, 138, 150, 154, 170, 178, 187, 189, 196, 212, 213, 218, 
222, 224, 231, 237, 246, 257, 259, 274, 277, 280, 281, 290, 291, 294, 295, 298-300, 
302, 304, 308-10, 320, 321, 323, 324, 327, 338, 342, 352, 355, 357, 368, 380, 390, 
391, 393, 470, 472, 477, 482, 488, 490-92, 498, 513-15, 517, 539, 542, 544, 546, 
553, 554, 558, 572, 573, 577, 581, 592, 599, 600, 605, 606, 618-19, 635, 653, 662 
Town and Country Paper—a weekly published in London from May 1855 to June 
1856.—281 
Tribune—see New-York Daily Tribune 
The Westminster Review—a radical quarterly published in London from 1824 to 
1914.—381 

=====第850页=====
820 
SUBJECT INDEX 
A 
Albania, Albanians (Arnauts)—454, 456 
American War of Independence, 1775-
83 and European powers—584-86 
Ancient Rome—  269,  340 
Ancient world—531 
See also Ancient Rome 
Anglo-Afghan war of 1838-42—17, 513 
Anglo-American war of 1812-14—405 
Anti-Corn Law League—187, 209, 259, 
389 
See also Corn Laws; Free trade 
Aristocracy (nobility), English 
— general characteristics—21, 54, 
194, 303, 387 
— new nobility, its alliance with the 
bourgeoisie—51,  54, 389 
— and the bourgeoisie in the 18th-
19th cent.—54, 56, 61, 187, 192, 
242, 258, 259, 310, 369, 389 
— and political power—21, 53-54, 
60, 194, 322 
— its domination in the army and 
navy—51,  54, 422 
— landed aristocracy, landlords—53-
54, 387, 389 
— financial—51, 53, 311, 321, 387, 
389 
Armaments, weapons—408, 411, 420, 
426, 436, 447, 458, 462 
Armenia, Armenians—589, 625, 634 
Army 
— general characteristics—288, 404-
07 
— and economy—406, 441, 469 
— and social relations—406, 416-17, 
447, 453, 469 
— under capitalism—403-04 — and exploiter classes—51, 54, 60, 
411, 421, 503 
— and peasantry—144, 145 
— irregular volunteer and guerrilla 
armies—453,  469 
— militia—140, 144, 300, 417, 418, 
461-62 
— discipline and moral qualities— 
288, 414-15, 418, 423, 427, 433, 
446-47,  469, 501-02, 526, 532 
— soldiers  —4,  404-06, 411,418,433, 
435, 455, 465 
— non-commissioned officers—35, 
43 
— officers—421-24, 426, 427, 434, 
435, 589-90 
— generals—443-45 
— Swiss mercenaries—405, 460-62 
— Landsknechte —405, 434 
— recruits—429, 432, 441-42, 575-
77 
— Belgian—412, 458, 466 
— Danish—420, 464-65 
— Dutch —412, 462-64 
— of German states — 5, 447-49 
— Hungarian —407, 426, 427 
— of Italian states—5, 460 
— Neapolitan (of the Kingdom of 
the Two Sicilies)—460-61 
— Norwegian—463-65 
— Portuguese—466 
— Sardinian (Piedmontese)—5, 10, 
407, 457-60 
— Spanish—5, 405, 467-69 
— Swedish—463-65 
— Swiss—405, 461-62 
— of the USA—404, 407, 467 
— miscellanea—432-33, 434, 569 

=====第851页=====
Subject Index 821 
See also Armaments, weapons; A&ny (in 
different countries); Artillery; Cavalry; 
Engineering troops;  Infantry; War, wars 
Army, Austrian—405, 413, 415, 418, 
420, 424-29, 433, 444, 497, 501 
Army, British 
— general characteristics—516, 542, 
547 
— composition, organisation, arma­
ment—41-42, 144, 294, 396-97, 
399, 405-08, 412, 414, 502 
— its domination by aristocracy—54, 
60, 503, 542 
— selling of officers' commissions 
and corruption of high officers— 
51, 63-64 
— as mercenary army—140, 418, 
434 
— corporal punishment—10, 33, 
418-19,  501-03 
— military art, military qualities—3, 
5, 6, 10, 314, 316, 396-98, 405, 
419-24, 445, 447, 465, 511, 549, 
551, 571, 573 
— shortcomings in its organisation 
and administration—34, 53, 59, 
125-26,  128-31,  300, 416, 422, 
423, 517 
— poor officer cadres—34, 41, 42, 
130-31,  421-24, 427, 590-91 
— reorganisation in—25-27, 34, 131 
— militia volunteers—140, 144, 300, 
417 
— miscellanea—320, 326, 524 
See also Navy, British 
Army, French 
— composition, organisation, arma­
ment, military expenditures—144, 
407-13,  426, 427, 429, 434, 441, 
576, 603, 617-18 
— as support of Bonapartism during 
the Second Empire—213, 366, 
415, 602, 617, 619 
— corruption of its commanders— 
601, 618 
— revolutionary and oppositional 
moods—110, 602-03, 620 
— its art of warfare, training, fight­
ing qualities—3, 5, 314, 315, 405, 
407,  410-11,  413-17, 424, 433, 
510, 571, 579 
— system of finding substitutes— 
411 — miscellanea—418, 501 
Army, Prussian 
— composition, organisation, arma­
ment, military expenditures—411, 
429-32,  433, 435, 436, 451, 452 
— as a weapon of the reactionaries — 
433 
— position of soldiers, drilling—433 
— military art, training, military qua­
lities—405,  413, 415, 420, 427, 
433-36 
— universal compulsory service and 
its realisation—432, 433 
— Landwehr (army reserve)—429-
34, 436, 454 
— Landsturm (people's militia)—430 
— miscellanea—418, 446, 501 
Army, Russian 
— composition, armament, organisa­
tion—3,  5, 407, 436-47, 575-79 
— and socio-economic backwardness 
of tsarist Russia—447 
— its fighting qualities—405, 413, 
433, 444-46, 526, 532, 552, 569-
74, 580 
— its art of warfare—3, 316, 443-44, 
447, 510, 56*9-70 
Army, Turkish—  33, 136, 446, 451-56, 
565, 570, 571, 588-90, 605, 613, 614, 
631, 677, 695, 696 
Artillery—  263,  408, 409, 413, 415, 417, 
421, 431, 434 
Asia Minor—453, 633 
Assimilation, national— 159 
Australia—55, 61, 64-66 
— riot in Ballarat—62-64 
See also Working class in Australia 
Austria 
— in the Middle Ages—425-26, 453 
— during the 1848-49 Revolution — 
160, 425 
— railways—496 
— political system—161 
— national question —  89, 157-61, 
427-28 
— and England—108, 223, 481-83, 
498-99 
— and France—597 
— and Galicia—157 
— and Hungary—39, 108,  160-61, 
428, 596 
— and Italian states—161 
— and Poland—157, 16i 

=====第852页=====
822 Subject Index 
— and Prussia—107 
— and Russia—39, 160, 425, 495 
— and the Slavs—39, 157-62, 425, 
428 
— prospects of revolution—89 
See also Army, Austrian; Austro-
Italian war of 1848-49; Crimean war 
of 1853-56; Peasantry 
Austro-Italian war of 1848-49—4-5, 10, 
160, 425, 427-28, 457, 459-60 
B 
Bank of England—166-68, 198-200, 535, 
557 
— bank restriction acts of 1797-
1821  — 166-67, 388 
— Bank Act of 1844-45—198-99 
Bank of France—  534,  536, 557 
Banks—198-200, 310, 534, 535, 555, 
557, 620, 657, 658 
See also Bank of  England;  Bank of 
France 
Bills of exchange—  200,  293, 534 
Bohemia, Bohemians (Czechs)—157-60, 
690-91 
Bonapartism—50, 617-19 
See also France during the Second 
Empire 
Bosnia—453,  454, 456 
Bourgeois political economy—54-55, 
60-61 
Bourgeoisie—  54, 61, 143, 168, 187, 
389, 658 
See also Bourgeoisie (in different 
countries)-
Bourgeoisie, English 
— general characteristics —  31, 53, 
54, 60, 143, 168, 195, 290 
— alliance with the nobility which 
became bourgeois—51, 54, 389 
— and aristocracy—54, 56, 187, 261, 
369 
— industrial—389 
— financial—51, 54, 311, 321, 387, 
389 
— commercial—146-48, 189, 191-95, 
208, 240-41 
— free trade—60, 258-59 
— foreign policy of Free Traders, 
their cosmopolitanism —  96, 120, 
144, 195, 224, 227, 231, 246, 258, 
369 — and the Crimean war of 1853-
56—15,  142-44, 145, 168, 231, 
246, 258, 368 
— its factions—54, 168, 187, 389 
— miscellanea—61-62, 187, 303 
Bourgeoisie, Prussian—659-61 
Bulgaria, Bulgarians—157, 158, 160, 
690, 692 
Byzantium—231 
C 
California—55, 61 
Canada—368 
Carinthia, Carinthians—157, 159, 690 
Caucasus—19 
Cavalry—136, 263, 406-07, 414-15, 
420-21,  426-27, 436, 445, 464 
Chartism, Chartist movement 
— People's Charter, the Chartists' po­
litical programme—47, 209, 242 
— People's Charter as a programme 
of establishing political rule of the 
proletariat—243 
— and bourgeois radicals—47, 243 
— in the 1850s—99-100, 121, 168, 
195-97,  240-41,  304-07, 333, 334, 
395, 524 
— London Workers' Association— 
243 
— and the Polish question—478 
Child labour— 369-70 
China as an object of colonial expansion— 
55-61 
Church—  51-52,  64, 95, 160, 302-03, 
310, 384, 391-92, 660, 692 
See also Clergy, the 
Civilisation—3, 158, 160, 243, 268, 
278, 294, 405, 447, 453, 689, 690 
Class,  classes—  53-54,  56, 61, 168, 303, 
304, 656, 660 
Class struggle—304, 656 
Clergy, the—79-80 
Commun  ism—  656 
Constitution 
— class limitations of bourgeois con­
stitution—379 
Corn Laws 
— general characteristics—16, 387, 
389 
— struggle against Corn Laws—60, 
166, 209, 388, 389 

=====第853页=====
Subject Index 823 
— their repeal in 1846—51, 54, 385, 
390, 391, 392 
See also Anti-Corn Law League; Free 
trade 
Corruption as a typical feature of  bourgeois 
society—190, 378 
Courts, judiciary system—16, 102, 190, 
340, 661 
Cracow, Cracow Republic—478, 497 
Crimean war of 1853-56 
— general remarks—32, 87, 91, 156, 
201, 234, 275, 278-79, 284-89, 
360, 403, 474, 484-85, 528, 570, 
595-96,  598, 623 
— and the working class and popu­
lar masses in European states— 
28, 70-71,  144, 303-04 
— and the national question—233, 
596 
— and prospects of revolution—89, 
145, 271, 278, 596 
— preparations for war, armed 
forces of belligerent countries— 
32-38,  41, 42, 82-83, 110-12, 135, 
138, 181-83, 204, 250-52, 254, 
259, 299, 318, 350, 351, 359-61, 
364, 365, 440, 476, 487, 520, 
522-23,  531-34, 558, 572, 575, 
577, 608, 609, 611-13, 628, 674 
— and diplomacy of European pow­
ers—28,  32, 41, 50, 68, 102, 
104-07,  132, 136, 141, 142, 170, 
174, 214, 223, 224, 229, 230, 
235-36,  246, 248, 275, 277, 341, 
367, 595, 596, 601, 603 
— war operations on the Danube in 
1853-54—4, 9, 74, 75, 87, 136, 
146-47,  212, 298, 454, 485, 526, 
528, 532, 570, 596, 609, 628, 694 
— battle of Oltenitza, November 4, 
1853—456, 526, 532, 571 
— battle of Citate, January 6, 1854— 
444, 456, 523, 532 
— siege of Silistria in 1854—75, 134, 
135, 445, 456, 482, 498, 564, 571, 
577, 590, 695 
— war operations in the Caucasus— 
35, 269, 288, 454, 456, 473, 485-
86, 565-67, 588, 589, 591-93, 597, 
610, 612-13, 623, 627, 628, 632, 
641-43,  646, 647, 650-53, 695-96 
— capture of Kars by Russians in 
1855—486, 563, 565-67, 571, 585-93, 595, 597, 600, 605-14, 623-37, 
639-41,  644-54, 676, 679, 680, 
694-96 
war operations in the Crimea in 
1854-56—3,  6, 9-11, 32-33, 59, 
60, 70, 75, 81-90, 109, 111-12, 
124-27,  130-33, 135-38, 146-49, 
150, 180-85, 201-07, 211, 212, 
215-17,  229, 249, 251-53, 264, 
275, 278, 280-81, 293, 296, 298, 
316-19,  349-51, 355, 356, 360, 
363-66,  408, 411, 412, 416, 417, 
422-23,  447, 456, 470, 482-87, 
491, 492, 494, 498-99, 516, 519, 
521-23,  527, 530, 533, 537-41, 
552, 563-64, 571-74, 592, 594, 597, 
601, 613, 615, 618, 619, 627, 628, 
633, 645, 646, 654, 685-86, 694 
— battle of Alma, September 20, 
1854—3,  5, 71, 411, 444, 446, 
565, 571, 685 
— battle of Balaklava, October 25, 
1854—12, 40, 70, 87, 102, 335, 
417, 424, 445, 456, 507, 549, 685 
— battle of Inkerman, November 5, 
1854—71,  87, 102, 126, 326, 358, 
363, 419, 420, 424, 446, 465, 502, 
508, 511, 526, 532, 550, 564, 571, 
597, 685, 695 
— battle on the Chernaya, August 
16, 1855—487, 490-91, 509-11, 
520, 526, 527, 532, 564, 571, 573, 
687, 695 
— defence of Sevastopol in 1854-
55—4,  5.6, 9, 81, 82, 84-85, 87, 
88, 110-17, 126, 127, 130, 133-35, 
136-39,  148-49, 151-55, 170-76, 
205-07,  219, 249-51, 253-55, 260, 
261, 263-65, 287, 292-93, 297-98, 
313-18,  334, 335, 349, 351, 356, 
358, 359, 363, 364, 419, 446, 486, 
491, 492, 502, 519-23, 525-29, 
531-32,  542-44, 546-52, 558, 571-
73, 583, 594, 595, 597, 598, 614. 
635, 648, 651, 684-86 
— heroism of the defenders of 
Sevastopol—116-17, 135, 174, 
175, 250, 254, 445-46, 552, 597 
— war operations on the sea—87, 
91, 180-81, 202, 211, 216, 247-48, 
254-55,  259, 265, 268, 272, 273, 
278, 287, 288, 291, 293-95, 308-
09, 319, 349, 361, 362, 473, 487-90, 

=====第854页=====
824 Subject Index 
493-94, 515-18, 527, 533, 563-65, 
594, 596-98, 631, 654, 697-702 
— and the development of military 
equipment and military  art—3, 
413, 511, 528 
— Paris Congress and Paris Treaty 
of 1856—623 
— and Britain, its foreign policy and 
diplomacy—9, 53, 69, 137, 144-
45, 223-25, 228, 235-36, 238-39, 
245, 269, 366-68, 470, 483, 498-
501, 614, 654, 678, 680 
— and the crisis of British military 
system—42-43,  124-31,  418-19, 
421-22,  484 
— and the attitude of the British 
bourgeoisie—120, 142-44, 166-69, 
231, 258-59 
— and Russia, and the foreign policy 
and diplomacy of tsarism  — 39, 
156, 269-71,  288, 495, 536-38, 
574, 595-98 
— and France, its foreign policy and 
diplomacy—69-70, 86-89,  91-93, 
112, 120, 136, 142, 146,  220-21, 
267-72,  278-79, 285-86, 289, 316, 
484, 595-96, 601, 602, 617-20 
— and the French military system, 
influence of Bonapartism on the 
conduct of war—4, 34-36,  87-93, 
109-12,  319, 617-20 
— and the French bourgeoisie—88, 
142, 293 
— and Austria—37-39, 89, 142, 251, 
267, 271, 278, 289, 361-62, 473, 
476, 481-83, 495-500, 598, 628, 
689 
— and Germany—76, 89, 236, 271, 
278, 497-500, 596 
— and Hungary—39, 89, 271, 278, 
474, 596 
— and Italian states—89, 271, 278, 
475, 476, 596 
— and Piedmont—4-5, 10, 111, 138, 
180, 182, 219, 253, 269, 458, 473, 
476 
— and Poland—89, 474-78, 575, 596 
— and Prussia—39, 94, 186, 233, 
271, 289, 497 
— and Slavonic peoples of the Bal­
kan Peninsula—39, 89, 271, 278, 
596 
— and Sweden—598 — and Turkey—33, 37, 269, 368, 
451, 453, 456, 474, 566, 588, 589, 
609, 610, 611, 628, 653, 654, 675, 
680 
— miscellanea—405, 408, 558 
See also "Eastern question" 
Croatia, Croats—157, 425, 690 
Cuba— 467 
D 
Danish-Prussian war of 1848-50—420, 
465 
Danubian Principalities—143 
Dardanelles—18, 142, 300 
Democratic Polish Association (Polish 
émigrés' organisation, 1832-62)— 
477-79 
Denmark— 395-96 
See also Danish-Prussian war of 
1848-50 
Drunkenness (as social phenomenon) — 
369 
£ 
"Eastern question"—160-61, 229, 248, 
294 
See also Crimean war of 1853-56; 
Dardanelles 
Economic crises 
— and condition of the working 
people—55,  61 
— and prospects of socialist move­
ment and revolution—55 
— prognostication  of—23,  55, 61 
— their chronic character—55, 60 
— overproduction as the basic form 
of their manifestation —  23, 55, 61 
— glut in the world market—54, 60 
— industrial, commercial  — 54, 60 
— critique of bourgeois theories of 
crises—54-55,  60-61 
Egyptian crisis of 1839-41—17, 71, 300 
Electoral system (in the bourgeois state) 
— as ruling classes' monopoly—208, 
322 
— corruption—190, 378 
Emigrants, political 
— Polish—477-80, 588 
— French—121 
Emigration (as social phenomenon) — 
80, 368 

=====第855页=====
Subject Index 825 
Engineering troops—134-35, 175, 263, 
408, 427, 435, 446, 597 
England (Great Britain) 
— general characteristics—51, 56, 
61, 144, 145, 188, 242, 243, 417 
— Glorious Revolution of 1688 —  51, 
53, 63, 188 
— and the French Revolution —  283, 
311 
— in the first half of the 19th cent, 
(before  1848)—71,  195, 376-77, 
384-85,  387-89, 393 
— in the 1850s (from 1849)  —24,  31, 
43-52,  54-62,  95-101,  124-27, 129-
31, 142-45, 166-69, 187-200, 213-
15, 218, 222-23, 239, 245-49, 257-
59, 280-82,  290-91, 302-11,  320-
27, 333-34, 337-43, 348, 352-58, 
363, 664 
— economics—21, 53-54, 121, 143, 
145, 209-10, 321, 387, 388, 389, 
553-55 
— symptoms of crisis in the early 
1850s—54-55,  60-61,  145, 198 
— social and political system —  49, 
51, 53-54, 55-60, 62, 100-01 
— classes, class struggle—145, 167, 
168, 187, 304, 325-26, 370 
— bourgeois rule, description of 
bourgeois social system—16, 50, 
53, 54, 60, 177-78, 190, 303-07, 
369, 513, 667-68 
— constitutional monarchy—51, 53-
54, 62, 69-70, 320, 379 
— oligarchic nature of govern­
ment—31,  49, 53-54, 57, 60, 194, 
302, 311, 321, 338, 542 
— and the army—63-64, 120-26, 
320-21,  517, 664-66 
— police—325-26 
— two-party system as the instru­
ment of domination by the ruling 
classes  —50-51,  78, 187, 338, 339, 
373-74 
— political parties of the ruling clas­
ses (general characteristics)—24-
25, 391 
— coalition ministry of "All the Tal­
ents"  (1853-55)—31, 53, 79, 130, 
275, 382 
— political crisis during the Crimean 
war of 1853-56—31, 59, 142-45, 
168, 258 — Bonapartist methods in Palmer-
ston's policy, his attempts to estab­
lish personal dictatorship—50 
— Peelites—8, 23, 45, 50, 130, 143, 
224, 246, 258, 277, 391 
— Free Traders as a party of indus­
trial bourgeoisie—8, 31, 103, 168, 
258 
— Radicals—8, 25, 29, 44, 47, 222, 
243, 375 
— legislation—54, 96, 303-04, 308, 
340, 386 
— electoral system, electoral re­
forms—21-22, 47, 54, 190, 191, 
196, 208-09, 242-43, 322, 338, 
377-79 
— bourgeois-democratic movement 
for electoral reform in the 1840s 
and in the 1850s—47, 51, 208-09, 
243, 381-83, 393, 394 
— bourgeois reform movement in 
the 1850s—167-68, 187, 195-97, 
208-09,  223, 240-42, 274,  289-91, 
309-11,  334, 394 
— preconditions and prospects of so­
cial revolution—56, 62, 145, 243 
— the press—121-22, 281-82 
— English Church and religion—51-
52, 64, 302, 303, 310, 384, 390-91 
— Catholic Church and religion  — 
79-80,  391-92 
— Catholic Emancipation Bill of 
1829—51,  79, 391 
— colonial policy (general charac­
teristics)—295-96, 368 
— colonial policy in Persia (Iran)— 
18 
— colonial policv in Ireland  — 295, 
383-86 
— colonial policy in Canada—368 
— projects of agrarian reforms in 
Ireland—79, 80, 342 
— foreign policy, diplomacy (general 
characteristics)—15-17, 584 
— aristocracy's monopoly on foreign 
policy—394 
— interconnection between foreign 
and home policies—9, 245 
— foreign policy before the 19th 
cent.—584-86 
— foreign policy in the first half of 
the 19th cent.—15-17, 19, 71, 
388, 474, 586 

=====第856页=====
826 Subject Index 
— and the "Eastern question" — 230-
32, 233-34 
— foreign policy during the Crimean 
war of 1853-56—143, 223-39, 
245-48,  269, 275, 277, 367-68 
— foreign policy of free-trade (indu­
strial) bourgeoisie—15, 120, 143, 
168, 224, 227, 231, 246, 258, 370 
— and Argentina—17 
— and Austria—108, 223, 498-99 
— and France—9, 59, 70, 72, 74, 
118, 286, 368, 470, 599 
— and Greece—17, 18, 368 
— and Holland—15, 585 
— and Hungary—108 
— and Italy—17, 475 
— and Poland—15, 474 
— and Portugal—17 
— and Russia—17-19, 142, 143, 234, 
584-86 
— and Spain  —17,  368 
— and Sweden—17 
— and Turkey—17, 18, 367-68 
— and the USA —599, 600 
See also Anglo-Afghan war of 1838-42; 
Anglo-American war of 1812-14; Anti-
Corn Law League; Aristocracy (nobility), 
English; Army, British; Bank of Eng­
land;  Bourgeoisie, English; Chartism, 
Chartist movement; Corn Laws; Cri­
mean war of 1853-56; "Eastern ques­
tion";  Literature; Manchester; Manches­
ter School; Navy, British; Parliament, 
British; Tories, English; Urquhartism, 
Urquhartists; Wales; Whigs, English; 
Working class in Great Britain;  Work­
ing-class movement in Great Britain; 
World market 
Europe—  89, 145, 691 
F 
Famine (as social phenomenon) —  80, 
389 
Female labour—369-70 
Fortification 
— general features—435 
— permanent work—175, 262, 435, 
549 
— strategic significance of for­
tresses—251-62, 528 
— fortified camp—262-63, 528-29 
— siege and defence of fortresses— 90, 137, 148-49, 172, 261-63, 314, 
528, 529, 547, 549 
France 
— general description  — 35, 144, 177, 
242, 412, 414, 416, 557 
— during the First Empire—441, 
557 
— during the Restoration—285, 
603, 659 
— July 1830 revolution and July 
monarchy—285, 558, 620 
See also Army, French; Bank of France; 
France during the Second Empire; 
French Revolution; June insurrection of 
the Paris proletariat in 1848; Literature; 
Napoleonic wars; Working class in 
France 
France during the Second Empire 
— general features—615, 617, 618 
— coup  d'état  of December 2, 
1851—9,  213, 416, 616-17 
— agriculture—144 
— trade—534, 535 
— finances—293, 534, 557, 558, 
601, 602, 620 
— banks—534, 535, 557 
— Crédit Mobilier— 535, 620 
— Stock Exchange, speculation — 
293, 558, 604, 657 
— internal situation —  212,  601-04 
— corruption of the ruling circles— 
601, 615, 616, 620 
— army as the bulwark of the 
Bonapartist regime  — 213,  268, 
415-16,  602, 615, 617-20 
— counter-revolutionary terrorism — 
60, 603, 615-17 
— working class—144, 602, 603 
— peasantry—110, 144, 212 
— growth of opposition in all strata 
of the society—602-04 
— growth of opposition in the 
army—110, 602, 603, 619 
— Bonapartist regime and wars—86, 
87, 91, 120, 142, 278, 484, 618-19 
— and Austria—600 
— and Britain  —62,  69, 70, 118, 213, 
286, 368, 470, 599, 600 
— and Greece—92 
— and Italy—35, 92 
— and Russia—267, 286, 289, 600 
— colonial policy of the Second Em­
pire—35,  110, 286 

=====第857页=====
Subject Index 827 
See also Crimean war of 1853-56 
Free trade—  60, 258-59 
French Revolution (18th cent.)—144, 
311, 618 
G 
Galicia—157 
Georgia—627 
German Confederation (1815-66)—448 
German philosophy—159, 161, 691 
Germany 
— general description—156, 434-35 
— history—656, 657, 659 
— economy—658-59 
— education—660 
— foreign policy—156-62, 462, 596 
See also Army; Crimean war of 1853-
56; German Confederation; Prussia 
Greece—15,  18, 368 
H 
Habeas Corpus Act—386 
Highland Gaels—426 
"Historical Irony" 
— as transformation of realisable in­
tentions into their opposite—91 
— examples  of—91,  212, 617 
Historiography 
— its class nature, as expression of 
the ruling classes' ideology—656 
— bourgeois (19th cent.)—158, 514-
15, 656 
— bourgeois falsification of history— 
405, 656 
History (as science)  —158,  404, 691 
See also "Historical Irony"; Historio­
graphy 
Hungary—15, 39, 89, 108, 156, 157, 
159, 161, 425, 427, 428, 453, 596, 
689-90 
See also Army; Crimean war of 1853-
56; National liberation war of 1848-49 
in Hungary 
India 
— its subjugation by Great Britain 
and conversion into a market for 
sale—49,  55, 61, 142, 418, 514 Industrial revolution—655-56 
Infantry 
— general features—5, 361, 405, 
406, 414, 423, 434, 445, 446-47, 
456 
— in the Middle Ages—469 
— light—5, 406, 414, 426, 465 
Interests—  81, 86, 90, 105, 107, 121, 
142, 395, 659 
Ireland 
— general description—80, 426 
— as British colony and citadel of 
English landlordism—295, 385-86 
— agrarian relations—80, 342 
— famine in Ireland as a result of 
British rule —389 
— potato blight and- famine (1845-
47)—80,  389 
— Repeal agitation—78, 79, 385-86 
— Lichfield-House Compact of 
1835—78,  79, 384 
— Irish deputies in British Parlia­
ment (Irish Brigade, Irish Quar­
ter)—58,  78-80, 130, 342-43, 392 
— and English Established Church, 
persecution of Catholics—383-84 
— struggle of Catholic population 
for equal rights, Catholic Emanci­
pation  Bill—51,  79, 391 
Islam 
— as a weapon of ruling classes, its 
fanaticism—455, 586 
Italy—15,  428, 460-61 
See also Army; Austro-Italian war of 
1848-49; Crimean war of 1853-56; 
Kingdom of Sardinia (Piedmont); Lit­
erature; Papal States (Roman State) 
J 
Joint-stock companies—53, 310, 321, 535, 
555, 620, 658, 659 
June insurrection of the Paris proletariat in 
1848 
— its suppression by the bour­
geoisie— 616 
K 
Kingdom of Sardinia (Piedmont) — 
459-60 
See also Army; Crimean war of 
1853-56 

=====第858页=====
828 Subject Index 
Kraina (Carniola)—157, 690 
Kurdistan, Kurds—453 
L 
Landed  property,  landowners—80, 387-89, 
659 
Language, linguistics—121-23, 157-60, 
306, 690, 691, 692 
Large-scale industry—531, 656, 659 
Law, legislation—54, 326, 340 
Literary Association of the Friends of 
Poland (from 1832)—477-79 
Literature 
— English—247, 297, 374, 383, 480 
— French—31, 303 
— Italian—355, 382 
— Slav—158-59 
M 
Manchester—  247,  370, 531 
Manchester School—8, 78, 103, 120, 168, 
246, 247, 258, 259, 282 
Masses, the, People, the 
— antagonistic interests of the mass­
es and exploiter classes—303 
Military art 
— its laws (rules of warfare)—88, 
92-93,  202, 349 
— strategy—92-93,  270-71,  435, 529, 
627 
— tactics—414-15, 420, 424, 426, 
435,  463-64,  509-11,  528-29, 627 
Military science 
— military history—404-05 
— military literature—423, 427, 435, 
443 
Military training—34, 42, 433, 578, 579 
Monarchy, absolute—403 
Money circulation and banks—198-200 
Money market—198-200 
See also Money circulation and banks 
Morality—50, 656 
Mortgage—661 
Moscow—537, 538 
N 
Napoleonic wars 
— general characteristics—88, 91-92, 
204, 248, 261, 283, 414, 528, 549 — France's wars with European coa­
litions (1804-15)—6, 11, 88, 91, 
92, 106, 147, 204, 261, 263, 269, 
288, 405, 412, 414, 427, 441, 444, 
464, 469, 511, 529, 549, 559, 
569-70, 579 
— and Britain—190, 300, 311, 383, 
502, 503 
— and Prussia—106 
— and Russia—283 
— miscellanea—43, 414, 427, 514, 
665 
See also Wars of the First French Repu­
blic (late 18th-early 19th cent.) 
Nation—145,  157-59, 404, 690, 691 
See also Nationality; National question 
Nationalism 
— national prejudices—15, 144 
Nationality—157-61,  425, 427, 428 
National liberation war of 1848-49 in 
Hungary—  425,  427-28, 569, 692-93 
National question—89, 143, 144 
See also Pan-Slavism, Polish question 
Navy, British—53, 54, 59, 60, 515, 517 
P 
Pan-Slavism—156-62, 689, 690, 691-93 
Papal States (Roman state)—460, 474 
Paris— 263 
Parliament (in the bourgeois state)— 
100-01 
See also Parliament, British 
Parliament, British 
— general features—54, 90, 187, 
188, 226, 338, 340, 343, 380, 394 
— House of Commons—53, 60, 63, 
68, 190-92, 208, 213, 226, 322, 
337-38,  340-41,  379 
— Irish MPs (Irish Brigade)—58, 
78-80,  130, 342-43, 391-92 
— House of Lords—189-94, 661-70 
— miscellanea—47-48, 167-68, 187-
88, 213, 222, 245,  470-71,  605 
Patriotic war of 1812 in Russia—88, 92, 
407, 441, 476, 569, 574 
Peasantry 
— in Austria—66i 
— in England—144, 377 
— in France—110, 144, 212 
— in Ireland—80 

=====第859页=====
Subject Index 829 
— Polish—576 
— in Prussia — 661 
Persia (Iran)—18, 625, 633 
Petty bourgeoisie—145, 657 
Poland,  Poles—15, 18, 108, 157, 161, 
284, 474, 477-80, 570, 576, 588-89, 
596, 690 
See also Cracow, Cracow Republic; Cri­
mean war of 1853-56; Democratic  Pol­
ish Association; Literary Association oj 
the Friends of  Poland;  Peasantry; Polish 
question, the 
Polish question, the—  89, 284, 477-78 
Poor Laws—  54, 188, 513 
Press, the—121-23, 659 
Probabilism—231 
Prussia 
— general characteristics—429, 430, 
433-34, 661 
— history—106, 657-61 
— economy—429, 657-59 
— social and political system—659-
61 
— foreign policy—39, 105-07, 283 
See also Army, Prussian; Bourgeoisie, 
Prussian; Crimean war of 1853-56; 
Danish-Prussian war of 1848-50; Ger­
many; Peasantry 
R 
Railways— 209-10, 658 
Revolution—  31, 80, 89, 655-56 
See also Revolutions of 1848-49 in 
Europe 
Revolutions of 1848-49 in Europe—31, 
61, 71, 80, 145, 161, 267, 425, 427, 
457, 460, 616, 655, 660, 661 
Russia (Russian Empire) 
— population—441 
— serfdom—442 
— in the first half of the 19th 
cent.—575,  576 
— autocracy as the bulwark of re­
action and counter-revolution — 
586-87 
— state apparatus and officials— 
442, 443 
— education—443 
—- Russian language—160 
— religion—442 
— foreign policy and diplomacy— 
38-39,  67, 269, 283, 284, 288, 576 — and Austria—39, 105, 156, 160, 
271, 289, 496 
— and England—59, 67, 143, 234, 
584-85 
— and France—269, 289, 441 
— and Persia (Iran)—19 
— and Prussia—105 
— and Turkey—18-19, 584 
See also Army, Russian; Crimean War 
of 1853-56; Moscow; Patriotic war of 
1812 in Russia 
Russo-Turkish war of 1768-74 
— Treaty of Kutschuk-Kainardji, 
1774—229, 235 
Russo-Turkish war of 1787-91—564-66, 
697, 700, 701 
Russo-Turkish war of 1828-29—511 
Ruthenians—see Ukraine, the, Ukrainians 
S 
Science—158, 443, 655-56 
See also History (as science) 
Second Empire—see France during the 
Second Empire 
Serbia, Serbs—157-60, 425, 428, 690-92 
Seven Years' War, 1756-63—414, 528, 
569, 570 
Slavonians—157, 690, 691 
Slavs—  39, 89, 156-61,  425, 428, 689-93 
Social system 
— ancient, slave-owners' — 531 
— bourgeois, capitalist—60, 89, 531 
Society—  80, 243, 244, 656 
See also Social  system;  Society, bourgeois 
Society, bourgeois—  61, 89, 243, 244, 
531, 655, 656 
State, the—  244,  403 
Stock Exchange—293, 558, 604, 657 
Styria—157, 690 
Suffrage— 243-44 
See also Electoral system (in the 
bourgeois state) 
Switzerland—460-63 
T 
Thirty Years' War, 1618-48—168, 464 
Tories, English 
— general features, class nature of 
the Party—50-51, 78,187, 195, 390 
— and electoral reform of 1832  — 
377, 378 

=====第860页=====
830 Subject Index 
— and British foreign policy—118, 
259 
— decay of the Party—31 
Treaty of Adrianople, 1829—17, 399, 
451, 664-65 
Treaty of Balta-Liman, 1849—17, 400 
Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi, 1833—18, 300, 
400 
Turkey 
— history—453, 474, 485 
— economic relations—367-68, 653 
— social and political system — 9, 
451, 453, 454, 588, 589, 654 
— role of national factor in its life — 
456, 588-89 
— privileges of the Turks, special 
features of national character— 
126-27,  455, 588-89 
— Albanians (Arnauts)—453, 454, 
456 
— oppression of the Slavs—39, 156-
58, 160 
— and Britain—18, 367, 625 
— and Egypt—453, 454, 456 
— and France—368 
— and Prussia—104-05 
— and Russia—18, 156, 232, 300, 625 
— and  Syria—71,  453, 454, 588 
— and Tunisia—453, 454, 456 
— as an object of colonial expan­
sion—102, 104, 232, 235, 284, 
286, 367-68, 456, 474 
— religious question—160, 454 
See also Army, Turkish; Crimean war 
of 1853-56; "Eastern question"; Egyp­
tian crisis of 1839-41; Russo-Turkish 
war of 1768-74; Russo-Turkish war of 
1787-91;  Russo-Turkish war of 1828-
29; Treaty of Adrianople, 1829; Treaty 
of Unkiar-Skelessi, 1833 
U 
Ukraine, the, Ukrainians—157, 690 
United States of America,  the—53,  55, 
61, 80, 143, 368, 599 
See also Anglo-American war of 1812-
14; American War of Independence, 
1775-83 and European powers; Army; 
California 
Urquhartism, Urquhartists—243-44, 394, 
478 W 
Wales— 426 
War, wars—143, 144, 429, 430, 516 
See also Anglo-Afghan war of 1838-42; 
Anglo-American war of 1812-14; Aus-
tro-Italian war of 1848-49; Crimean 
war of 1853-56; Danish-Prussian war of 
1848-50; Military art; Military science; 
Military training; Napoleonic wars; Na­
tional liberation war of 1848-49 in 
Hungary; American War of Inde­
pendence, 1775-83 and European  powers; 
Patriotic war of 1812 in Russia; Russo-
Turkish war of 1768-74; Russo-Turkish 
war of 1787-91; Russo-Turkish war of 
1828-29; Thirty Years' War, 1618-48; 
Wars of the First French Republic 
Wars of the First French Republic (late 
18th-early 19th cent.)—90-91, 106, 
144, 261, 300, 311, 383, 462, 502, 
569, 572, 599, 654, 664 
Wealth— 531 
Whigs, English 
— general features of the Party—49, 
130, 188, 384, 388, 482 
— class character of the Party—187, 
387 
— as a ruling party, its policy—78, 
187, 188, 194, 195, 352-53, 377, 
385, 388, 584 
— policy on the Irish question—78-
80, 383-86, 391 
— Whiggism—15, 380 
— decay of the Party—8 
Working class—  55, 145, 258, 655-56 
— conditions of its life and work 
under capitalism — 369-70 
See also Working class (in different 
countries) 
Working class in Australia—65-66 
Working class in France—145, 602, 603 
Working class in Great Britain—55, 95, 
145, 243 
See also Working-class movement in 
Great Britain 
Working-class movement in Great Bri­
tain—  51, 54-55, 61, 95-96, 187, 195-
96, 209, 239, 303-07, 320, 323-27, 
333, 369, 656 
See also Chartism, Chartist movement 
World market 
— Britain's monopoly—331 

=====第861页=====
831 
GLOSSARY OF GEOGRAPHICAL NAMES3 
Adrianople Edirne 
Aitodor Goristoye 
Akaltzik Akhaltsikh 
Aleppo (Haleb) Aleppo or Haleb-
es-Shabba 
Alexandropol 
(Gumri) Leninakan 
Arabat Rybatskoye 
Araxes (river) Aras 
Astrachan Astrakhan 
Austerlitz Slavkov 
Baidar Orlinoye 
Bakshiserai Bakhchisarai 
Batum (Batoum) Batumi 
Bayazid Dogubayazit 
Bazardshik (Bazargic)... Tolbukhin 
Berdiansk Osipenko 
Braila (Ibraila, Brai-
low) Bräila 
Breslau  Wroclaw 
Busaco Bussaco 
Candia Crete 
Careening Bay Kilen Bay 
Carlsburg  Alba Julia 
Ceylon Sri Lanka 
Charkoff Kharkov 
Cherson Kherson 
Chotin Hotin or Khotin 
Coblentz Coblenz or Koblenz 
Colberg Kolobrzeg Constantinople Istanbul 
Culm Chlumec 
Dantzic (Danzig) Gdansk 
Ekaterinoslav 
(Yekaterinoslav) Dnepropetrovsk 
Erzeroum Erzerum or 
Erzurum 
Galatch (Galatz) Galaji 
Gallipoli Gelibolu 
Gumri—see Alexandropol 
Halys (river) Kizil Irmak 
Helsingfors Helsinki 
Inkermann Inkerman 
Kaffa Theodosia 
Kalafat Calafat 
Kars Chai (river) Kars 
Kamtchatka Kamchatka 
Katsha Kacha 
Kamiesh Kamysh 
Kertch Kerch 
Kieff Kiev 
Königsberg  Kaliningrad 
Krain Carniola 
Kurulu Stolbovoye 
Kutais Kutaisi 
Lemberg Lvov 
Malakoff Malakhov 
Memel Klaipeda 
Nasgen (Nargö)  Naisar 
Nikolaieff Nikolayev 
' The glossary includes geographical names occurring in Marx's and Engels' articles in the 
form customary in the European and American press of the time but differing from the 
national names or from those given on modern maps. The left column gives geographical 
names as used in the original (when they differ from the national names of the time, the latter 
are given in brackets); the right column gives corresponding names as used on modern maps 
and in modern literature.— Ed. 

=====第862页=====
832 Glossary of Geographical Names 
Olmiitz Olomouc Scutari Usküdar 
Oltenitza Oltenija Shumla Shumen (Kolarov-
Olti Oku grad) 
Otshakoff Ochakov Sizopolis Sizeboli or Sozopol 
Pampeluna ,. Pamplona St. Petersburg Leningrad 
Pekin Peking Sukhum Kaleh Sukhumi 
Persia Iran Sveaborg (Sweaborg).... Suomenlinna 
Porto Rico (isl) Puerto Rico Tiflis Tbilisi 
Posen Poznan Tilsit Sovetsk 
Preussisch Eylau Bagrationovsk Toli-Monatzir Bitolya or Bitolj 
Redout Kaleh Kulevi Trebizonde Trebizond 
Reval (Revel) Tallinn Tripoli Tripolitsa 
Rioni Rion Tunis Tunisia 
Rustchuk Ruse or Ruscuk Urkusta Peredovoye 
Saint-Jean-d'Acre Akka Wartha (river) Warta 
Scinde Sind or Sindh Wilna Vilnius 

=====第863页=====
