MARX & ENGELS
COLLECTED WORKS
VOLUME 10
Marx and Engels 1849-51    
=====第1页=====
file:///G|/Temp/menewisbns/intros/meint_10.htm [31/08/2011 18:35:24]KARL MARX
FREDERICK ENGELS
Volume
10 
Marx and Engels 1849-51
2010
Lawrence & Wishart
Electric Book
=====第2页=====
file:///D|/Temp/menewisbns/me10.htm [09/12/2010 14:48:26]Editorial commissions:
GREAT BRITAIN: Jack Cohen, Maurice Cornforth, MauriceDobb, E. J. Hobsbawm, James Klugmann, Margaret Mynatt.USA: James S. Allen, Philip S. Foner, Dirk J. Struik, William W.Weinstone.USSR: N. P. Karmanova, V. N. Pavlov, M. K. Shcheglova, T. Y.
Solovyova, Y. V. Yeremin, P. N. Fedoseyev, L. I. Golman, A. I.
Malysh, A. G. Yegorov, V. Y. Zevin.
Digital Edition Copyright © Lawrence & Wishart 2010Digital production: Electric BookISBN 978-1-84327-954-9 All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of
private study, research, criticism or review, no part of thispublication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, electrical,
chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner.
=====第3页=====
V 
Contents 
Preface , XIII 
KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
September 1849-June 1851 
1. F. Engels. The German Social Democrats and The Times  3 
2. K. Marx and F. Engels. Announcement of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue  5 
3. F. Engels. Letters from Germany 7 
1 7 
II. Curious Revelations Concerning the Despots  of Germany.—Intended 
War against France.—The Coming Revolution  10 
III. The  Prussian King Swearing  to the  Constitution  and  "Serving  the 
Lord!"—Grand Conspiracy  of the  Holy Alliance.—The Approach­
ing Onslaught  on Switzerland.—Projected Conquest  and  Partition  of 
France!  14 
4. F. Engels. Letters from France  17 
I 17 
11. Striking Proofs  of the Glorious Progress  of Red Republicanism !  21 
III. Signs  of the Times.—The Anticipated Revolution  24 
IV. The  Elections.—Glorious Victory  of the  Reds.—Proletarian  As­
cendancy.—Dismay  of the  Ordermongers.—New Schemes  of Re­
pression  and  Provocations  to Revolution  27 
V 30 
VI 33 
VII 34 
VIII 38 
5. K. Marx  and F. Engels. Announcement  41 
6. K. Marx.  The  Class Struggles  in France, 1848  to 1850 45 

=====第4页=====
VI Contents 
I. The Defeat of June 1848 48 
II. June 13, 1849 71 
III. Consequences of June 13, 1849 101 
IV. The Abolition of Universal Suffrage in 1850 132 
7. F. Engels. The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution .. 147 
I. Rhenish Prussia 154 
II. Karlsruhe 172 
III. The Palatinate 186 
IV. To Die for the Republic! 203 
8. F. Engels. To the Hungarian Refugee Committee in London 240 
9. K. Marx and F. Engels. Reviews from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomischeRevueNo. 2 241 
I. G. Fr. Daumer, Die Religion des neuen Weltalters. Versuch einer 
combinatorisch-aphoristischen  Grundlegung  241 
II. Ludwig Simon of Trier, Ein Wort des Rechts für alle Reichsverfas­
sungskämpfer an die  deutschen Geschwornen  -.. 247 
III. Guizot, Pourquoi la révolution d'Angleterre a-t-elle réussi? Discours sur 
l'histoire de la révolution d'Angleterre  251 
10. K. Marx and F. Engels. Review, January-February 1850 257 
11. F. Engels. The Ten Hours' Question 271 
12. K. Marx and F. Engels. Address of the Central Authority to the 
League, March 1850 277 
13. F. Engels. The English Ten Hours' Bill 288 
14. K. Marx and F. Engels. Reviews from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische RevueNo. 4 301 
I. Latter-Day Pamphlets, Edited by Thomas Carlyle—No. I, The Present 
Time, No. II,Model Prisons 301 
II. Les Conspirateurs, par A. Chenu, ex-capitaine des gardes du citoyen 
Caussidière. Les sociétés secrètes; la préfecture de police sous 
Caussidière; les corps-francs. La naissance de la République en février 
1848, par Lucien de la Hodde  311 
III. Le socialisme et  l'impôt, par Emile de Girardin  326 
15. K. Marx and F. Engels. Review, March-April 1850 338 
16. K. Marx. Louis Napoleon and Fould 342 
17. K. MarxandF. Engels. Gottfried Kinkel 345 
18. K. Marx and F. Engels. Editorial Note  348 
19. K. Marx and F. Engels. Statement 349 
20. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Editor of The Times 352 
21. F. Engels. Two Years of a Revolution; 1848 and 1849 353 
22. K.Marx and F.Engels. A Letter to the Prussian Ambassador in 
London, Baron Bunsen  370 
23. K. Marx and F. Engels. Address of the Central Authority to the 
League, June 1850 371 
24. K. Marx and F. Engels. The Prussian Refugees 378 

=====第5页=====
Contents VII 
25. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Editor of TheSpectator 380 
26. K. Marx and F. Engels. Prussian Spies in London 381 
27. K. Marx. To the Editor of The  Globe  385 
28. K. Marx and F. Engels. Statement to the Editor of the Neue 
Deutsche  Zeitung 387 
29. K. Marx. To the Chairman of a Refugee Meeting in London 389 
30. K. Marx and  F. Engels. To the Editors of the Weser-Zeitung  390 
31. F. Engels. Letter from Germany. The War in Schleswig-
Holstein  392 
32. F. Engels. The Peasant War in Germany 397 
1 400 
II 411 
III -.. 428 
IV 441 
V 446 
VI 469 
VII : 478 
33. K. Marx and F. Engels. Statement on Resignation from the 
German Workers' Educational Society in London 483 
34. K. Marx and  F. Engels. A Letter to Adam, Barthélémy and Vidil.... 484 
35. K. Marx and F. Engels. Editorial Comment on the Article 
"Tailoring in London or the Struggle between Big and Small 
Capital" by J. G. Eccarius 485 
36. F. Engels. On the Slogan of the Abolition of the State and the 
German "Friends of Anarchy" 486 
37. K. Marx  andF.  Engels. Review, May to October 1850 490 
38. K. Marx and F. Engels. Draft Statement by Heinrich Bauer and 
Karl Pfänder on the Funds of the German Workers' Educational 
Society in London 533 
39. K. Marx and  F. Engels. Statement 535 
40. K. Marx and F. Engels. Introduction to the Leaflet of L. A. 
Blanqui's Toast Sent to the Refugee Committee 537 
41. F. Engels. To the Editor of The Times 540 
42. F. Engels. Conditions and Prospects of a War of the Holy Alliance 
against France in 1852 542 
43. K. Marx. The Constitution of the French Republic Adopted 
November 4, 1848 567 
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 
1. K.Marx. On Germany. Note for the "Review" (May-October 
1850) ; 583 
2. K. Marx. Reflections 584 

=====第6页=====
VIII Contents 
APPENDICES 
1. Permit to Leave Switzerland Issued to Frederick Engels  595 
2. Appeal for Support for German Political Refugees 596 
3. Receipt of the Committee of Support for German Political 
Refugees in London 598 
4. Accounts of the Committee of Support for German Refugees 
in London 599 
5. From the Indictment of the Participants in the Uprising in 
Elberfeld in May 1849 602 
6. Preliminaries to Issue of Shares in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische  Revue, Edited by Karl Marx  605 
7. About Engels' Speech at a Banquet Held on February 25, 1850, in 
Honour of the Second Anniversary of the February Revolution in 
France (From a Newspaper Report) 607 
8. Accounts of the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee in Lon­
don 608 
9. About Engels' Speech at a Meeting of Fraternal Democrats on 
April 5, 1850, Commemorating Robespierre's Birthday Anniver­
sary (From a Newspaper Report) 611 
10. Meeting of Refugee Committee on April 8, 1850 612 
11. Universal Society of Revolutionary Communists 614 
12. Accounts of the Social-Democratic Refugee "Committee in Lon­
don 616 
13. The German Refugees in London 619 
14. Accounts of the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee in Lon­
don for May, June and July 1850 621 
15. About Engels' Speech at a Meeting Organised by Fraternal 
Democrats on September 10, 1850 (From a Newspaper Report)... 624 
16. Meeting of the Central Authority, September 15, 1850 625 
17. The Resolution of the Central Authority of the Communist 
League, September 15, 1850 630 
18. Accounts of the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee in Lon­
don from August 1 to September 10, 1850 631 
19. Proposal from the London District of the Communist League to 
the Central Authority in Cologne 633 
20. Rules of the Communist League 634 
21. About Engels' Speech at a New Year's Party of the Fraternal 
Democrats Society, December 30, 1850 (From a Newspaper 
Report) 637 
NOTES AND INDEXES 
Notes 641 
Name Index 710 

=====第7页=====
Contents IX 
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 742 
Index of Periodicals 760 
Subject Index 765 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
1. Cover of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue ... 43 
2. A map of Rhenish Prussia, Baden and the Palatinate during the 
campaign for the Imperial Constitution (May-July 1849) 192-193 
3. A page from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische 
Revue with verses by Louis Ménard. The introduction by Marx 
and Engels says: "Our friend Louis Ménard, author of the book 
Prologue d'une révolution, has sent us the following verses, which he 
wrote in the wake of the June 1848 events." 289 
4. The first page of Frederick Engels' article "Two Years of a 
Revolution; 1848 and 1849", published by The Democratic 
Review 355 
5. A map of the Peasant War in Germany 448-449 
6. A map of the Peasant War in Swabia and Franconia (1525) 472-473 
7. The first page of Karl Marx's article "The Constitution of the 
French Republic'', which appeared in Notes  to the People  573 

=====第8页=====
TRANSLATORS: 
GREGOR BENTON: Article 7 
RICHARD DIXON: Article 29, Appendices 7 
CLEMENS DUTT: Article 42 
FRIDA KNIGHT: Appendices 1, 11 
RODNEY LIVINGSTONE: Article 23; Appendices 16, 
17, 19, 20 
HUGH RODWELL: Articles 2, 9 (II), 10, 13, 15, 16, 17, 
19, 28, 30, 33, 35, 36, 39 
PETER AND BETTY ROSS: Article 8 
BARBARA RUHEMANN: Articles 38, 40; Appendices 
3-6, 8, 12-14, 18 
SALO RYAZANSKAYA: From the Preparatory Materi­
als 2 
CHRISTOPHER UPWARD: Articles 14, 37 
JOAN AND TREVOR WALMSLEY: Articles 5, 18; 
From the Preparatory Materials 1; Appendices 
2, 9, 10 

=====第9页=====
Preface 
Volume 10 of the Collected Works of Marx and Engels covers the 
period from the autumn of 1849 to the summer of 1851. 
The bourgeois-democratic revolutions which swept across the 
European continent in 1848-49 had ended in defeat. The last centres 
of insurrection in Germany, Hungary and Italy had been suppressed 
in the summer of 1849. In France, the victory of the counter­
revolution was already clearing the way for the coup d'état of Louis 
Bonaparte on December 2, 1851. Everywhere workers' and demo­
cratic organisations were being destroyed and revolutionaries 
severely persecuted. Yet the events of the preceding years had left 
their mark. They had struck at the remnants of feudalism in the 
European countries, given an impulse to the further growth of 
capitalism and aggravated its contradictions. 
Marx and Engels had already embarked upon their scientific 
analysis of the European revolutions of the mid-nineteenth century, 
in which the revolutionary energies of the whole of society had 
become concentrated in the proletariat—the most active and 
determined force of the revolution. And now they set out to deepen 
this analysis by defining the general and specific features of the 
1848-49 revolutions and drawing the practical lessons for the 
consolidation of the proletariat as a class. During the immediately 
ensuing years they concentrated most of their attention on the 
theoretical summing up and generalisation of the experience of the 
revolutionary battles, determining the objective laws of class struggle 
and of revolution, and working out the strategy and tactics of the 
proletariat in the new conditions. As Lenin was later to point out, 
"Here as everywhere else, his [Marx's] theory is a summing up of 
experience,  illuminated by a profound philosophical conception of the 

=====第10页=====
XIV Preface 
world and a rich knowledge of history" (V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, 
Vol. 25, p. 412). 
In this period Marx and Engels were not, however, solely 
concerned with theoretical work but with practical tasks of rallying 
the working-class organisations. They did not at first expect the 
break in revolutionary battles to last long. And they considered it 
essential to gather together the dispersed proletarian forces as 
quickly as possible, and to prepare them for new struggles. By the 
summer of 1850, however, they had realised that hopes of an early 
renewal of the revolution were groundless—but they continued to 
work for the unity of the most conscious elements of the working 
class and of its supporters, seeing this as a long-term task. 
Marx moved to London at the end of August 1849—and there 
Engels joined him in November. Straight away, they did their utmost 
to revive and reorganise the Communist League. They tried to 
stimulate the work of the London German Workers' Educational 
Society, whose nucleus consisted of the Communist League's local 
communities, and joined the Society's Committee of Support for 
German Refugees, seeking to rally the proletarian revolutionary 
émigrés around the League. At the same time, they established close 
contacts with revolutionary leaders—with the Blanquist French 
émigrés in London and the Left-wing Chartists—joining with them 
in forming the Universal Society of Revolutionary Communists in 
the spring of 1850 (see this volume, pp. 614-15). Especially 
important were their contacts with the revolutionary wing of the 
Chartist movement under G. Julian Harney and Ernest Jones, and 
their use of the Chartist journal The Democratic Review to propagate 
scientific communism and explain events on the Continent to British 
workers. 
The "Letters from Germany" and "Letters from France" —  pub­
lished in The Democratic Review, and which associates of the Institute 
of Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the Communist 
Party of the Soviet Union have recently shown to have been written 
by Engels —are initial sketches, as it were, for Marx's major political 
and historical works summing up the results of the 1848-49 
revolutions  ( The Class Struggles in  France  and The Eighteenth Brumaire 
of Louis Bonaparte), and likewise for Engels' "Revolution and 
Counter-Revolution in Germany". Engels' articles contain the initial 
formulations of certain important ideas elaborated in these 
works—the tendency of the bourgeoisie to turn to counter­
revolution, the leading revolutionary role of the proletariat, the 
worker-peasant alliance, and the permanent revolution. In the 
"Letters from France", for example, Engels expressed the hope that 

=====第11页=====
Preface XV 
in the next round of revolutions the working class would have the 
support of the broad mass of peasants. The peasants, he wrote, were 
"beginning to see that no government, except one acting in the 
interest of the working men of the towns, will free them from the 
misery and starvation into which ... they are falling deeper and 
deeper every day" (see this volume, p. 21). 
Marx and Engels were convinced that to build and strengthen a 
proletarian party it was essential to have a publication which would 
continue the traditions of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. And in March 
1850 they launched the journal Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch­
ökonomische Revue —the theoretical journal of the Communist 
League, with Marx as editor. Its inaugural announcement defined 
the purpose of the journal: "A time of apparent calm such as the 
present must be employed precisely for the purpose of elucidating 
the period of revolution just experienced, the character of the 
conflicting parties, and the social conditions which determine 
the existence and the struggle of these parties" (see this volume, 
p. 5). 
In its six modest-sized issues, the Revue published Marx's The Class 
Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 and Engels' The Campaign for the 
German Imperial Constitution and The Peasant War in Germany, which 
contain a wealth of important ideas. Marx and Engels also 
contributed book reviews, international reviews, and other articles, 
all of which appear in the present volume. 
In The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 (the title given by 
Engels to its 1895 edition) Marx for the first time applied to a whole 
period of history the method of analysis and explanation of historical 
materialism. And it was to contemporary history that he applied it. 
In his Preface to the 1895 edition Engels described this as "a 
development as critical, for the whole of Europe, as it was typical". 
Marx, he wrote, had set out "to demonstrate the inner causal 
connection" and so "to trace the political events back to effects of 
what were, in the final analysis, economic causes". (This Preface will 
appear in its chronological place in Volume 28 of the Collected 
Works.) 
It was by analysing and drawing conclusions from the practical 
experience of revolutionary struggle that Marx was able to 
demonstrate the objective necessity of social revolutions, and to 
enrich the whole theory of revolution by the idea that revolutions 
are the "locomotives of history", accelerating historical progress 
and stimulating the constructive energy of the masses. He showed 
how in revolutionary periods history is speeded up—as was the 

=====第12页=====
XVI Preface 
case in France when the different classes of society "had to count 
their epochs of development in weeks where they had previously 
counted them in half centuries" (see this volume, p. 97). Examining 
the course of events in France, where the class struggle had been 
especially acute, Marx found that the bourgeoisie as a class was 
losing its revolutionary qualities and that the working class had 
become the principal driving force of revolution and thereby 
also of historical progress. In the June uprising in 1848 the prole­
tariat of Paris had acted as an independent force and displayed 
immense energy and heroism. This, he pointed out in The Class 
Struggles in France, was the first great battle between the two classes 
whose division split modern society in two, serving notice that, 
despite the defeat of the proletariat, former bourgeois demands had 
given place to "the bold slogan of revolutionary struggle: Overthrow 
of the bourgeoisie! Dictatorship of the working class!" (see this volume, 
p. 69). 
This is the first time Marx used the phrase "dictatorship of the 
working class" (Diktatur der Arbeiterklasse) in print. And its appear­
ance meant more than simply the use of a single phrase to express 
the idea of the proletariat winning political power, which Marx and 
Engels had already formulated in works written before the 1848 
revolution. It marked a step forward in the whole conception of 
proletarian revolution, the "proletarian" or "working-class" dic­
tatorship being envisaged as a genuinely democratic political 
organisation of society in which political power would represent and 
express the interests of the vast majority, the working people, as 
opposed to the dictatorship of the exploiting classes. Revolutionary 
socialism, Marx maintained, meant establishing the dictatorship of 
the working class as the effective power to bring about the socialist 
reconstruction of society. 
"This Socialism," he wrote (see this volume, p. 127), "is the 
declaration of  the permanence of  the revolution, the  class  dictatorship of the 
proletariat as the necessary transit point to the abolition of class 
distinctions  generally,  to the abolition of all the relations of production 
on which they rest, to the abolition of all the social relations that 
correspond to these relations of production, to the revolutionising of 
all the ideas that result from these social relations." 
The Class Struggles in France contains Marx's classical definition of 
the tasks of the working-class dictatorship in the decisive field—the 
economic reconstruction of society, that is to say: "The appropria­
tion of the means of production, their subjection to the associated 
working class and, therefore, the abolition of wage labour, of capital 
and of their mutual relations" (see this volume, p. 78). This 

=====第13页=====
Preface XVII 
definition separates off scientific communism from the vague 
demands for "community of property" characteristic of all varieties 
of Utopian socialism and Utopian communism. 
In The Class Struggles in France Marx also went deeper in his 
criticism of non-proletarian socialist currents, showing their theoreti­
cal weaknesses and their untenability in practice. In particular, he 
exposed the fallacy in Louis Blanc's idea of class collaboration and 
state assistance to workers' associations as the means to achieving 
socialism. In his petty-bourgeois version of socialism,which Marx so 
exhaustively examined, Blanc had also assured the workers that the 
rulers of the bourgeois Second Republic were willing to resolve social 
problems by adopting his plan for the "organisation of labour". 
Blanc's unreal ideas and conciliatory tactics came to nothing, and 
Marx saw in their collapse the positive gain that the proletariat was 
liberated from such harmful illusions. 
Other works written by Marx and Engels during this period 
likewise referred to how bitterly the workers were let down by the 
various systems of Utopian socialism and the empty verbosity of 
petty-bourgeois democratic leaders. In the "Letters from France", 
for example, Engels described the gradual liberation of the working 
class from the influence of petty-bourgeois ideas: "The people ... 
will soon find socialist and revolutionary formulas which shall 
express their wants and interests far more clearly than anything 
invented for them, by authors of systems and by declaiming leaders" 
(see this volume, p. 35). 
Finally, in The Class Struggles in France, Marx put forward, 
expounded and justified one of the key principles of the strategy and 
tactics of workers' revolutionary struggle—that the peasantry and 
urban petty-bourgeois strata were allies of the proletariat against the 
bourgeois system. Nothing but the victory of the proletariat, he 
showed, could deliver the non-proletarian sections of the working 
people from the economic oppression and degradation brought 
upon them by capitalism. He demonstrated the necessity for close 
alliance between the proletariat, the peasantry and the urban 
petty-bourgeoisie, and at the same time the necessity for the leading 
political role of the proletariat as the most revolutionary class. And 
he exposed the limited ideas and impotent politics of the petty-
bourgeois democratic leaders, using the failure of the petty-
bourgeois Montagne party on June 13, 1849, to prove how incapable 
was such a party to conduct any revolutionary struggle on its 
own. 
The Class Struggles in France is, indeed, a major work in which, 
following the experience of the revolutions of 1848-49, Marx 
2-1124 

=====第14页=====
XVIII Preface 
achieved a new stage in developing the theory of scientific 
communism. A popular summary of the main conclusions was 
provided in Engels' article "Two Years of a Revolution" (see this 
volume, pp. 353-69). Published in The Democratic Review, this article 
by Engels is a model of revolutionary propaganda in the British 
workers' press. 
The key problems of the theory of revolution and working-class 
strategy and tactics posed in The Class Struggles in France were also 
examined in the "Address of the Central Authority to the 
League" (March 1850). written jointly bv Marx and Engels. This 
document summed up the experience of the revolution in Germany, 
and marked an important step forward in the elaboration of the 
programme and tactics of the revolutionary proletariat. 
The Address contains a comprehensive and classical definition of 
the idea of permanent revolution which had been variously 
formulated in preceding writings by Marx and Engels. Their 
exhaustive analysis of the 1848-49 revolution showed that the 
revolutionary reconstruction of society was by nature a long and 
complex process which would pass through several stages. The 
objective laws of this process, they found, made feasible an 
uninterrupted development from the bourgeois-democratic through 
to the proletarian stage of the revolution. And they concluded that it 
was in the interests of the working class and its allies that no long 
period of calm should intervene. The proletarian party should 
therefore work for the continuous ("permanent") development of 
the revolution until the working class established its political 
power—and such a strategy was the most favourable one for the 
mass of the people and for social-historical progress. "It is our 
interest and our task," the Address declared, "to make the 
revolution permanent, until all more or less possessing classes have 
been forced out of their position of dominance, [and] the proletariat 
has conquered state power..." (see this volume, p. 281). 
The Address indicates some of the practical measures for effecting 
the transition from the bourgeois-democratic to the proletarian 
revolution. The workers had, it says, to create their own centres of 
working-class power, alongside the official government, in the form 
of local self-governing bodies, workers' clubs and committees, by 
means of which the apparatus of government in the bourgeois-
democratic revolution could be brought under effective control by 
the proletarian masses. And to carry the revolution further, Marx 
and Engels concluded, the workers had to arm themselves and 
set up an armed proletarian guard. 

=====第15页=====
Preface XIX 
Later, in the new context of imperialism, Lenin was to draw on the 
conclusions about permanent revolution, formulated by Marx and 
Engels in the Address, in his teachings on the passage from 
bourgeois-democratic to socialist revolution, which carried further 
the Marxist conception of the strategy and tactics of the proletariat 
and of the revolutionary Marxist party. 
In March 1850, when they wrote the "Address of the Central 
Authority to the League", Marx and Engels were still expecting an 
early new revolutionary outburst, with the petty-bourgeois 
democrats coming to power in Germany. This made them con­
sider it doubly urgent to liberate the working class from the 
political and ideological influence of the petty-bourgeois 
democrats. The most effective means of doing so was to form an 
independent workers' party, with both clandestine and legal 
organisations, and with the underground communities of the 
Communist League serving as the nucleus of the non-clandestine 
workers' associations. While urging that the workers' party must 
dissociate itself both ideologically and in its organisation from the 
petty-bourgeois democrats, Marx and Engels did not deny the 
importance of agreements for joint struggle against the coun­
ter-revolution. But they insisted that in all circumstances the 
working class must conduct and consolidate its own independent 
policy. 
A second "Address of the Central Authority to the League", in 
June 1850, lays especial emphasis on creating a strong proletarian 
party in Germany, and in other European countries, adapted to 
clandestine activity and yet using all legal opportunities for 
propaganda and for organising the masses. 
Two works by Engels, dealing mainly with events in Germany but 
summarising, directly or indirectly, the experience of the 1848-49 
revolutions, were published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch­
ökonomische Revue. The series of essays entitled The Campaign for the 
German Imperial Constitution were written by Engels in the wake of 
the Baden-Palatinate insurrection of the spring and summer 
of 1849, in which he had taken part. On Marx's advice, he wrote 
these essays as a pamphlet condemning the leaders of the German 
petty-bourgeois democrats for their chronic indecision and word-
mongering. First-hand reports by a participant were blended with a 
historical study of the last phase of the revolution in Germany. 
Engels examined the nature of the revolutionary movement  itself, 
the attitudes of the classes and parties involved in it, and the causes 
of its failure. And he drew his conclusions on the tactics of a 
revolutionary party in armed uprising or civil war. 
2* 

=====第16页=====
XX Preface 
Another of Engels' historical works, and one which has long 
occupied a prominent place in the legacy of Marxist historiography, 
was written for the Revue—The Peasant War in Germany. Though this 
dealt with events of a long past epoch, Engels wrote it with the 
contemporary scene in mind. For the defeat of the 1848-49 
revolutions was bringing its inevitable aftermath of fatigue and 
disenchantment, and Engels sought to renew contemporary rev­
olutionary convictions by reviving past revolutionary traditions of 
the people and by drawing attention, in particular, to the dormant 
revolutionary energy of the peasants, since their alliance with the 
working class would be decisive for any future success of the 
revolution. He sought to inspire his contemporary readers by his 
vivid portraits of sixteenth-century revolutionary leaders—Thomas 
Münzer, the plebeian revolutionary who was herald of the plebeian 
Reformation, the brilliant peasant general Michael Geismaier, and 
other indomitable fighters against feudal oppression. 
The Peasant War in Germany, like Marx's The Class Struggles in 
France, is a model of how to apply the method of historical 
materialism to the elucidation of historical events. Throwing new 
light on a period of world history which was a crucial turning point in 
the history of Germany, Engels' study combines profound theoreti­
cal generalisations with precise political conclusions. He analyses the 
central problems of German sixteenth-century history, the part 
played by the anti-feudal peasant and plebeian movements, the spe­
cific features of the era when feudalism had already disintegrat­
ed, and the transition to capitalism had begun, and the consequences 
in Germany of the failure of the Peasant War. In most cases, German 
bourgeois historians had seen nothing but "violent theological 
bickering" behind the events of 1525 (see this volume, p. 411). But 
Engels was the first to make clear the profound social and economic 
causes of both the Reformation and the Peasant War, and to make 
clear that the political and ideological struggle of that time was, 
essentially, a class struggle. 
The Peasant War in Germany is, indeed, organically related to the 
problems of the working-class and democratic movement in the 
middle of the nineteenth century. As Engels wrote in a preface to the 
second edition, in 1870, "the parallel between the German 
revolution of 1525 and the 1848-49 revolution was much too striking 
to be entirely renounced at the time". (The Preface of 1870 will 
appear in its chronological place in Volume 21 of the Collected 
Works.) 
Engels described the Reformation and the Peasant War as the 
earliest of the bourgeois revolutions, and saw the main reason for the 

=====第17页=====
Preface XXI 
failure of the Peasant War in the vacillation and treachery of the 
German burghers, whom he regarded as the historical predecessors 
of the bourgeoisie. The main force in the Peasant War was the 
peasants themselves along with the urban plebeians. But provincial 
limitations and the fact that "neither burghers, peasants nor 
plebeians could unite for concerted national action" were, Engels 
held, among the reasons for its defeat (see this volume, p. 481). The 
dispersed state of the revolutionary forces, and their parochial and 
particularist tendencies, he stressed, had likewise had a distinctly 
negative effect in the 1848-49 revolution. 
The present volume contains a number of book reviews and 
critical articles examining the ideological impact of the revolutionary 
events of 1848-49, and attacking bourgeois and petty-bourgeois 
interpretations of the revolution. The revolutionary upheavals had 
meant a turning point in the evolution of the views of bourgeois 
ideologists. In face of the militant independent activity of the 
working class even previously progressive bourgeois historians and 
political theorists had lost their capacity for scientific evaluation of 
the process of history. This shift to the right is remarked upon, for 
example, in the review of Guizot's pamphlet Pourquoi la révolution 
d'Angleterre a-t-elle réussi? Guizot had previously acknowledged the 
necessity for revolutions and, in particular, the role of the class 
struggle of the third estate against the feudal aristocracy in the 
making of bourgeois society. But now he belittled the significance of 
revolutionary action. He set up as a model the "Glorious Revolution" 
of 1688 in England, and made out that the English seventeenth-cen­
tury revolution (1640-60) had been successful when it had followed 
the ways of compromise and had, by virtue of its religious character, 
secured England's further constitutional development without 
revolutionary explosions and upheavals. Criticising Guizot's reading 
of history, Marx and Engels produced a classical description of the 
English seventeenth-century revolution, its peculiarities and signifi­
cance, and its difference from the French revolution of the 
eighteenth century. 
A similar shift to the right among ideologists of the ruling class is 
illustrated by the case of Thomas Carlyle—the British Sage of 
Cheyne Walk, Chelsea. In a review of Carlyle's Latter-Day Pamphlets 
Marx and Engels demolished his subjective idealist concept of 
history, the "hero cult", and his counterposing of the "hero" to the 
masses. By exalting these "heroes", said Marx and Engels, Carlyle 
was only "justifying and exaggerating the infamies of the bour­
geoisie" (see this volume, p. 310). 

=====第18页=====
XXII Preface 
The glorification of personalities was typical of petty-bourgeois 
democrats as well—of their historians and writers, and also of 
police-sponsored champions who exaggerated the deeds of the 
petty-bourgeois opposition movement and thereby inflated their 
own individual merits as "saviours of society" from dangerous red 
revolutionaries. Marx and Engels denounced this decking up in false 
colours of members of the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois opposition 
in a caustic review of two books by the French police agents Chenu 
and de la Hodde. Having made it clear that the two authors were 
nothing but agents provocateurs, Marx and Engels voiced strong 
objections to the adventurist and conspiratorial tactics which opened 
the way for provocateurs to penetrate the revolutionary movement. 
They described the exponents of such tactics as "alchemists of the 
revolution" who sought only "to bring it artificially to crisis-point, to 
launch a revolution on the spur of the moment, without the 
conditions for a revolution" (see this volume, p. 318). This criticism 
of conspiracy and sectarianism could not have been more timely, 
since adventurism and adventurist illusions were widespread among 
the members of the Communist League and the petty-bourgeois 
emigrants. 
In their review of Girardin's Le socialisme et l'impôt Marx and 
Engels continued their criticism of "bourgeois socialism", begun in 
the Manifesto of the Communist Party, and also made a critical 
examination of anarchist ideas. The latter were fairly widespread at 
the time in France—notably in the works and utterances of 
Proudhon—and in Germany too. This review of Girardin's 
pamphlet concurs with Engels' unfinished manuscript "On the 
Slogan of the Abolition of the State and the German 'Friends of 
Anarchy' ", which condemns the anarchist proposals for "abolishing 
the state", examines their origin in Germany, and presents a relevant 
account of Stirner's anarcho-individualist ideas. 
The international reviews included in this volume are of much 
interest, too. They contain a scientific analysis of the more important 
current economic and political events in Europe and North America, 
and several predictions which were confirmed by subsequent 
development. 
Until the summer of 1850, Marx and Engels were convinced that 
the economic crisis which began in 1847 would continue to get worse, 
and would generate a new surge of revolution. This view was 
reflected in The Class Struggles in  France,  the March "Address of the 
Central Authority to the League", and in their first and second 
international reviews. Marx and Engels in fact overestimated the 
maturity of capitalism — or underestimated its potential of recovery 

=====第19页=====
Preface XXIII 
from economic crisis and of further development—and likewise 
overestimated the revolutionary potential of the working class at that 
time.  It was this, in part, which had led to their over-optimistic 
predictions of early revolution. "History," wrote Engels in his 
introduction to Marx's Class Struggles in France in 1895 (to be 
included in Volume 28 of the Collected Works), "has proved us, and 
all who thought like us, wrong. It has made it clear that the state of 
economic development of the Continent at that time was not, by a 
long way, ripe for the elimination of capitalist production." In the 
summer of 1850, on resuming his economic researches and making a 
thorough examination of the economic situation, Marx found that 
the 1847 economic slump had run its course and that a new period of 
boom had begun. His study of the processes at work in the economy 
gave him a clearer and more accurate idea of the prospects of 
revolution. In their third international review Marx and Engels 
wrote: "With this general prosperity, in which the productive forces 
of bourgeois society develop as luxuriantly as is at all possible within 
bourgeois relationships, there can be no talk of a real revolution.... A 
new revolution is  possible  only in  consequence  of a new  crisis.  It is, however, 
just as certain as this crisis" (see this volume, p. 510). 
In his subsequent economic research and analysis of social 
development Marx found that the influence of economic processes 
on society was not necessarily direct and that economic crisis would 
not always, or indeed usually, immediately precipitate an outbreak of 
revolution. Nonetheless, the thought that economic crises exercise a 
revolutionising influence on society and that, by aggravating the 
contradictions of capitalism, crises may stimulate the revolutionary 
movement, is an abiding part of Marxist theory. Lenin drew special 
attention to the theoretical importance of these propositions (see 
V. I. Lenin, Precis of the Correspondence between Marx and Engels, 
1844-1883, second Russ. ed., 1968, p. 30). 
In their third international review, Marx and Engels described yet 
another essential feature of the revolutionary process. Though 
Britain was, as they put it, "the demiurge of the bourgeois cosmos", 
the revolution had occurred on the Continent and a new revolu­
tionary explosion should likewise be expected first of all in the 
continental countries. "Violent outbreaks must naturally occur 
rather in the extremities of the bourgeois body than in its heart, since 
the possibility of adjustment is greater here than there" (see this 
volume, p. 509). So probabilities favoured the beginning of the 
revolutionary transformation of society not in the centre but on the 
outskirts of the bourgeois world, in countries with a less developed 
capitalist economy than in Britain. 

=====第20页=====
XXIV Preface 
Apart from certain major theoretical works on history, and 
current book reviews and international reviews, this volume contains 
articles on current social problems, such as "The Ten Hours' 
Question" by Engels, "The Constitution of the French Republic" by 
Marx, and a few others, with their letters and statements to the press 
exposing the slander and persecution of revolutionary leaders by 
absolutist and bourgeois governments. "The Constitution of the 
French Republic", for example, which appeared in the Chartist Notes 
to the People, shows up the limited nature and class essence of 
bourgeois democracy and the flagrant difference between the 
proclamations of democratic rights and liberties in bourgeois written 
constitutions and the anti-democratic practices of bourgeois states, 
along with constitutional reservations which effectively reduced 
these rights and liberties to nothing. 
Engels' manuscript "Conditions and Prospects of a War of the 
Holy Alliance against France in 1852" opened a new stage in his 
elaboration of a Marxist military theory—to which he and Marx 
attached great importance in the light of the lessons of the 1848-49 
revolution. The manuscript examines the material basis of military 
science, the dependence of the art of war and the military 
establishment itself on the economy and the social system, the 
influence of revolutions on the development of warfare, and also the 
military potentials of the European states in the mid-nineteenth 
century. Engels wrote, too, about the army of the future socialist 
state,  born in the flames of proletarian revolution—and his ideas 
about it have proved prophetic. He predicted that it would be 
unusually strong in combat, highly manoeuvrable, and possess a high 
degiee of striking power since its development would be backed by 
the rapidly developing productive forces of the new society, its 
flourishing technology and culture. 
Marx's and Engels' entire elaboration of the theory of scientific 
communism in the light of the experience of the 1848-49 revolution 
precipitated sharp ideological clashes inside the Communist League 
between them and their followers, on the one hand, and the 
sectarian faction of Willich-Schapper, on the other. The controversy 
focussed on the prospects of revolution and the related questions of 
proletarian strategy and tactics. The Willich-Schapper faction was 
for premature actions, including attempts to seize power, which 
would have been especially dangerous in that period of revolution­
ary low tide. The minutes of the September 15, 1850, sitting of the 
Central Authority of the Communist League (published in the 
Appendices to this volume) mirror clearly enough the issues 
involved. Speaking at the sitting, Marx insisted on the great harm 

=====第21页=====
Preface XXV 
which would result for the revolutionary movement from any 
voluntarist adventurist "playing at revolution" which ignored the 
real situation and state of the proletarian movement. The tactical 
errors of the Willich-Schapper faction, he observed, stemmed from 
the poor theoretical and philosophical equipment of its members. "A 
German national standpoint," he said, "was substituted for the 
universal outlook of the Manifesto, and the national feelings of the 
German artisans were pandered to. The materialist standpoint of the 
Manifesto has given way to idealism" (see this volume, p. 626). 
Despite Marx's proposals, which would have dissociated proletari­
an revolutionaries from the Willich-Schapper group and preserved 
the unity of the proletarian organisation, the sectarians managed to 
split the Communist League. They joined forces with other 
adventurist elements inside the League, and with petty-bourgeois 
émigrés, to attack Marx and Engels and their followers. In the end, 
Marx, Engels and their friends decided to resign from the London 
German Workers' Educational Society and from the Social-
Democratic Refugee Committee, and to break off relations with the 
Blanquist French émigrés, who had sided with Willich and Schapper. 
The documents included in this volume and its Appendices portray 
the struggle of Marx and Engels and the proletarian revolutionaries 
who rallied to their side against adventurers and splitters in the 
working-class movement of that time. 
The section in the volume headed "From the Preparatory 
Materials" contains rough manuscripts concerning, in the main, 
Marx's study of political economy. 
The 1848-49 revolution and their reflections on it had impressed 
on Marx and Engels the urgency of working out the economic basis 
of the theory of scientific communism. And from 1850 onwards this 
became the principal strand in the development of Marxist thought. 
In 1850-53 Marx filled twenty-four notebooks with transcriptions of 
passages from various, mainly economic, works. Only one of this 
large collection of manuscripts illustrating Marx's understanding of 
economics at that time and his methods of research has been 
included in this volume. 
The section contains Marx's manuscript entitled "Reflec­
tions",  which sets out some of his own ideas, evidently related to his 
study of Tooke's An Inquiry into the Currency Principle. Taking as 
point of departure some of Tooke's and Adam Smith's principles on 
the circulation of commodities and money between different groups 
of producers and consumers in a bourgeois society (capitalists and 
ordinary individual consumers), Marx goes on to examine a number 

=====第22页=====
XXVI Preface 
of economic problems: the nature of money and its outwardly 
levelling role which disguises the class character of production 
relations in capitalist society; the futility of trying to transform 
capitalist society by reforming the circulation of money; the real 
causes of economic crises, which stem from the intrinsically 
contradictory nature of the capitalist mode of production; the 
superficial and false interpretation of these causes by bourgeois 
economists, who reduce them to mere swindling in monetary and 
commercial transactions, speculative fever, and the like. Many of the 
ideas contained in this manuscript were later developed in Marx's 
published economic works. 
The Appendices to this volume contain documents illustrating the 
practical revolutionary activities of Marx and Engels in the period 
covered. Apart from the already mentioned agreements on the 
establishment of the Universal Society of Revolutionary Commu­
nists,  and materials related to the struggle in the Communist League 
against the Willich-Schapper group, the Appendices also contain 
appeals and reports by the Social-Democratic Committee of Support 
for German Refugees, newspaper accounts of Engels' speeches at 
various meetings, and documents concerning the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue. They also contain the Rules of 
the Communist League drawn up by its new Central Authority in 
Cologne (the Central Authority was transferred there after the 
League split in the autumn of 1850), with Marx's marginal notes, 
other materials of the League, and some papers of a biographical 
nature. 
Some of the works published in this volume have never before 
been translated into English. This applies to the second and third 
international reviews, the article "Gottfried Kinkel", the June 
Address of the Central Authority to the Communist League, the 
Statement against Arnold Ruge, a few of the book reviews and some 
of the statements and letters to editors of various newspapers, all of 
which were written jointly by Marx and Engels. Works translated 
into English for the first time also include Marx's article "Louis 
Napoleon and Fould", and Engels' The Campaign for the German 
Imperial Constitution, "On the Slogan of the Abolition of the State 
and the German 'Friends of Anarchy'", "Conditions and Prospects 
of a War of the Holy Alliance against France in 1852", and 
others. 
The materials in the section "From the Preparatory Materials" 
are also appearing in English for the first time. So are the materials 

=====第23页=====
Preface XXVII 
in the Appendices (save for the minutes of the sitting of the Central 
Authority of the Communist League of September 15, 1850, and the 
1850 Rules of the Communist League). And in this volume the 
documents "Permit to Leave Switzerland Issued to Frederick 
Engels", "From the Indictment of the Participants in the Uprising 
in Elberfeld", and some of the transcripts of Engels' speeches, are 
being published for the first time in any edition of the Works of 
Marx and Engels. 
Those works that have been previously published in English are 
given either in new or in carefully revised translations. Particulars 
about their earlier publications in English are given in the notes. Also 
described in the notes are peculiarities in the arrangement of the text 
of certain works, in particular the manuscripts. 
Most of the works appearing in this volume have been translated 
from the German. Translations from other languages are indicated 
at the end of the texts, as are reproductions of texts written by the 
authors in English. 
The volume was compiled and the preface and notes written by 
Tatyana Yeremeyeva (CC CPSU Institute of Marxism-Leninism). 
The name index together with the indexes of quoted and mentioned 
literature and of periodicals were prepared by Valentina Kholopova, 
and the subject index by Marien Arzumanov (CC CPSU Institute of 
Marxism-Leninism). 
The publishers express their gratitude to the editors of 
Marx/Engels, Gesamtausgabe —MEGA, Bd. 10, erste Abteilung (Insti­
tute of Marxism-Leninism of the CC, Socialist Unity Party of 
Germany), for the loan of materials used in preparing the volume. 
The translations were made by Gregor Benton, Clemens Dutt, 
Frida Knight, Rodney Livingstone, Hugh Rodwell, Peter and Betty 
Ross,  Barbara Ruhemann, Christopher Upward, and Joan and 
Trevor Walmslev (Lawrence & Wishart), Richard Dixon and Salo 
Ryazanskàya (Progress Publishers), and edited by Richard Abraham, 
Clemens Dutt, Sheila Lynd, Margaret Mynatt, Barbara Ruhemann 
and Alick West (Lawrence & Wishart), Richard Dixon, Salo 
Ryazanskaya, Yelena Chistyakova, Natalia Karmanova and Victor 
Schnittke (Progress Publishers), and Vladimir Mosolov, scientific 
editor, for the Institute of Marxism-Leninism, Moscow. 
The volume was prepared for the press by Anna Vladimirova and 
Lyudgarda Zubrilova (Progress Publishers). 

=====第24页=====
KARL MARX 
and 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
September 1849-June 1851 

=====第25页=====

=====第26页=====
AND NATIONAL TRADES' JOURNAL. 
YOL ML  M«, til LMDOM, 8ÀTTODAT, DEOEMEI1, B4».  *. «SSUS 
Frederick Engels 
THE GERMAN SOCIAL DEMOCRATS 
AND THE TIMES1 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE NORTHERN STAR3 
Sir,— The Times of Friday lastb contains a letter signed "Anti-
Socialist", denouncing to the English public, and to the English 
Home-Secretary,0 some of the "hellish doctrines" developed in the 
London German Newspaper, by a certain Mr. Charles Heinzen, 
described as a "shining light of the German Social Democratic party". 
These "hellish doctrines" consist chiefly of a benevolent proposal for 
killing, in the next continental revolution, "a couple of millions of 
reactionaries". 
We may safely leave it with you to qualify the conduct of the 
editors of The Times, in allowing their columns to be made the 
receptacle of direct police information and denunciation in political 
matters. We are however rather astonished to see in the "leading 
journal of Europe" Herr Heinzen described as "a shining light of the 
German Social Democratic party". "The leading journal of Europe" 
certainly might have known that Herr Heinzen, so far from serving 
as a shining light to the party in question, has, on the contrary, ever 
since 1842, strenuously, though unsuccessfully, opposed everything 
like Socialism and Communism. "The German Social Democratic 
party", therefore, never took, nor is it likely ever to take, the 
responsibility of anything said or written by Mr. Charles Heinzen. 
As to the danger likely to result from the "hellish doctrines" 
aforesaid, The Times might have known that Mr. Heinzen, far from 
trying to put these doctrines into practice during the last eighteen 
months of revolutionary convulsions in Germany, hardly ever 
a George Julian Harney.— Ed. 
b See The Times No.  20341,  November 28. 1849.— Ed. 
c George Grev.— Ed. 

=====第27页=====
4 Frederick Engels 
during that time put his foot upon German soil, and played no part 
whatever in any of those revolutions. 
The idea, Sir, of a man who never did any damage even to the 
most diminutive of German princes, being able to do harm to the 
gigantic British empire, would be, in our eyes, an insult to the 
English nation. We therefore beg leave to move that the whole 
matter be wound up by The Times giving a vote of thanks to Mr. 
Charles Heinzen, for the courage malheureux* with which he 
combated Socialism and Communism. I am, Mr. Editor, 
Yours very obediently, 
A German Social Democrat 
London, Nov. 28th, 1849 
First published in The Northern Star Reprinted from the newspaper 
No. 632, December 1, 1849 
Wretched courage.— Ed. 

=====第28页=====
5 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
[ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG. 
POLITISCH-ÖKONOMISCHE REVUE] 2 
THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue 
edited by 
Karl Marx 
will appear in January 1850. 
The periodical bears the title of the newspaper of which it is to be 
considered the continuation. One of its tasks will consist in returning 
in retrospect to the period which has elapsed since the suppres­
sion of the Neue Rheinische Zeitungß 
The greatest interest of a newspaper, its daily intervention in the 
movement and speaking directly from the heart of the movement, its 
reflecting day-to-day history in all its amplitude, the continuous and 
impassioned interaction between the people and its daily press, this 
interest is inevitably lacking in a review. On the other hand, a review 
provides the advantage of comprehending events in a broader 
perspective and having to dwell only upon the more important 
matters. It permits a comprehensive and scientific investigation of 
the economic conditions which form the foundation of the whole 
political movement. 
A time of apparent calm such as the present must be employed 
precisely for the purpose of elucidating the period of revolution just 
experienced, the character of the conflicting parties, and the social 
conditions which determine the existence and the struggle of these 
parties. 
The review will be published in monthly issues of at least five 
printers' sheets at a subscription price of 24 silver groschen per 
quarter, payable upon delivery of the first issue. Single issues 10 sgr. 
Messrs. Schuberth and Co., in Hamburg, will attend to retail 
distribution through bookshops. 

=====第29页=====
6 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Friends of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung are requested to circulate 
subscription lists in their respective areas and to send them without 
delay to the undersigned. Literary contributions and likewise news 
items for discussion in the review will be accepted only post paid. 
London, Dec. 15, 1849 
K. Schramm 
Manager of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung 
4 Anderson Street, King's 
Road, Chelsea 
Published in the Westdeutsche Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 6, January 8, 1850 „ U1. , , . ^ ,. , c >u *• 
° J ' Published in English lor the tirst 
time 

=====第30页=====
THE DEMOCRATIC REVIEW 
JANUARY, 1850. 
Frederick Engels 
LETTERS FROM GERMANY 4 
i 
[The Democratic Review, January 1850] 
Cologne, Dec. 18th; 1849 
"Order reigns in Germany." Such is the present great motto of 
our rulers, be they princes, aristocrats, bourgeois, or any other 
fraction of that recently formed party which you might call in 
English the party of Ordermongers.5 "Order reigns in Germany"; and 
yet never was there, not even under the "Holy Roman Empire"6 of 
yore,  such a confusion in Germany as there is at present under the 
reign of "Order". 
Under the old system, before the revolution of 1848, we knew at 
least who governed us. The old Federal Diet of Frankfort7 made 
itself felt by laws against the liberty of the press, by exceptional courts 
of law, by checks imposed even upon the mock constitutions with 
which certain German populations were allowed to delude them­
selves. But now! We hardly know, ourselves, how many Central 
Governments we have got in this country. There is, firstly, the Vicar 
of the Empire, instituted by the dispersed National Assembly,8 and 
who,  although without any power, sticks to his post with the greatest 
obstinacy.3 There is secondly the "Interim",9 a sort of thing—nobody 
knows exactly what—but something like a revival of the old Diet, 
got up under the old prevalent influence of Prussia, and which 
"Interim" is poking at the old Vicar (who more or less represents the 
Austrian interest), to resign his place into their hands.10 In the 
meantime neither has the slightest power. Thirdly, there is the 
"Regency of the Empire",11 elected in Stuttgart by the National 
Assembly during the latter days of its existence, and the remains of 
that Assembly, the "Decided Left" and the "Extreme Left", which 
two Lefts, along with the "Regency", represent the "moderate and 
a Archduke John of Austria.— Ed. 

=====第31页=====
8 Frederick Engels 
philosophical" Democrats and Shopocrats of Germany. This "Impe­
rial"  government holds its sittings in a public house in Berne in 
Switzerland,1 and has about as much power as the two preceding. 
Fourthly, there is what is called the Three-Kings'-League,12 or the 
"Confined (or Refined, I don't know which) Federal State", got up 
for the purpose of making the King of Prussiab Emperor overall the 
lesser states of Germany. It is called the "Three-Kings'-League", 
because all kings, with the exception of the King of Prussia, are 
opposed to it! and it calls itself the "Confined Federal State", 
because, although travailing in birth ever since the 28th of May last,13 
there is no hope of its ever producing anything likely to live!! There 
are, fifthly, the Four Kings, of Hanover, Saxony, Bavaria, and 
Wurtemberg,r who are determined to do as they like themselves, and 
not to submit to any of the above "Central Impotencies"; and lastly, 
there is Austria, trying every means to keep up her supremacy in 
Germany, and supporting, therefore, the Four Kings in their efforts 
for independence from Prussian ascendancy. The real governments, 
in the meantime, those who hold the power, are Austria and Prussia. 
They rule Germany by military despotism, and make and unmake 
laws at their liking. Between their dominions and dependencies lie, 
as quasi neutral ground, the four kingdoms, and it will be upon this 
ground, and particularly in Saxony, that the pretensions of the two 
great powers will meet each other. There is, however, no chance of a 
serious conflict- between them. Austria and Prussia, both, know too 
well that their forces must remain united if they want to keep down 
the revolutionary spirit spread all over Germany, Hungary, and 
those parts of Poland belonging to the powers in question. In case of 
need, besides, "our beloved brother-in-law",0 the orthodox Czar of 
all the Russias, would step in and forbid his lords-lieutenant of 
Austria and Prussia to quarrel any more amongst themselves. 
This never equalled confusion of governments, of pretensions, of 
claims, of German Federal Law, has, however, one enormous 
advantage. The German Republicans were, up to this time, divided 
into Federalists and Unitarians; the first having their principal force 
in the south. The confusion ensuing upon every attempt to 
re-organise Germany into a Federative State, must make it evident 
that any such plan will prove abortive, impracticable, and foolish, 
and that Germany is too advanced in civilisation to be governable 
a See this volume, p. 249.— Ed. 
b Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
c Ernest Augustus, Frederick Augustus II, Maximilian II, William I.— Ed. 
d The reference is to Nicholas I, married to Frederick William IV's sister.— Ed. 

=====第32页=====
Letters from Germany 9 
under any form but the German Republic, One and Indivisible, 
Democratic and Social. 
I should have liked to have said a few words on the acquittal of 
Waldeck and Jacoby,14 but want of room prevents me doing so. 
Suffice it to say, that for at least some months to come it will be quite 
impossible for the government in Prussia to obtain in political trials a 
verdict of guilty, excepting, perhaps, in some remote corners where 
the jury-class are as fanaticised as the Orangemen of Ulster.15 

=====第33页=====
10 
II 
CURIOUS REVELATIONS CONCERNING 
THE DESPOTS OF GERMANY.— 
INTENDED WAR AGAINST FRANCE — 
THE COMING REVOLUTION 
[The Democratic Review, February 1850} 
Cologne, Jan. 20th, 1850 
The day after I sent you my last, news reached here of the 
"settlement of the question" who was to rule over all Germany. The 
"Interim", consisting of two Austrian and two Prussian delegates, 
have at last prevailed upon old Archduke John to retire from 
business. They have consequently taken the reins of a power which, 
however, will not be of long duration. It expires in the month of May 
next, and there is good reason to expect that even before that term 
certain "untoward events" will sweep away these four provisional 
rulers of Germany. The names of these four satellites of military 
despotism are very significant. Austria has sent M. Kübeck, minister 
of finance under Metternich, and General Schönhals, the right hand of 
the butcher Radetzki. Prussia is represented by General Radowitz, 
member of the Jesuit order, favourite of the king, and principal 
inventor of all those plots by which Prussia has succeeded, for the 
moment, in putting down the German revolution; and by 
M. Bötticher, governor, before the revolution, of the province of 
Eastern Prussia, where he is fondly (?) remembered as a "putter 
down" of public meetings and organiser of the spy system. What the 
doings of such a lot of rogues will be you will not need to be told. I 
will name one instance only. The Wurtemberg government, forced 
by the revolution, had contracted with the Prince of Thurn and 
Taxis—who, you know, has the monopoly of forwarding letters by 
post and conveying of passengers in a large part of Germany, to the 
exclusion of the governments—the Wurtemberg government, I say, 
had contracted with this robber on a national scale to part, for a 
handsome sum, with his monopoly in favour of the said government. 
Times having got better for those who live upon national plunder, 
Prince Thurn and Taxis values his monopoly higher than the sum 

=====第34页=====
Letters from Germany 11 
contracted for, and won't part with it. The Wurtemberg govern­
ment, freed from the pressure from without, find this change of 
opinion quite reasonable; and both parties apply—the prince 
publicly, the government aforesaid secretly—to the "Interim", 
which, taking for pretext an article of the old act of 1815, declares 
the contract void and unlawful. This is all right. It is far better that 
M. Thurn and Taxis keeps his privilege a few months longer; the 
people, when they finish with the whole lot of privileges, will take it 
not only from him without giving him anything, but will, on the 
contrary, make him give up even the money he has robbed them of 
up to this time. 
The military despotism in Austria is getting more intolerable every 
day. The press almost reduced to annihilation, all public liberties 
destroyed, the whole country swarming with spies—imprisonments, 
courts-martial, floggings in every part of the country—this is the 
practical meaning of those provincial constitutions which the 
government publish from time to time, and which they do not care a 
straw about breaking in the very moment of publication. There is, 
however, an end to everything, even to states of siege and the rule of 
the sword. Armies cost money, and money is a thing which even the 
mightiest emperor cannot create at his will. The Austrian govern­
ment have, up to this time, managed to keep their finances afloat by 
tremendous issues of paper money. But there is an end to this, too; 
and, in spite of that Prussian lieutenant who once would challenge 
me to a duel, because I told him a king or emperor could not make as 
many paper dollars3 as he liked—in spite of that profound political 
economist, the Emperor of Austria15 sees his paper money, though 
inconvertible, at the discount of from twenty to thirty per cent 
against silver, and almost fifty per cent against gold. The foreign 
loan he intended has dropped to the ground through the exertions 
of Mr. Cobden. Foreign capitalists have subscribed to the amount of 
£500,000 only, and he wants fifteen times that sum; while his 
exhausted country cannot afford to lend him anything. The deficit, 
fifteen millions and a half at the end of September last, will, by this 
time,  have reached from twenty to twenty-four millions—the greater 
part of the Hungarian war expenses being payable in the last quarter 
of 1849. Thus there is only one alternative for Austria: either 
bankruptcy, or a foreign war to make the army pay  itself,  and to 
reconquer commercial credit by battles gained, provinces conquered, 
and war contributions imposed. Thus Mr. Cobden, in opposing the 
a Here and below the reference is to German  talers. — Ed. 
b Francis Joseph I.— Ed. 

=====第35页=====
12 Frederick Engels 
Austrian and Russian loans3 on the plea of the preservation of peace, 
has more than any one else contributed—for Russia is in the same 
awkward state as Austria—to hasten that coalesced campaign against 
the French Republic which cannot, under any circumstances, be long 
delayed. 
In Prussia, we assist at another act of "royal conscientiousness". 
You know that Frederick William IV, the man who never broke his 
word, in November, 1848, dispersed by force the national represen­
tation, and forced upon his people a constitution16 after his own 
heart; that he agreed that this beautiful piece of workmanship was to 
be revised by the first parliament to be assembled; that in this 
parliament the Second Chamber (House of Commons) was, even 
before they got to the revising business, dissolved, another electoral 
reform forced upon the people, by which universal suffrage was very 
nicely done away with, and a majority of landed nobility, of 
government officials, and of  bourgeois,  was secured. This Chamber, 
to vote for the election of which every democrat refused, so that it 
has been elected by one-fifth or one-sixth of the whole number of 
voters—this Chamber, in conjunction with the old First Chamber, 
set about revising the Constitution, and made it, of course, even 
more agreeable to the king than he himself had made it originally. 
They have now almost done with it. Now, you think, his Majesty will 
please to accept this amended Constitution, and take the oath 
prescribed in it? Not he, indeed. He sends his faithful parliament a 
royal message, stating that he is very much pleased with what his two 
Chambers have made of his Constitution, but that, before his "royal 
conscientiousness" permits him to take the oath aforesaid, his own 
Constitution must be altered in about a dozen points.17 And what are 
these points? Why, his Majesty is modest enough not to require any 
more than the following trifles. 1. The First Chamber, now elected 
by the large landed proprietors and capitalists, to be a complete 
House of Lords, containing the royal princes, about one hundred 
hereditary peers chosen by his Majesty, sixty peers elected by the 
large landed proprietors, thirty by the large monied interest, six by 
the universities. 2. Ministers to be responsible to the king and 
country, not to the parliament. 3. All taxes now upon the budget to 
be levied for ever, without power of parliament to refuse. 4. A "Star 
Chamber",18 or High Court of Justice, to try political offences—no 
mention being made of juries. 5. A special law to define and restrain 
the powers of the Second Chamber of parliament, &c. Now what do 
a Cobden's speech delivered on January 18, 1850. (See The Times No. 20390, 
January 19, 1850.)—Ed. 

=====第36页=====
Letters from Germany 13 
you think of this? His Majesty forces upon the good Prussians a new 
Constitution, to be amended by parliament. His parliament amends 
it by striking out everything like a remnant of popular rights. And 
the king, not content with that, declares that his "royal conscientious­
ness"  forbids him to accept his own Constitution, amended in his 
own interest, without the above further modifications. Verily this is a 
truly "royal" sort of conscientiousness! There is little chance of even 
this present mock parliament bowing to such impudence. The 
consequence will be dissolution, and the end of all parliaments for 
the moment in Prussia. The secret of all this is the anticipation of the 
great coalition war, mentioned above. The "conscientious" gentle­
man on the throne of Prussia expects to have his rebellious country 
overrun by the month of March or April, by a million of Asiatic 
barbarians, to march, along with "his own glorious army",19 against 
Paris,  to conquer that fair country which produces his heart-
cherished champagne. And the Republic once done away with, the 
scion of Saint Louis3 restored to the throne of France, what then 
would be the use of constitutions and parliaments at home? 
In the meantime the revolutionary spirit is rapidly reviving all over 
Germany. The most inveterate ex-Liberalb  who, after March, 1848, 
joined the king to combat the people, now sees that—as the saying is 
in Germany—although he gave to the devil only the end of his little 
finger, that gentleman has since seized the whole hand. The incessant 
acquittals by juries in political trials are the best proofs of this. Every 
day brings a new fact in this way. Thus, a few days ago, the Mülheim 
workpeople—who, in May, 1849, tore up the railway, in order to 
stop the sending of troops to insurged Elberfeld — have been 
acquitted here at Cologne. In the south of Germany, financial 
difficulties and increased taxation show to every bourgeois that this 
present state cannot last. In Baden the very same bourgeois who 
betrayed the last insurrection, and hailed the arrival of the Prussians, 
are punished and driven to madness by these very same Prussians 
and by the government, which under their protection drives them to 
ruin and despair. And the working people and peasantry every­
where are on the qui vive, waiting for the signal of an insurrection 
which, this time, will not subside until the political dominion and 
social progress of the proletarians shall have been secured. And this 
revolution is drawing nigh. 
a Count Chambord.— Ed. 
b Ludolf Camphausen. — Ed. 

=====第37页=====
14 
m 
THE PRUSSIAN KING SWEARING TO THE CONSTITUTION 
AND "SERVING THE LORD!"—GRAND CONSPIRACY OF THE HOLY 
ALLIANGE.—THE APPROACHING ONSLAUGHT ON SWITZERLAND.— 
PROJECTED CONQUEST AND PARTITION OF FRANCE! 
[The Democratic Review, March 1850] 
Cologne, Feb. 18th, 1850 
At last His Majesty, the King of Prussia, has taken the oath to the 
so-called "Constitution".20 Had it not been for the occasion of 
making a speech, there is no doubt but that royal farce would never 
have taken place. But his speech-loving majesty, for the sake of the 
speech, resolved to swallow the oath, quite as humbly as he has been 
seen to swallow so many unpalatable things before, such as the 
celebrated "Hat  off!" 21 shouted to him by the people of Berlin on 
the 19th of March, 1848. The oath is of no consequence. What is the 
oath of a king, and particularly of a Frederick William IV! The 
speech is the principal feature, and a precious speech it is. Think of 
the Prussian Majesty declaring most seriously, and neither him nor 
any one else in the assembly bursting forth in laughter, that he is a 
man of honour, and that he is about to give what is dearest to him—his 
royal word! But, he continues—after a series of most whimsical 
oratorical efforts—he gives his word on one condition only: that it be 
made possible for him to govern with this constitution, and to fulfil 
the promise he made three years ago, viz., "I and my house will serve 
the Lord!"22 
What this new-fashioned "man of honour" means by governing 
with the constitution and serving the Lord, is already becoming 
pretty clear. His Majesty's ministers have come out since that 
swearing farce; firstly, with two laws, doing almost entirely away with 
the liberty of the press and the right of association and of public 
meeting; secondly, with a demand for eighteen millions of dollars 
(two millions and a half sterling) for increasing  the army.  The meaning 
of this is evident. First destroy in detail the few sham liberties left to 
the people by the precious mock-constitution, and then raise the 
army to the war footing, and march with Russia and Austria against 

=====第38页=====
Letters from Germany 15 
France. There is no doubt of the bourgeois chambers agreeing to all 
this, and thus making it possible to the king to govern with the 
constitution, and serve the Lord with his house. 
This Prussian credit for the army "to meet eventualities which 
might present themselves during spring", must be taken, together 
with the other measures of the Holy Alliance,23 in order to make us 
see clearly through their plots. Prussia, besides these eighteen 
millions, is already treating for a loan of sixteen millions—ostensibly 
for the purpose of constructing the great Eastern Railway. You 
know, too well, since the Russian loan affair, what a splendid pretext 
for raising money railways are made by the governments of the Holy 
Alliance. Prussia, thus, will soon raise five millions sterling.the whole 
of which will be at the disposal of the war-office. Russia, besides the 
five millions sterling already raised, is about to contract for another 
loan of thirty-six millions of roubles silver, or five millions sterling. 
Austria alone, after the shabby result of her late effort to raise 
money, must be satisfied with what she can get at home. Her deficit, 
as I stated in my last, really amounts to two hundred million florins 
(twenty millions sterling) in one year! Thus, while Russia and Prussia 
raise money to make war, Austria must make war in order to raise 
money! 
There is no doubt that if there are no untoward events in France, 
the "holy" campaign will be opened next month against Switzer­
land,3  and perhaps Turkey. Russia keeps in Poland, and its vicinity, 
an army of 350,000 men, ready to march at a moment's notice. She 
has already contracted for large supplies of victuals, to be delivered 
next month, not in Poland, but in Prussia, at Dantzic. The Prussian 
army—about 150,000 now—can in a month be raised to 350,000, by 
calling in the reserve and the first class of the Landwehr. The 
Austrian army—about 650,000—has never been diminished, but, 
on the contrary, increased by the Hungarian prisoners. The whole of 
the forces, which may be disposable for a foreign war, may be 
something like a million; but two-thirds of the Prussians and 
Austrians are infected with the democratic disease, and would most 
likely pass to the other side, as soon as an opportunity presented 
itself. 
The first pretext for attacking Switzerland is the German refugees 
living in that country. This pretext will soon cease to exist, as the 
cowardly persecutions of the federal government directly or 
indirectly force all refugees to leave Switzerland. There are now 
perhaps 600 German refugees in that country, and even they will 
See this volume, p.  28.—  Ed. 

=====第39页=====
16 Frederick Engels 
soon have to leave it. But then there is another pretext—the demand 
of Prussia to restore the Prussian king's authority in the ex-
principality of Neufchatel, which made itself a republic in 1848.24 
And if even this be complied with, there will be the question of the 
Sonderbund raised again, in connection with the new federal 
constitution, which, in 1848, replaced the old reactionary treaty of 
1814,  guaranteed by the Holy Alliance. 25 Thus, there will be no 
chance for Switzerland escaping war and foreign occupation. 
But the final aim of the Holy Alliance is the conquest and partition 
of France. The plan designed to finish at once this great rev­
olutionary centre is as follows: France, once conquered, will be 
divided into three kingdoms—the South-west, or Aquitania (capital, 
Bordeaux), will be given to Henry, Duke of Bordeaux*; the East, 
or Burgundy (capital, Lyons), will be given to Prince Joinville; and 
the North, or France proper (capital, Paris), will be awarded to Louis 
Napoleon, for the signal services he has rendered to the Holy 
Alliance. Thus France, reduced to the old state of division it was in 
some centuries ago, would be utterly powerless. What do you say to 
this pretty scheme, which no doubt originated in the "historical" 
head of the king of Prussia? 
But, be assured, the People—without whom the Holy Alliance 
have reckoned—will very soon put a stop to all these plots and 
schemes, and that as soon, too, as the Holy Alliance commence to put 
their plans into execution. For the people are wide awake, both in 
France and Germany, and, fortunately, they are strong enough to 
put down all their opponents, as soon as matters are brought to a 
general, decisive, and open contest. And then the enemies of 
democracy will, to their terror, see that the movements of 1848 and 
'49 were nothing, in comparison to the universal conflagration which 
will burn up the old institutions of Europe, and light the victorious 
nations to a future—free, happy, and glorious. 
Written between December 18,  1849,  and Reprinted from the journal 
February 18, 1850 
Published in The Democratic Review 
in January-March 1850, marked by the 
editors "From Our Own Correspondent" 
a Count Chambord.— Ed. 

=====第40页=====
17 
Frederick Engels 
LETTERS FROM FRANCE 
I 
[The Democratic Review, January 1850] 
Paris,  December 20th, 1849 
The great question of the day is the excise upon "potable liquors", 
now under discussion in the National Legislative Assembly. This 
question is of such importance, and contains, in fact, in  itself,  so 
much of the whole present situation, that it will not be amiss to 
devote to it the whole of this letter. 
The tax on potable liquors is of very old date.3 It formed one of the 
principal features of the financial system under the monarchy of the 
eighteenth century, and one of the main grievances of the people at 
the time of the first revolution. It was done away with by that 
revolution. But Napoleon restored it in a somewhat modified shape 
about the year 1808, at a time when, forgetting his revolutionary 
origin, he made the establishment of his dynasty in the midst of the 
ancient European royal families, his principal aim. The tax was so 
exceedingly obnoxious to the people, that at the downfall of 
Napoleon, the Bourbon family promised its immediate repeal, and 
Napoleon  himself,  at St. Helena, declared it had been that tax more 
than anything else which caused his fall, by setting against him the 
whole of the South of France. The Bourbons, however, never 
thought of redeeming their promise, and the tax remained as before 
up to the revolution of 1830, when, again, its abolition was held out 
to the country. This promise was no more fulfilled than the 
preceding one; and thus the excise existed when the revolution of 
1848 broke out. The provisional government,27 instead of im­
mediately repealing it and substituting for it a heavy income-tax 
upon the large capitalists and landed proprietors, only promised 
a Cf. this volume, pp. 117-20 and  328.—  Ed. 

=====第41页=====
18 Frederick Engels 
either its repeal, or at least its revision; the Constituent Assembly3 
even went so far as to continue the tax altogether. It was only in the 
last days of its existence, when royalism was rifer than ever, that the 
"honest" and "moderate" members of that Assembly voted the 
repeal of the tax on potable liquors, to take effect from the 1st of 
January, 1850. 
It is clear that the tax in question bt'ongs essentially to the 
monarchical traditions of France. Repealed as soon as the mass of the 
people got the upper hand, it was restored as soon as either the 
aristocracy or the Bourgeoisie, represented by a Louis XVIII or a 
Louis Philippe, held the reins of government. Even Napoleon, 
though in many points opposed to both aristocracy and Bourgeoisie, 
and overthrown by the conspiracy of both—even the great Emperor 
thought himself obliged to re-establish this feature of the ancient 
traditions of Monarchical France. 
The tax in itself weighs very unequally upon the different classes 
of the nation. It is a grievous burden upon the poor, while upon the 
rich the pressure is exceedingly light. There are about twelve 
millions of wine-producers in France; these pay nothing upon their 
consumption of wine, it being of their own growing; there are, 
further, eighteen millions of people inhabiting villages and towns 
under 4,000 inhabitants, and paying a tax from 66 centimes to 1 fr. 
32 centimes per 100 litres of wine; and there are, finally, some five 
millions inhabiting towns of more than 4,000 inhabitants, and paying 
upon their wine the droit  d'octroi, 2* levied at the gate of the town, and 
varying in the different localities, but at all events incomparably 
higher than what is paid by the preceding class. The tax, further, 
falls quite as heavy upon the most inferior as upon the higher-priced 
wines;  the hectolitre which sells at 2, 3, 4 francs, and the one sold at 
12 to 1,500 fr., both pay the same tax; and thus, while the rich 
consumer of choice champagne, claret, and Burgundy, pays almost 
nothing, the working man pays to the government upon his inferior 
wine a tax of 50, 100, and, in some cases, 500 or 1,000 per cent upon 
the original value. Of the revenue derived by this tax, 51 millions of 
francs are paid by the poorer classes, and 25 millions only by the 
wealthier citizens. There cannot, under such circumstances, exist the 
slightest doubt that this tax is exceedingly injurious to the 
production of wine in France. The principal markets for this 
produce, the towns, are to the wine-producer so many foreign 
countries where he has to pay, before bringing his produce to sale, a 
regular custom-house duty of from 50 to 1,000 per cent ad valorem. 
a The Constituent National Assembly (May 4, 1848-May 1849).— Ed. 

=====第42页=====
Letters from France 19 
The other part  of the  market,  the open country,  is at  least subject  to a 
duty  of from  20 to 50 per  cent  of the  original value.  The  inevitable 
consequence  of this  is the  ruin  of the  wine-growing parts  of the 
country.  It is  true  the  production  of wine  has  been augmenting  in 
spite  of the tax, but the  population  has  outgrown this augmentation 
at a far  quicker rate. 
Why, then,  has it  been possible  to keep  up under  the middle-class 
government such  an obnoxious  tax as  this?  In England,  you  will say, 
even Cobden  and  Bright would have swept  it away long  ago. And so 
they would.  But in  France,  the manufacturers never found  a Cobden 
or a Bright  who  stood  up for  their interests with invincible tenacity,2 
nor a Peel  to give  way to  their claims.29  The  French financial system, 
although  so much vaunted  by the  majority  of the  Assembly,  is the 
most confused  and  artificial, mixtum compositum? that ever  was 
imagined. None  of the  reforms carried  in England since  1842  were 
attempted  in France under Louis Philippe. Postage Reform  was 
considered almost  as blasphemy  in the  blessed time  of Guizot.  The 
tariff was,  and is now,  neither  a free-trade  nor a  mere revenue,  nor a 
protectionist,  nor a  prohibitive  tariff, but  contains something  of all, 
except free-trade.  Old  prohibitions  and  high duties, that  for many 
years have been  to no  purpose,  nay,  that  are decidedly injurious  to 
trade,  are to be  found  in all  parts  of the tariff. Yet no one  dared 
touch them. Local taxation,  in all  towns  of more than  1,000 
inhabitants,  is indirect,  and  collected upon  the produce brought into 
town. Thus  the freedom  of trade even  in the  interior  is interrupted 
every  ten or  fifteen miles  by a  sort  of inland-custom-house. 
This state  of things, disgraceful even  to a  middle-class govern­
ment, remained untouched from different causes. With  all this 
oppressive taxation, with receipts  of 1,400 or 1,500  millions  of 
francs, there  was a  deficit  at the end of  every year,  and a  loan after 
every fourth  or fifth year.  The  stockjobbers  of the  Paris Bourse 
found  an  inexhaustible source  of profit-making, jobbing,  and 
peddling  in this  low  state  of the  Public Exchequer. They  and  their 
associates formed  the  majority  in the two  Chambers,  and  were thus 
the real dominators  of the  state,  and  always demanding fresh 
supplies  of money. Financial Reform, besides, could  not  have been 
effected without sweeping measures, which would have brought  the 
budget  to its  équilibre, changed  the  allotment  of taxes,  and,  besides 
taxing these stockjobbers themselves, given  a greater political weight 
to other fractions  of the  middle classes.  And  what consequences such 
Cf. this volume,  p. 116.—  Ed. 
b Mixture.— Ed 

=====第43页=====
20 Frederick Engels 
a change would have had under the worm-eaten government of 
Louis Philippe you may judge, from the comparatively trifling 
pretext which led to the revolution of February. 30 
That revolution brought into office no man able to reform the 
financial system of France. The gentlemen of the National,31 who 
took possession of that department, felt themselves borne down by 
the weight of the deficit. Many attempts were made at bit-by-bit 
reform; all proved abortive, excepting the abolition of the tax upon 
salt and the Postage Reform. At last, in a fit of despair, the 
Constituent Assembly voted the repeal of the wine tax, and now the 
"honest" and "moderate" men of order32 in the present precious 
Assembly restore it! Nay, more: the Minister3  intends restoring the 
salt tax, and re-augmenting the Postage; so that the old financial 
system, with its eternal déficiences and difficulties, and consequent 
absolute sway of the Paris Bourse, with its jobbing, peddling, and 
profitmongering, will very shortly be restored in France. 
The people, however, do not seem likely to submit quietly to a 
measure which restores a heavy tax upon an article of prime 
necessity for the poor, while it almost exempts the rich. Social 
democracy has spread wonderfully over the agricultural districts of 
France; and this measure will convert the remainder of the millions 
who,  twelve months ago,b  voted for that ambitious blockhead, Louis 
Napoleon. The country once won for social democracy, there will be 
very few months, nay, weeks, indeed, ere the Red Flag floats from 
the Tuileries and the Elysée-National. 33 Then only will it be possible 
to radically upset the old, oppressive financial system, by at one 
stroke doing away with the National Debt, by introducing a system of 
direct, progressive taxation; and by other measures of a similarly 
energetic character/ 
a Achille Fould, Minister of Finance.— Ed. 
b In December 1848 during the election of the President of the French 
Republic— Ed. 
Cf. this volume, p. 116.— Ed. 

=====第44页=====
21 
ii 
STRIKING PROOFS OF THE GLORIOUS PROGRESS 
OF RED REPUBLICANISM! 
[The Democratic Review, February 1850] 
Paris,  January 21st, 1850 
A great many important events have occurred since my last, but as 
the generality of readers will have been informed of them from the 
daily and weekly papers, I shall refrain from going over the same 
ground from beginning to end, and instead shall limit this letter to 
some general observations on the state of the country. 
During the last twelve or fifteen months, the revolutionary spirit 
has made immense progress throughout France. A class, which by its 
social position was kept apart, as much as possible in civilised society, 
from taking an interest in public business, which by the old 
monarchical legislation was shut out from all political rights, which 
never read a newspaper, and which, nevertheless, forms the vast 
majority of Frenchmen—this class, at last, is rapidly coming to its 
senses. This class is the small peasantry, numbering about twenty-
eight millions of men, women, and children, counting amongst its 
ranks from eight to nine millions of small landed proprietors, who 
possess, in the shape of freehold34 property, at least four-fifths of the 
soil of France. This class has been oppressed by all governments 
since 1815, not excepting the provisional government, which 
imposed on it the tax of 45 additional centimes upon every franc of 
the land-tax,35 which in France is very heavy. This class,borne down 
also by a band of usurers to whom their property almost without 
exception is mortgaged at extraordinary high interest, is at last 
beginning to see that no government, except one acting in the 
interest of the working men of the towns, will free them from the 
misery and starvation into which, notwithstanding their land-
allotments, they are falling deeper and deeper every day.a This class, 
a Cf. this volume, pp. 27-28, 122-23 and  262-63.—  Ed. 
3-1124 

=====第45页=====
22 Frederick Engels 
which in a great measure forced the revolution of 1789, and which 
formed the basement upon which arose the vast empire of 
Napoleon, has now, in its immense majority, joined the revolu­
tionary party and the working men of Paris, Lyons, Rouen, and the 
other large towns of France. The tillers of the soil now see clearly 
enough how they have been cheated by Louis Napoleon, to whose 
presidential majority they at least furnished six millions of votes, and 
who has repaid them with the re-imposition of the wine and brandy 
tax. And thus, the vast majority of the French people are now united 
to overthrow, as soon as a proper occasion shall present  itself,  the 
insolent sway of the capitalist class, which, hurled down by the storm 
of February, has again seized the helm of government, and exercises 
its rule far more arrogantly than ever it did under its own 
well-beloved Louis Philippe. 
The history of the last months affords innumerable proofs of this 
most important fact. Take the circular of Minister d'Hautpoul to 
the gendarmerie, ;by which espionage is carried into the very heart 
of the most obscure village; take the law against the schoolmasters,36 
who,  in French villages, are generally the best expression of the 
public opinion of their localities, and who are now to be placed at the 
mercy of government, because they now almost all profess social-
democratic opinions; and many other facts. But one of the most 
striking proofs is to be found in the election which has just taken 
place in the department du Gard. 37 This department is known as the 
most ancient stronghold of the "Whites"—the Legitimists. 38 It was 
the scene of the most horrid outrages against the republicans in 1794 
and '95, after the downfall of Robespierre; it was the central seat of 
the "white terrorism" in 1815, when Protestants and Liberals were 
publicly murdered, and outrages of the most horrible nature were 
committed on the wives, daughters, and sisters of those victims by 
Legitimist mobs, headed by the renowned Trestaillon, and protected 
by the government of legitimate Louis XVIII. Well, this department 
had to elect a deputy, in the place of a Legitimist, deceaseda; and the 
result was, a great majority for a thoroughly Red candidate,0 while 
the two Legitimist candidates were in a signal minority.0 
Another proof of the rapid progress of this alliance of the working 
men in the towns and the peasantry of the country, is the new law on 
public education.39 The most inveterate Voltairians of the 
bourgeoisie, even M. Thiers, see there is no way left to oppose that 
a Jean Baptiste de Beaune. — Ed. 
Etienne Favand. — Ed. 
c E. de Grail and H. de Lourdoueix.— Ed. 

=====第46页=====
Letters from France 23 
progress but by surrendering their old theories and principles, and 
by prostrating public education at the feet of the priesthood! 
Again. There is, now, a general rush of all public papers and 
public characters, that are not exacdy reactionaries, to claim the once 
despised tide of "Socialist". The oldest enemies of Socialism now 
proclaim themselves Socialists. The National, even the Siècle, 
monarchist under Louis Philippe, declare they are Socialists. Even 
Marrast, the infamous traitor of 1848, now hopes, though in vain, to 
get elected by proclaiming himself a Socialist. The people, however, 
are not thus to be duped, and the rope to hang that vagabond is 
ready, and only waiting for the occasion. 
To-day they discuss in the National Assembly the law for killing 
the remaining 468 prisoners of the June insurrection,40 by transport­
ing them to, and setting them to work in the most unhealthy parts of 
Algeria. No doubt the law will pass by an immense majority. But 
before the unfortunate heroes of that grand battle of labour can 
reach the shore destined to bury them, there is little doubt but 
another popular storm will have swept away the voters of this law of 
murder, and carry, perhaps, to that land of banishment, those of the 
present majority who may have escaped a prompter, more radical, 
and most righteous revenge on the part of the people. 
3* 

=====第47页=====
24 
in 
SIGNS OF THE TIMES.— 
THE ANTICIPATED REVOLUTION 
[The Democratic Review, March 1850] 
Paris,  February 19th, 1850 
I must limit this letter somewhat in space, but the facts which have 
occurred in the course of this month are so striking, that they will 
speak for themselves. The revolution is advancing so rapidly, that 
every one must see its approach. In all spheres of society it is spoken 
of as imminent; and all foreign papers, even if opposed to 
democracy, declare it an unavoidable thing. Nay, more, you may 
with almost certainty foresee, that if no unexpected events give a 
turn to public affairs, the great contest between the united 
Ordermongers and the vast majority of the people, can hardly be 
postponed beyond the latter end of this spring. And what the result 
of that contest will be, is a matter admitting of no doubt. The people 
of Paris are so sure of having very shortly the most splendid case for 
a revolution they ever had, that there is a general order amongst 
them — "Avoid all petty squabbles, submit to anything which puts 
not a vital question to you." Thus, with all their efforts, the other 
day, when the trees of liberty were cut down, the government could 
not excite the working people to even a petty street-row, and the 
individuals dancing round the tree at the Porte Saint-Martin, which 
your London Illustrated News depicted in such a terrific manner,3 
consisted of a set of police spies who lost all their day's job through 
the coolness of the people.41 Thus, in spite of what the government 
papers say to the contrary, the 24th of this month will pass off very 
quietly.b The government would give almost anything if they could 
have a row in Paris, with some fictitious conspiracies and outbreaks 
a See The Illustrated London News No. 412, February 9, 1850.— Ed. 
The second anniversary of the February Revolution. Cf. this volume, 
p. 128.—  Ed. 

=====第48页=====
Letters from France 25 
in the departments, in order to inflict the state of siege upon the 
capital and those departments which, on the 10th of March, will have 
to elect new deputies in lieu of the condemned of Versailles. A word 
on the new system of military despotism.4* To keep the provinces in 
bondage, the government have invented the new system of 
commanders-in-chief. They have united a number of the seventeen 
military divisions of France into four grand districts, each of which is 
to be under the command of one general, who, thus, has almost the 
arbitrary power of an eastern satrap or a Roman proconsul. These 
four military districts are so arranged, that they surround Paris and 
the whole centre of France, as it were, with an iron circle, in order to 
keep it down. This measure, illegal as it is, has however been adopted 
not only on account of the people, but on account of the Bourgeois 
opposition too. The Legitimist and Orleanist43  parties now see clear 
enough that Louis Napoleon is serving them very badly. They 
wanted him as a means to the re-establishment of monarchy, as an 
instrument to be shuffled aside when worn out, and they now see 
him aspiring to a throne for  himself,  and going a good deal faster 
than they want. They know well enough that at this moment there is 
no chance for monarchy, and that they must wait; and yet Louis 
Napoleon does everything in his power to come to a settlement, and 
to risk a revolution which may cost him his head, rather than wait his 
time.  They know, too, that neither party, Legitimist or Orleanist, has 
gained so much ground upon the other as to make the victory of one 
of the two an undeniable necessity; and as before the 10th of 
December, 1848, they want another neutral man, who, while they 
await the course of events, may govern according to the common 
interests of both. Thus, these two parties, the only important 
fractions of the Ordermongers, are now against the prolongation of 
Louis Napoleon's presidency, although four months ago they would 
have done anything to carry it; they are again, for once, for the 
neutral ground of the republic, with General Changarnier as president. 
Changarnier seems to be in the plot; and Napoleon, who does not 
trust him but dares not dismiss him from his proconsulate at Paris, 
has put the four military districts as a fetter around him. This may 
explain why M. Pascal Duprat's (a traitor of June '48, who now courts 
popularity again) speech 3 against the new military system and 
against Louis Napoleon  himself,  was very tolerantly listened to by the 
majority. There occurred two curious incidents on this occasion. 
When M. Duprat said, according to a newspaper, Louis Napoleon 
a Duprat's interpellation made in the Legislative Assembly on February 16, 1850. 
dealt with the new system of military administration.— Ed. 

=====第49页=====
26 Frederick Engels 
had to choose between the position of his uncle,3 or that of 
Washington, a voice from the left shouted, "or that of the Emperor 
Soulouque of Haiti".b A general burst of laughter hailed this 
comparison of the French would-be-emperor to a personage, than 
whom none offers more matter for ridicule to all the Charivaris of 
Paris;  and yet not even the President of the Assembly interposed.0 
You see what even this precious majority thinks of Louis Napoleon! 
The Minister of War then got up, and, turning to the left, 
concluded a most violent speech with these words: "And now, 
gentlemen, if you like to commence we are ready!"e This expression 
of the Minister will show you more than anything, how generally a 
violent struggle is expected. 
In the meantime, the Social-Democratic party are actively 
preparing for the elections. Although there is a chance for the 
"honest and moderate", to elect one or two of their candidates in 
Paris,  where some sixty thousand working men have been, under 
a variety of pretexts, struck off the voting register; yet there is 
no doubt that the socialists will have a signal triumph in the 
departments. The government themselves are expecting it. They 
therefore have prepared a measure for doing away with what is now 
openly called the conspiracy of "Universal Suffrage". They intend to 
make the suffrage indirect; the voters to elect a limited number of 
electors, who again name the representative. In this the government 
are sure of the support of the majority. But as this amounts to an 
open overthrow of the constitution, which cannot be revised before 
1851,  and by an assembly elected for the purpose, they expect violent 
resistance on the part of the people. These, therefore, are to be 
intimidated by the foreign armies making their appearance on the 
Rhine at the time this measure is brought into the House. If this 
really come to pass—and Louis Napoleon seems foolish enough to 
risk such a thing—then you may expect to hear something like the 
thunder of a revolution. And then, the Lord have mercy upon the 
souls of all Napoleons, Changarniers, and Ordermongers! 
Napoleon I Bonaparte.— Ed. 
See Le Moniteur universel No. 48, February 17, 1850.— Ed. 
André Dupin.— Ed. 
Alphonse d'Hautpoul.— Ed. 
e Cf. this volume, pp. 32 and 128.— Ed. 

=====第50页=====
27 
IV 
THE ELECTIONS.—GLORIOUS VICTORY OF THE REDS.— 
PROLETARIAN ASCENDANCY.—DISMAY OF THE ORDERMONGERS — 
NEW SCHEMES OF REPRESSION 
AND PROVOCATIONS TO REVOLUTION44 
[The Democratic Review, April 1850] 
Paris,  March 22nd, 1850 
Victory! Victory! The people have spoken, and they have 
spoken so loud that the artificial fabric of bourgeois rule and 
bourgeois plotting has been shaken to its very foundation. Car-
not, Vidal, Deflotte, representatives of the people for Paris, 
elected by from 127,000 to 132,000 votes, that is the answer of the 
people to the odious provocations of the government and parliamen­
tary majority. Carnot, the only man of the "National" fraction who, 
under the provisional government, instead of flattering the 
bourgeoisie, brought down on his head a handsome share of its 
hatred; Vidal, an openly pronounced communist of longstanding; 
Deflotte, vice-president of Blanqui's club, one of the foremost, active 
invaders of the Assembly on the 15th of May, 1848, 45 in June 
following, one of the leading combatants on the barricades, 
sentenced to transportation, and now stepping directly from the 
hulks into the legislative palace—really, this composition is signifi­
cant! It shews, that if the triumph of the Red party is owing to the 
union of the small trading class with the proletarians, this union is 
based upon totally different terms to that momentary alliance which 
brought about the overthrow of monarchy. Then, it was the small 
trading class, the petty bourgeoisie, who, in the provisional 
government, and still more so in the Constituent Assembly, took the 
lead, and very soon set aside the influence of the proletarians. Now, 
on the contrary, the working men are the leaders of the movement, 
and the petty bourgeoisie, equally pressed down and ruined by 
capital, and rewarded with bankruptcy for their services rendered in 
June,  1848, are reduced to follow the revolutionary march of the 
proletarians. The country farmers are in the same position, and thus 

=====第51页=====
28 Frederick Engels 
the whole mass of those classes that now are opposed to the 
government—and they form the vast majority of Frenchmen—are 
headed and led on by the proletarian class, and find themselves 
obliged to rely, for their own emancipation from the pressure of 
capital, upon the total and entire emancipation of the working men.3 
The elections in the departments, too, have been very favourable 
to the Red party. They having carried two-thirds, the Ordermongers 
one-third of their candidates. 
This party, or aggregation of parties, has admirably understood 
the broad hint given by the people. They now see certain ruin before 
their eyes if they allow the general election of 1852 both for the 
Assembly and the new President to come off with the present system 
of suffrage. They know, that the people are so fast rallying round the 
red flag, that it will be impossible for them to carry on the 
government even until that term. On one side the President and the 
Assemblyb; on the other, the vast mass of the people every day 
organising themselves stronger and stronger into an invincible 
phalanx. Thus the conflict is inevitable; and the longer the 
Ordermongers wait, the greater hope there will be for the victory of 
the people. They know it, and therefore they must strike the decisive 
blow as soon as possible. To provoke an insurrection as soon as 
possible, and to fight it to the utmost, is the only chance left for them. 
The "Holy Alliance", besides, after the elections of the 10th of 
March, can have no more doubts as to the course they must pursue. 
Switzerland, now, is out of the question.0 Revolutionary France is 
again standing up before them in all her terrible grandeur. France, 
then, must be attacked, and as soon as possible. The "Holy Alliance" 
are getting low in cash, and there is now very little chance of getting 
fresh supplies of that desirable commodity. The different armies 
cannot be maintained at home much longer, they must either be 
disbanded or they must be made to maintain themselves by 
quartering upon the enemy. Thus, you see that, if in my last I told 
you that the revolution and war were fast approaching, events are 
fully bearing out my prediction. 
The Ordermongers have for the moment again set aside their 
party squabbles. They have re-united to attack the people. They 
change the garrison of Paris, of which three-fourths voted for the 
red list; and, yesterday, a law re-establishing the newspaper stamp, 
another law doubling the caution money to be deposited by all 
a Cf. this volume, pp. 127 and  128.—  Ed 
The Democratic Review has "president of the Assembly", which is a misprint.— Ed 
Cf. this volume, p.  15.—  Ed 

=====第52页=====
Letters from France 29 
newspapers, and a third, suspending the liberty of electoral 
meetings, were laid on the table of the Assembly by the government. 
Other laws will follow; one to grant powers to the police to expel 
from Paris any working man not born there; another, to empower 
the government to transport, without judgment, to Algiers, any citizen 
who shall have been convicted of being a member of a secret  society,  and 
many more, the whole to be crowned by a more or less direct attack 
upon universal suffrage. Thus, you see, they provoke revolt, by 
battering down all the rights and privileges of the working classes. 
Revolt will follow, and the people, united with the mass of the 
national guard, will very soon hurl down that infamous class 
government which, in its utter impotency to do anything but 
odiously oppress, has, nevertheless, the impudence to call itself the 
"Saviour of Society"!!! 

=====第53页=====
30 
[The Democratic Review, May 1850] 
Paris,  April 20th, 1850 
The outbreak of the revolution, which has become inevitable since 
the elections of the 10th of March, has been retarded by the 
cowardice both of the government and of the men who, for the 
moment, have taken the lead of the Paris movement. The 
government and the National Assembly were so terror-struck by the 
vote of the 10th of March, and by the repeated proofs of mutinous 
spirit in the army, that they dared not come immediately to any 
conclusion. They resolved upon passing new repressive laws, a list of 
which I gave you in my last; but if the ministry and some of the 
leaders of the majority had confidence in these measures, the mass 
of the members had not, and even the government very soon lost its 
confidence again. Thus, the more stringent of these repressive laws 
were not brought forward, and even those that were—the laws on 
the press and on electoral meetings—met with a very doubtful 
reception from the majority. 
The Socialist party, on the other hand, did not profit by the victory 
as it ought to have done. The reason for this is very plain. This party 
consists not only of the working men, but it includes, now, the great 
mass of the shopkeeping class too, a class whose socialism is indeed a 
great deal tamer than that of the proletarians. The shopkeepers and 
small tradesmen know very well that their own salvation from ruin is 
entirely dependent upon the emancipation of the proletarians; that 
their interests are indissolubly tied up with those of the working 
men. But they know also, that if the proletarians conquered political 
power by a revolution, they, the shopkeepers, would be entirely set 
aside, and be reduced to accept from the hands of the working class 
any thing they might give them. If the present government, on the 

=====第54页=====
Letters from France 31 
contrary, be overthrown by peaceful means, the shopkeepers and 
small tradesmen, being the least obnoxious of the classes now in 
opposition, would very quietly step in and take hold of the 
government, giving, at die same time, the working people as small a 
share of it as possible. The small trading class, then, were quite as 
much terrified at their own victory as the government was at its own 
defeat. They saw a revolution starting up before their eyes, and they 
strove immediately to prevent it. There was a means for this ready at 
hand. Citizen Vidal, in addition to being elected for Paris, had been 
elected for the Lower Rhine too. They managed to make him accept 
for the Lower Rhine, and thus there is to be a new election in Paris. 
But it is evident, that as long as there is an opportunity given to the 
people to obtain peaceful victories, they will never raise their cry "to 
arms";  or if, nevertheless, provoked into an émeute, they will fight 
with very little chance of victory. 
The new election was fixed for the 28th of this month; and the 
government immediately profited by the favourable position created 
by the amiable shopocracy. Ministers disinterred old police regula­
tions,  in order to expel from Paris a number of working men, for the 
moment without work; and showed that they could do even without 
the proposed law against electoral meetings, by direcdy putting a 
stop to all of them. The people knowing that the day before an 
election, they could not fight to any advantage, submitted. The social 
and democratic press, entirely in the hands of the shopocracy, of 
course did every thing to keep them quiet. The behaviour of this 
press has, ever since the affair of the "trees of liberty", been most 
infamous. There have been numbers of occasions for the people to 
rise; but the press has always preached peace and tranquillity while 
the representatives of the shopocracy in the electoral committee and 
other organised bodies have always managed to lessen the chances of 
a street victory, by opening peaceful outlets for the popular 
exasperation. 
The false position in which the Red party has been forced, and the 
advantage given by the new election to the Ordermongers, is fully 
shewn by the names of the two opposing candidates. The red 
candidate, Eugène Sue, is an excellent representative of that 
well-meaning, "soft sawder", sentimental shopocrat-socialism, 
which, far from recognising the revolutionary mission of the 
proletarians, would rather mock-emancipate them by the benevolent 
patronage of the petty trading class. As a political man, Eugène Sue 
is a nullity; as a demonstration, his nomination is a step backwards 
from the position conquered on the 10th of March. But it must be 
confessed, that if sentimental socialism is to have the honour of the 

=====第55页=====
32 Frederick Engels 
day, his name is the most popular to be put forward, and he has a 
great chance to be elected. 
The Ordermongers, on the other side, have so far recovered, that 
they now oppose to Eugène Sue, whose name signifies nothing or 
very little, a name which signifies everything—M. Leclerc, a the 
bourgeois Lacedemonian of the insurrection of June.46 Leclerc is a 
direct reply to Deflotte, and a direct provocation to the working men, 
more direct than any other name could possibly be. Leclerc, 
candidate for Paris—that is a repetition of the words of General 
d'Hautpoul: — "Now, gentlemen, whenever you please to descend 
into the streets, we are ready!"b 
The repeated election in Paris, as you see, offers no advantage, 
but, on the contrary, has already put to a great deal of disadvantage 
the proletarian party. But there is another fact to be noticed. The 
election of the 10th of March was carried under the old list; that of 
the 28th of April is to come off under the new revised list of voters 
for 1850, which came into force on the 1st of April; and in this 
revised list there are from twenty  to thirty thousand working men struck off 
under various pretexts. 
However, even if this time the Ordermongers obtain a small 
majority, they will not be the gainers. The fact remains, that, with 
universal suffrage, they can no longer govern France. The fact 
remains, that the army is largely infected with socialism, and only 
awaits an occasion for open rebellion. The fact remains, that the 
working people of Paris are in better spirits than ever for putting an 
end to the present state of things. Never before did they come out so 
openly as they have done this time in the electoral meetings, till they 
were suppressed. And the government, forced to attack universal 
suffrage, will thereby give the people an occasion for a combat, in 
which there is for the proletarians the certainty of victory. 
Cf. this volume, pp. 135 and 516.— Ed 
See this volume, pp. 26 and 128.— Ed 

=====第56页=====
33 
VI 47 
[The Democratic Review, June 1850] 
[End of May 1850] 
"If the proletarians suffer the suffrage to be taken from them, 
they submit to the undoing of  the Revolution of February, as far  as they  are 
concerned For them the republic will no longer exist. They will be 
shut out from it. Will they allow this? 
"The law certainly will pass. Not a titde of it will be weakened. The 
will of the majority, upon this point, has already shown itself 
clearly.48 And as matters stand to-day, no one can tell what will 
follow, whether the people will rise and hurl down the government 
and Assembly, or whether they will wait until another occasion. Paris 
seems quiet; there is no direct sign of an approaching revolution; but 
a spark will suffice to call forth a tremendous explosion. 
"That explosion would have taken place before now but for the 
treacherous conduct of the popular chiefs, who have been doing 
nothing but preaching 'peace', 'tranquillity', and 'majestic calm'.3 
This,  however, cannot last long. The situation of France is eminently 
revolutionary. The Ordermongers cannot stand where they are. 
They must advance a step every day in order to maintain themselves. 
If this law should pass without provoking a revolution, they will come 
out with fresh, more violent, and more direct attacks on the 
constitution and the Republic. They want an émeute, and they will 
have a revolution, and have it soon, too. For it must be borne in mind 
that this is a question of weeks, perhaps days, not of years." 
a An allusion to Victor Hugo's speech made in the Legislative Assembly on May 
21, 1850, in which he called for "calme majestueux".— Ed. 

=====第57页=====
34 
VII 
[The Democratic Review, July 1850] 
Paris,  June 22nd, 1850 
The Electoral "Reform" Law has passed, and the people of Paris 
have not moved. Universal Suffrage has been destroyed, without the 
slightest attempt at disturbance or demonstration, and the working 
people of France are again what they were under Louis Philippe: 
political Pariahs, without recognised rights, without votes, without 
muskets. 
It really is a curious fact, that Universal Suffrage in France, won 
easily in 1848, has been annihilated far more easily in 1850. Such ups 
and downs, however, correspond much with the French character, 
and occur very often in French history. In England such a thing 
would be impossible. Universal Suffrage, once established there, 
would be won for ever. No government would dare to touch it. Only 
think of the minister who should be foolish enough to consider 
seriously re-establishing the Corn Laws. 49 The immense laughter of 
the whole nation would hurl him down. 
The people of Paris have, undoubtedly, committed a serious 
mistake, in not profiting of the occasion for insurrection given by the 
destruction of Universal Suffrage. The army was well disposed, the 
small trading class was forced to go with the people, and the 
Mountain,50  nay, even the party of Cavaignac knew that in case of a 
defeated insurrection they would inevitably be made to suffer for it, 
whether they stood with the people or not. Thus, at least, the moral 
support of the small trading class and of its parliamentary organs, 
the Mountain, was sure this time, äs soon as the insurrection had 
broken out; and with that the resistance of a large portion of the 
army would be broken. But the occasion has been missed, partly 
from the cowardice of the parliamentary chiefs and the press, partly 
from the peculiar state of mind the people of Paris are in at present. 

=====第58页=====
Letters from France 35 
The working people of the capital are at present in a state of 
transition. The different socialist systems which, up to this time, have 
been discussed amongst them, no longer suffice to them; and it must 
be confessed, take all French systematic Socialism together, and 
there is not much in it of a very revolutionary nature. On the other 
hand the people, so many times deceived by their chiefs, have such a 
deep distrust towards all men who ever have acted as their 
leaders—not excepting even Barbes or Blanqui 51—that they are 
resolved not to make any movement in order to bring any of these 
leaders into office. Thus the whole working-class movement is about 
to take a different, far more revolutionary aspect. The people, once 
thinking for themselves, freed from the old socialist tradition, 
will soon find socialist and revolutionary formulas which shall 
express their wants and interests far more clearly than anything 
invented for them, by authors of systems and by declaiming leaders. 
And then, arrived thus at maturity, the people will again be enabled 
to avail themselves of whatever talent and courage may be found 
among the old leaders, without becoming the tail of any of them. 
And this state of the popular mind in Paris accounts for the 
indifference displayed by the people, at the destruction of Universal 
Suffrage. The great struggle is postponed for the day in which one 
or both of the two rival powers of the state, the President or the 
Assembly, will try to overthrow the Republic. 
And this day must soon arrive. You recollect what was boasted in 
all the reactionary papers, about the cordial understanding between 
the President and the majority. Now, this cordial understanding has 
just resolved itself into the most deadly struggle between the two 
rivals.  The President has been promised, as the price for his 
adhesion to the Electoral Law, an annual addition to his salary of 
3,000,000 fr. (£120,000), which additional pay was most awfully 
wanted by the debt-ridden Louis Napoleon, besides being consid­
ered as the preliminary step to the prolongation of his presidency 
for ten years. The Electoral Law was hardly passed, when the 
ministers stepped in and asked for the three millions a year. But all 
at once the majority got frightened. They, who no longer consider 
the imbecile Louis Napoleon as a serious pretender, far from being 
ready to consent to the prolongation of his presidency, on the 
contrary want to get rid of him as soon as possible. They name a 
select committee to report on the Bill, and that committee reports 
against its adoption. Great consternation at the Elysée-National. 
Napoleon threatens abdication. A most serious collision between the 
two powers of the state is imminent. The ministry, a lot of bankers, a 
number of other "friends of order" interpose, with no result. Several 

=====第59页=====
36 Frederick Engels 
"transactions" are proposed; in vain. At last an amendment is come 
to, which seems to satisfy all parties more or less. The majority, not 
quite sure as to the consequences of a rupture with the President, 
and having, as yet, not quite concluded the compact which is to unite 
the Legitimists and Orleanists into one party, seems to recoil a little, 
and to be ready to grant the money in another shape. The discussion 
is to come off on Monday; what the result will be no one can say. 
However, a serious rupture with Napoleon is, I think, not yet in the 
line of policy of the royalist majority. 
The compact which is to unite the Orleanists and Legitimists, the 
younger and the elder branch of the house of Bourbon, is, at 
present, more than ever spoken of. It is a fact that most active 
negotiations are carried on with regard to this subject. The journey 
of Messrs. Thiers, Guizot, and others to the death-bed of Louis 
Philippe, at St. Leonards, had no other object than this. I shall not 
repeat to you the various versions as to the state of this affair, and the 
results obtained by the journey above mentioned. The daily papers 
have said more than enough about that. A fact, however, it is, that 
the Orleanist and Legitimist parties are in France pretty much 
agreed as to the conditions, and that the only difficulty is to have 
these conditions adopted by the two rival branches. Henry, Duke of 
Bordeaux,3 is to be made king, and as he has no children, the 
adoption of the Count of Paris, grandson of Louis Philippe, and heir 
to the throne by regular succession, is a matter almost of course, and 
offering no difficulties. The tricolour flag, besides, is to be 
maintained. The expected death of old Louis Philippe would 
facilitate this solution. He seems to have submitted to it, and the 
Duke of Bordeaux, too, appears to have accepted the agreement. 
The Duchess of Orleans, mother of the Count of Paris, and her 
brother-in-law, Joinville, are said to be the only obstacles in the way 
of a settlement. Louis Napoleon is to be paid off with ten millions of 
hard cash. 
There is no doubt but this, or a similar settlement, will finally be 
come to; and as soon as this is done, the direct attack upon the 
Republic will follow. In the meantime, a preliminary engagement is 
to be commenced by the councils-general of the departments. They 
have been just called together before their regular time of meeting, 
and are expected to call upon the National Assembly to revise the 
constitution. The same thing was considered last year, but thought 
premature by the councils themselves. There is no doubt they will 
show considerably more pluck this time, particularly after the 
a Count Chambord.— Ed. 

=====第60页=====
Letters from France 37 
successful blow at the Suffrage. And then the occasion will come for 
the people to show that if they abstained from showing their power 
for a time, they are not willing to be thrust back to the most infamous 
epoch of the Restoration. 
P.S.—  I have just read a small pamphlet sold at three sous 
(halfpence) and given out gratis with the République. This pamphlet 
contains the most astounding disclosures as to the plots and 
conspiracies of the royalists, as far back as the spring of 1848. It is by 
one Borme, 52 a witness examined in the trial of Barbes and Blanqui, 
at Bourges. 53 He confesses himself a paid royalist agent, who at that 
trial committed gross perjury. He contends that the whole move­
ment of the 15th of May, 1848, originated with the royalists, and 
many other things of a most curious character. There is something, 
too, which regards The Times. Borme gives name and address. He 
lives in Paris. The pamphlet is one which must call forth more 
disclosures still. I call your most earnest attention to it. 

=====第61页=====
38 
VIII 
[The Democratic Review, August 1850] 
Paris,  July 23, 1850 
As I anticipated in my last, the dotation to Louis Bonaparte 
finally passed the Assembly—in substance allowing him the sum he 
wanted, in form humiliating him deeply before the eyes of all 
France.54  The Assembly then resumed its work of repression—tak­
ing up the press law. Atrocious as this law was when produced from 
the hand of its originator, M. Baroche, it was innocent and harmless 
compared with what the spite of the majority has made it. The 
majority, in its furious and yet impotent hatred against the press, has 
dealt out its blows almost blindfolded, not caring whether it hits the 
"good" or the "bad" press. Thus the "law of hatred" has been 
enacted. The caution money is raised. The stamp is re-established on 
newspapers. An extra stamp is put upon the "roman-feuilleton", 
that part of the newspaper which is dedicated to the publication of 
novels—a measure which would be quite incomprehensible if it was 
not a reply to the election of Eugène Sue, the effect of whose socialist 
novels has not yet been forgotten by the majority. All works 
published in weekly numbers or monthly parts of less than a certain 
size, are subjected to the stamp in the same manner as newspapers. 
And lastly, every paragraph appearing in a newspaper must be 
provided with the signature of the author. 
This law, as the blind fury of the majority has made it, falls heavily, 
not only upon the socialist and republican press, but on the 
counter-revolutionary press: and perhaps far more heavily upon this 
than upon the opposition press. The names of the republican writers 
are pretty well known, and it matters little whether they sign their 
paragraphs or not; but let the Journal des Débats, the Assemblée 
nationale, the Pouvoir, the Constitutionnel, 8cc, be obliged to come out 
with the names of their contributors, and their leaders will 

=====第62页=====
Letters from France 39 
immediately lose all influence even upon their class of readers. The 
name of a great daily paper, particularly an old-established one, is, to 
respectable people, always a respectable firm; but let these firms, 
Bertin and Co., Véron and Co., Delamarre and Co., once be 
dissolved into their literary components, let that mysterious "Co." 
once decompose into venal "penny-a-liners" of old standing, who, 
for hard cash, have defended all possible causes, such as Granier de 
Cassagnac, or into foolish old women calling themselves statesmen, 
such as Capefigue, let all the little men who raise loud voices and 
spout big articles once creep out into daylight under the new law, 
and you will see what a sad figure the respectable press will make. 3 
It is true that, under the new law, by the enhanced price of 
newspapers a very numerous class of readers will be excluded from 
this mode of getting information. Both newspapers, cheap periodi­
cals, and other popular publications will be above the reach of 
numerous working-men, and particularly of the majority of the 
country-people. But the press was always an auxiliary means merely 
to agitate the peasantry; this class being far more sensible to their 
own material sufferings and to the increase of taxation than to the 
declamations of the press; and as long as the present bourgeois 
government cannot find out the means—which it never can—to 
alleviate the weight of usury and taxation upon the peasantry, as 
long will there be discontent and "revolutionary tendencies", 
manifested amongst this newly-roused class. As to the working-men 
in the towns, they cannot be entirely excluded from seeing the 
newspapers, and if cheap periodical publications are stopped, they 
will make up for that by increasing secret societies, secret debating-
clubs,  &c. But if the government, with respect to diminishing the 
number of revolutionary tracts and periodicals, have obtained some 
result, they have obtained it at the cost of ruining the whole of the 
publishing and bookselling trades; for it is impossible that these 
trades can subsist under the restrictions imposed by the new law. 
And thus this is very likely to contribute much to breaking up the 
party of order both in and out of the Assembly. 
As soon as the law on the press was voted, the Assembly proceeded 
to give Louis Napoleon another broad hint that he was not to exceed 
the limits the constitution had placed him in. The Bonapartist 
paper, Le Pouvoir, had an article commenting in not very favourable 
terms upon the Assembly. An old law of the Restoration was dug up, 
and the publisher of the Pouvoir, arraigned at the bar for breach of 
a Cf. this volume, pp. 138 and  520-21.—  Ed 

=====第63页=====
40 Frederick Engels 
privilege, and sentenced to 5,000fr. (£200)* fine, which fine was, of 
course, immediately paid.55 The penalty was not very severe, but the 
act of the Assembly was sufficiently significant. "We strike low but we 
mean to hit higher," said a member, and was loudly applauded. 
The Assembly then resolved to suspend its sitting for three 
months, from the 11th of August next. As provided by the 
constitution, it had to elect a commission of twenty-five members, 
which is to remain at Paris during the adjournment, and to watch the 
executive power.56  The chiefs of the majority, believing Louis 
Napoleon to be sufficiently humiliated, drew up a list of these 
candidates, including none but members of the majority, Orleanists, 
Moderate Legitimists, some Bonapartists, no Republicans nor 
ultra-Legitimists. But in the vote all the Bonapartists have been 
thrown out, and in their stead some Moderate Republicans and 
several ultra-Legitimists have been elected, thus again showing the 
disposition of the Assembly to have none of the coup d'état which 
Louis Napoleon is always dreaming of. b 
I do not expect that there will be anything serious until the 
experiment is made to upset the Republic; be it by the President, or 
be it by one of the royalist factions. This would, no doubt, rouse the 
people from their torpor; and this is an event which must take place 
between now and May 1852, but at what precise epoch it is 
impossible to predict.57 
Written between December 20, 1849, and Reprinted from the journal 
June 23, 1850 
Published in The Democratic Review, 
January-August 1850, marked by the 
editors in some issues (January-March, 
and May): "From Our Own 
Correspondent" 
a Cf. this volume, pp. 140 and  520-21.—  Ed. 
b Ibid., pp. 140 and  521.—  Ed. 

=====第64页=====
41 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
ANNOUNCEMENT58 
Circumstances beyond the control of the editorial board delayed 
publication of the first issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. The 
second issue will therefore appear a fortnight after the first at the 
latest, and will contain amongst others the following articles: 
1848-49. II. June 13, 1849.—III. Repercussions of June 13 on the 
Continent.—IV. Current Situation; England.59—By Karl Marx. 
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution. III. The 
Palatinate.—IV. To Die for the Fatherland.60 —By Frederick 
Engels. 
The third issue will contain among other items: 
What Is Bourgeois Property? II. Landed Property.—Lectures 
given at the German Workers' Educational Society in London,61 
by Karl Marx. 
The Last Days of the German Parliament. By W.  Wolff. 
The Financial State of Prussia, etc., etc.62 
Care will be taken that in future the paper is published between 
the first and the tenth of each month. 
The Editorial Board 
Written in late February 1850 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first. 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue time 
No. 1, January 1850, London, 
Hamburg, New York, 1850 

=====第65页=====

=====第66页=====
Sfltut 
Ytbtgttt  tow 
Aar! SR«*,?. 
185 0. 
0 « » ft » v g un* 0t  « » * 0 « » t 
M £J>u*Mtl) * Ar. 
Cover of the Atewe Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue 

=====第67页=====

=====第68页=====
KARL MARX 
THE CLASS STRUGGLES 
IN FRANCE 
1848 to 1850 

=====第69页=====
Written from January to November 1, Printed according to the journal 
1850 checked with the text of the 1895 
edition 
First published in the journal Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische 
Revue Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 5-6,. 1850 
Signed: Karl Marx 

=====第70页=====
47 
With the exception of only a few chapters, every more important 
part of the annals of the revolution from 1848 to 1849 carries the 
heading: Defeat of the Revolution! 
What succumbed in these defeats was not the revolution. It was the 
pre-revolutionary traditional appendages, results of social relation­
ships which had not yet come to the point of sharp class antag­
onisms— persons, illusions, conceptions, projects from which the 
revolutionary party before the February Revolution was not free, 
from which it could be freed not by the victory of  February,  but only by 
a series of defeats. 
In a word: the revolution made progress, forged ahead, not by its 
immediate tragi-comic achievements, but on the contrary by the 
creation of a powerful, united counter-revolution, by the creation of 
an opponent in combat with whom alone the party of insurrection 
ripened into a really revolutionary party. 
To prove this is the task of the following pages. 

=====第71页=====
48 
I 
THE DEFEAT OF JUNE 1848 
After the July Revolution,3  when the liberal banker Laffitte led his 
compère, the Duke of Orleans, in triumph to the Hôtel de Ville, he let 
fall the words: "From now on the bankers will rule." Laffitte had 
betrayed the secret of the revolution. 
It was not the French bourgeoisie that ruled under Louis Philippe, 
but one faction of it: bankers, stock-exchange kings, railway kings, 
owners of coal and iron mines and forests, a part of the land­
ed proprietors associated with them—the so-called finance aristoc­
racy. It sat on the throne, it dictated laws in the Chambers, it 
distributed public offices, from cabinet portfolios to tobacco bureau 
posts. 
The industrial bourgeoisie proper formed part of the official 
opposition, that is, it was represented only as a minority in the 
Chambers. Its opposition was expressed all the more resolutely, the 
more unalloyed the autocracy of the finance aristocracy became, and 
the more it itself imagined that its domination over the working class 
was ensured after the mutinies of 1832, 1834 and 1839, which had 
been drowned in blood.64  Grandin, Rouen manufacturer and the 
most fanatical instrument of bourgeois reaction in the Constituent as 
well as in the Legislative National Assembly, was the most violent 
opponent of Guizot in the Chamber of Deputies. Léon  Faucher,  later 
known for his impotent efforts to climb into prominence as the 
Guizot of the French counter-revolution, in the last days of Louis 
Philippe waged a war of the pen for industry against speculation and 
its train-bearer, the government. Bastiat agitated in the name of 
a Of 1830.—Ed 

=====第72页=====
The Class Struggles in France 49 
Bordeaux and the whole of wine-producing France against the 
ruling system. 
The petty  bourgeoisie  of all gradations, and the peasantry also, were 
completely excluded from political power. Finally, in the official 
opposition or entirely outside the pays légal, 3 there were the ideo­
logical representatives and spokesmen of the above classes, their 
savants, lawyers, doctors, etc., in a word: their so-called men of 
talent. 
Owing to its financial straits, the July monarchy was dependent 
from the beginning on the big bourgeoisie, and its dependence on 
the big bourgeoisie was the inexhaustible source of increasing 
financial straits. It was impossible to subordinate the administration 
of the state to the interests of national production without balancing 
the budget, without establishing a balance between state expendi­
tures and state revenues. And how was this balance to be established 
without limiting state expenditures, that is, without encroaching on 
interests which were so many props of the ruling system, and without 
redistributing taxes, that is, without shifting a considerable share of 
the burden of taxation onto the shoulders of the big bourgeoisie 
itself? 
On the contrary, the faction of the bourgeoisie that ruled and 
legislated through the Chambers had a direct interest in the 
indebtedness  of the  state.  The  state  deficit was really the main object of its 
speculation and the chief source of its enrichment. At the end of 
each year a new deficit. After the lapse of four or five years a new 
loan. And every new loan offered new opportunities to the finance 
aristocracy for defrauding the state, which was kept artificially on the 
verge of bankruptcy — it had to negotiate with the bankers under the 
most unfavourable conditions. Each new loan gave a further oppor­
tunity, that of plundering the public which had invested its capital in 
state bonds by means of stock-exchange manipulations, into the 
secrets of which the government and the majority in the Chambers 
were initiated. In general, the instability of state credit and the 
possession of state secrets gave the bankers and their associates in the 
Chambers and on the throne the possibility of evoking sudden, 
extraordinary fluctuations in the quotations of government securi­
ties, the result of which was always bound to be the ruin of a mass 
of smaller capitalists and the fabulously rapid enrichment of the big 
gamblers. As the state deficit was in the direct interest of the ruling 
faction of the bourgeoisie, it is clear why the extraordinary state 
Those enjoying the franchise.— Ed. 

=====第73页=====
50 Karl Marx 
expenditure in the last years of Louis Philippe's reign was far more 
than double the extraordinary state expenditure under Napoleon, 
indeed reached a yearly sum of nearly 400,000,000 francs, whereas 
the whole average annual export of France seldom attained a volume 
amounting to 750,000,000 francs. The enormous sums which, in this 
way, flowed through the hands of the state facilitated, moreover, 
swindling contracts for deliveries, bribery, defalcations and all kinds 
of roguery. The defrauding of the state, practised wholesale in 
connection with loans, was repeated retail in public works. What 
occurred in the relations between Chamber and Government 
became multiplied in the relations between individual departments 
and individual entrepreneurs. 
The ruling class exploited the building of railways in the same way 
as it exploited state expenditures in general and state loans. The 
Chambers piled the main burdens on the state, and secured the 
golden fruits to the speculating finance aristocracy. One recalls the 
scandals in the Chamber of Deputies, when by chance it leaked out 
that all the members of the majority, including a number of 
ministers, had been interested as shareholders in the very railway 
constructions which as legislators they caused to be carried out 
afterwards at the cost of the state. 
On the other hand, the smallest financial reform was wrecked due 
to the influence of the bankers. For example, the postal reform. 
Rothschild protested. Was it permissible for the state to curtail 
sources of revenue out of which interest was to be paid on its 
ever-increasing debt? 
The July monarchy was nothing but a joint-stock company for the 
exploitation of France's national wealth, the dividends of which 
were divided among ministers, Chambers,3 240,000 voters and 
their adherents. Louis Philippe was the director of this com­
pany—Robert Macaire65  on the throne. Trade, industry, agricul­
ture,  shipping, the interests of the industrial bourgeoisie, were 
bound to be continually endangered and prejudiced under this 
system. Cheap government, gouvernement à bon marché, was what it 
had inscribed in the July days on its banner. 
Since the finance aristocracy made the laws, was at the head of the 
administration of the state, had command of all the organised public 
authorities, dominated public opinion through the actual state of 
a The Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue had Bauern (peas­
ants).  In the Errata given by the editors of the journal this word was corrected to 
Kammern (Chambers). In the copy of the Revue with Marx's corrections Bauern was 
changed to Bankiers. — Ed. 

=====第74页=====
The Class Struggles in France 51 
affairs and through the press, the same prostitution, the same 
shameless cheating, the same mania to get rich was repeated in every 
sphere, from the Court to the Café Borgne, 3 to get rich not by 
production, but by pocketing the already available wealth of others. 
Clashing every moment with the bourgeois laws themselves, an 
unbridled assertion of unhealthy and dissolute appetites manifested 
itself,  particularly at the top of bourgeois society—lusts wherein 
wealth derived from gambling naturally seeks its satisfaction, where 
pleasure becomes crapuleux? where money, filth and blood com­
mingle. The finance aristocracy, in its mode of acquisition as well as 
in its pleasures, is nothing but the rebirth of the lumpenproletariat on the 
heights of  bourgeois  society. 
And the non-ruling factions of the French bourgeoisie cried: 
Corruption! The people cried: À bas les grands voleurs! À bas les 
assassins! 0 when in 1847, on the most prominent stages of bourgeois 
society, the same scenes were publicly enacted that regularly lead the 
lumpenproletariat to brothels, to workhouses and lunatic asylums, to 
the bar of justice, to the dungeon and to the scaffold. The industrial 
bourgeoisie saw its interests endangered, the petty bourgeoisie was 
filled with moral indignation, the imagination of the people was 
offended, Paris was flooded with pamphlets— La dynastie Rothschild, 
Les juifs rois de Vépoque, à etc. —in which the rule of the finance 
aristocracy was denounced and stigmatised with greater or 
less wit. 
Rien pour la gloire! e Glory brings no profit! La paix partout et 
toujours!* War depresses the quotations of the three and four per 
cents!  the France of the Bourse jobbers had inscribed on her banner. 
Her foreign policy was therefore lost in a series of mortifications to 
French national sentiment, which reacted all the more vigorously 
when the rape of Poland was brought to its conclusion with the 
incorporation of Cracow by Austria, and when Guizot came out 
actively on the side of the Holy Alliance in the Swiss Sonderbund 
war. 66 The victory of the Swiss liberals in this bogus war raised the 
self-respect of the bourgeois opposition in France; the bloody 
uprising of the people in Palermo worked like an electric shock on 
a Cafés of dubious character.—Ed. 
b Debauch.— Ed. 
c Down with the big thieves! Down with the assassins!  — Ed. 
d G. Dairnvaell, Rothschild f, ses valets et son peuple, Paris, 1846; and Histoire 
édifiante et curieuse de Rothschild 1 er, Roi des juifs, Paris, 1846; A. Toussenel, Les juifs, rois 
de l'époque. Histoire de la féodalité financière, T. 1-2, Paris, 1847.— Ed. 
e Nothing for  glory!  — Ed. 
Peace everywhere and  always!  — Ed. 

=====第75页=====
52 Karl Marx 
the paralysed masses of the people and awoke their great 
revolutionary memories and passions.* 
The eruption of the general discontent was finally accelerated and 
the mood for revolt ripened by two economic world events. 
The potato blight and the  crop  failures of 1845 and 1846 increased 
the general ferment among the people. The dearth of 1847 called 
forth bloody conflicts in France as well as on the rest of the 
Continent. As against the shameless orgies of the finance aristocracy, 
the struggle of the people for the prime necessities of life! At 
Buzançais, hunger rioters executed 67; in Paris, oversatiated  escrocs^ 
snatched from the courts by the royal family! 
The second great economic event which hastened the outbreak of 
the revolution was a general commercial and industrial crisis in 
England. Already heralded in the autumn of 1845 by the wholesale 
reverses of the speculators in railway shares, staved off during 1846 
by a number of incidents such as the impending abolition of the corn 
duties, the crisis finally burst in the autumn of 1847 with the 
bankruptcy of the London wholesale grocers, on the heels of which 
followed the insolvencies of the land banks and the closing of the 
factories in the English industrial districts. The after-effect of this 
crisis on the Continent had not yet spent itself when the February 
Revolution broke out. 
The devastation of trade and industry caused by the economic 
epidemic made the autocracy of the finance aristocracy still more 
unbearable. Throughout the whole of France the bourgeois 
opposition agitated at  banquets  for an  electoral reform  which should win 
for it the majority in the Chambers and overthrow the Ministry of 
the Bourse. In Paris the industrial crisis had, moreover, the 
particular result of throwing a multitude of manufacturers and big 
traders, who under the existing circumstances could no longer do 
any business in the foreign market, onto the home market. They set 
up large establishments, the competition of which ruined the small 
épiciers and boutiquiers* en masse. Hence the innumerable bankrupt­
cies among this section of the Paris bourgeoisie, and hence their 
revolutionary action in February. It is well known how Guizot and 
the Chambers answered the reform proposals with an unambiguous 
* Annexation of Cracow by Austria in agreement with Russia and Prussia on 
November 11, 1846.—Swiss Sonderbund war: November 4 to 28, 1847.—Rising in 
Palermo: January 12, 1848; at the end of January, nine days' bombardment of the 
town by the Neapolitans.— Note by Engels to the edition of 1895. 
a Swindlers.— Ed. 
Grocers and shopkeepers.— Ed. 

=====第76页=====
The Class Struggles in France 53 
challenge, how Louis Philippe too late resolved on a ministry led by 
Barrot, how things went as far as hand-to-hand fighting between the 
people and the army, how the army was disarmed as a result 
of the passive conduct of the National Guard, how the July mon­
archy had to give way to a Provisional Government. 
The Provisional Government which emerged from the February 
barricades necessarily mirrored in its composition the different 
parties which shared in the victory. It could not be anything but a 
compromise between the different  classes  which together had overturned 
the July throne, but whose interests were mutually antagonistic. The 
great majority of its members consisted of representatives of the 
bourgeoisie. The republican petty bourgeoisie was represented by 
Ledru-Rollin and Flocon, the republican bourgeoisie by the people 
from the National, 3 the dynastic opposition by Crémieux, Dupont de 
l'Eure, etc. 68 The working class had only two representatives, Louis 
Blanc and Albert. Finally, Lamartine in the Provisional Government: 
this essentially represented no real interest, no definite 
class;  for such was the February Revolution, the general upris­
ing with its illusions, its poetry, its imaginary content and 
its rhetoric. Moreover, the spokesman of the February Revolution, 
according to both his position and his views, belonged to the 
bourgeoisie. 
If Paris, as a result of political centralisation, rules France, the 
workers, in moments of revolutionary earthquakes, rule Paris. The 
first act in the life of the Provisional Government was an attempt to 
escape from this overpowering influence by an appeal from 
intoxicated Paris to sober France. Lamartine disputed the right of 
the barricade fighters to proclaim a republic on the ground that only 
the majority of Frenchmen had that right; they must await the 
majority vote, the Paris proletariat must not besmirch its victory by a 
usurpation. 0 The bourgeoisie allows the proletariat only  one  usurpa­
tion— that of fighting. 
Up to noon of February 25 the republic had not yet been pro­
claimed; on the other hand, all the ministries had already been 
shared out among the bourgeois elements of the Provisional Gov­
ernment and among the generals, bankers and lawyers of the Na­
tional But the workers were determined this time not to put up 
with any fraud like that of July 1830. They were ready to take up 
the fight anew and to get a republic by force of arms. With this 
a A. Marrast and L. A. Gamier-Pages.— Ed. 
b From Lamartine's speech made in the Chamber of Deputies on February 24, 
1848.  Marx gives a summary of this speech.— Ed. 
4-1124 

=====第77页=====
54 Karl Marx 
message, Raspail betook himself to the Hôtel de Ville. In the name of 
the Paris proletariat he commanded the Provisional Government to 
proclaim a republic; if this order of the people were not fulfilled 
within two hours, he would return at the head of 200,000 men. The 
bodies of the fallen were scarcely cold, the barricades were not yet 
cleared away, the workers not yet disarmed, and the only force which 
could be opposed to them was the National Guard. Under these 
circumstances the doubts born of considerations of state policy and 
the juristic scruples of conscience entertained by the Provisional 
Government suddenly vanished. The time limit of two hours had not 
yet expired when all the walls of Paris were resplendent with the 
historic, momentous words: 
République française! Liberté,  ' Egalité, Fraternité! 
Even the memory of the limited aims and motives which drove the 
bourgeoisie into the February Revolution was extinguished by the 
proclamation of the republic on the basis of universal suffrage. 
Instead of only a few factions of the bourgeoisie, all classes of French 
society were suddenly hurled into the orbit of political power, forced 
to leave the boxes, the stalls and the gallery and to act in person upon 
the revolutionary stage! With the constitutional monarchy vanished 
also the semblance of a state power independently confronting 
bourgeois society as well as the whole series of subordinate struggles 
which this semblance of power called forth! 
By dictating the republic to the Provisional Government and 
through the Provisional Government to the whole of France, the 
proletariat stepped into the foreground forthwith as an independent 
party, but at the same time challenged the whole of bourgeois France 
to enter the lists against it. What it won was the terrain for the fight 
for its revolutionary emancipation, but by no means this emancipa­
tion itself. 
The first thing that the February republic had to do was, rather, to 
complete the rule of the bourgeoisie by allowing, beside the finance 
aristocracy, all the propertied classes to enter the orbit of political 
power. The majority of the great landowners, the Legitimists,69  were 
emancipated from the political nullity to which they had been 
condemned by the July monarchy. Not for nothing had the  Gazette  de 
France agitated in common with the opposition papers; not for 
nothing had La Rochejaquelein taken the side of the revolution in 
the session of the Chamber of Deputies on February 24. The 
nominal proprietors, who form the great majority of the French 
people, the peasants, were put by universal suffrage in the position of 
arbiters of the fate of France. The February republic finally brought 

=====第78页=====
The Class Struggles in France 55 
the rule of the bourgeoisie clearly into view, since it struck off the 
crown behind which capital kept itself concealed. 
Just as the workers in the July days had fought for and won the 
bourgeois monarchy, so in the February days they fought for and won 
the bourgeois  republic.  Just as the July monarchy had to proclaim itself 
a monarchy surrounded by republican institutions, so the February 
republic was forced to proclaim itself a republic surrounded by social 
institutions. The Paris proletariat  compelled  this concession, too. 
Marche, a worker, dictated the decree 3 by which the newly formed 
Provisional Government pledged itself to guarantee the workers a 
livelihood by means of labour, to provide work for all citizens, etc. 
And when, a few days later, it forgot its promises and seemed to have 
lost sight of the proletariat, a mass of 20,000 workers marched on the 
Hôtel de Ville with the cry: Organisation of labour! Formation of a 
special Ministry of Labour! Reluctantly and after long debate, the 
Provisional Government nominated a permanent special com­
mission b to find means of improving the lot of the working 
classes! It consisted of delegates from the corporations of Paris 
artisans and was presided over by Louis Blanc and Albert. The 
Luxembourg palace was assigned to it as its meeting place. In this 
way the representatives of the working class were banished from the 
seat of the Provisional Government, the bourgeois part of which 
retained the real state power and the reins of administration 
exclusively in its hands; and side  by side with the ministries of Finance, 
Trade, and Public Works, side  by side with the Bank and the Bourse, 
there arose a socialist synagogue whose high priests, Louis Blanc and 
Albert, had the task of discovering the promised land, of preaching 
the new gospel and of providing work for the Paris proletariat. 
Unlike any profane state power, they had no budget, no executive 
authority at their disposal. They were supposed to break the pillars 
of bourgeois society by dashing their heads against them. While the 
Luxembourg sought the philosopher's stone, in the Hôtel de Ville 
they minted the current coinage. 
And yet the claims of the Paris proletariat, so far as they went 
beyond the bourgeois republic, could win no other existence than the 
nebulous one of the Luxembourg. 
In common with the bourgeoisie the workers had made the 
February Revolution, and alongside the bourgeoisie they sought to 
assert their interests, just as they had installed a worker in the Provi­
sional Government itself alongside the bourgeois majority. 
a The decree on the right to work adopted on February 25, 1848.— Ed. 
b Commission du gouvernement pour les travailleurs. — Ed. 
4* 

=====第79页=====
56 Karl Marx 
Organisation of labour!  But wage labour, that is the existing, the bour­
geois organisation of labour. Without it there is no capital, no bour­
geoisie, no bourgeois society. A special Ministry of Labour! But the 
ministries of Finance, of Trade, of Public Works—are not these 
the bourgeois Ministries of Labour? And alongside these a proletarian 
Ministry of Labour had to be a ministry of impotence, a ministry of 
pious wishes, a Luxembourg Commission. Just as the workers 
thought they would be able to emancipate themselves side by side 
with the bourgeoisie, so they thought they would be able to 
consummate a proletarian revolution within the national walls of 
France, side by side with the remaining bourgeois nations. But 
French relations of production are conditioned by the foreign trade 
of France, by her position on the world market and the laws  thereof; 
how was France to break them without a European revolutionary 
war, which would strike back at the despot of the world market, 
England? 
As soon as it has risen up, a class in which the revolutionary 
interests of society are concentrated finds the content and the 
material for its revolutionary activity directly in its own situation: 
foes to be laid low, measures dictated by the needs of the struggle to 
be taken; the consequences of its own deeds drive it on. It makes no 
theoretical inquiries into its own task. The French working class had 
not attained this level; it was still incapable of accomplishing its own 
revolution. 
The development of the industrial proletariat is, in general, 
conditioned by the development of the industrial bourgeoisie. Only 
under its rule does the proletariat gain that extensive national 
existence which can raise its revolution to a national one, and does it 
itself create the modern means of production, which become just so 
many means of its revolutionary emancipation. Only its rule tears up 
the material roots of feudal society and levels the ground on which 
alone a proletarian revolution is possible. French industry is more 
developed and the French bourgeoisie more revolutionary than that 
of the rest of the Continent. But was not the February Revolution 
levelled directly against the finance aristocracy? This fact proved that 
the industrial bourgeoisie did not rule France. The industrial 
bourgeoisie can rule only where modern industry shapes all property 
relations to suit  itself,  and industry can win this power only where it 
has conquered the world market, for national bounds are inadequate 
for its development. But French industry, to a great extent, main­
tains its command even of the national market only through a more 
or less modified system of prohibitive tariffs. While, therefore, 
the French proletariat, at the moment of a revolution, possesses in 

=====第80页=====
The Class Struggles in France 57 
Paris real power and influence which spur it on to an effort beyond 
its means, in the rest of France it is crowded into separate, scattered 
industrial centres, being almost lost in the superior numbers of 
peasants and petty bourgeois. The struggle against capital in its 
developed, modern form, in its decisive aspect, the struggle of the 
industrial wage-worker against the industrial bourgeois, is in France 
a partial phenomenon, which after the February days could so much 
the less supply the national content of the revolution, since the 
struggle against capital's secondary modes of exploitation, that of the 
peasant against usury and mortgages or of the petty bourgeois 
against the wholesale dealer, banker and manufacturer, in a word, 
against bankruptcy, was still hidden in the general uprising against 
the finance aristocracy. Nothing is more understandable, then, than 
that the Paris proletariat sought to assert its own interests side by 
side with the interests of the bourgeoisie, instead of enforc­
ing them as the revolutionary interests of society  itself,  that it let 
the red flag be dipped before the  tricolour.™  The French workers 
could not take a step forward, could not touch a hair of the bourgeois 
order, until the course of the revolution had aroused the mass of the 
nation, the peasants and petty bourgeois, standing between the 
proletariat and the bourgeoisie, against this order, against the rule of 
capital, and had forced them to attach themselves to the proletarians 
as their protagonists. The workers could buy this victory only 
through the tremendous defeat in June. 
The Luxembourg Commission, this creation of the Paris workers, 
must be given the credit of having disclosed, from a Europe-wide 
tribune, the secret of the revolution of the nineteenth century: the 
emancipation of the proletariat. The Moniteur blushed when it had to 
propagate officially the "wild ravings" 71 which up to that time lay 
buried in the apocryphal writings of the Socialists and reached the 
ear of the bourgeoisie only from time to time as remote, half 
terrifying, half ludicrous legends. Europe awoke astonished from its 
bourgeois doze. Therefore, in the minds of the proletarians, who 
confused the finance aristocracy with the bourgeoisie in general; in 
the imagination of the good old republicans who denied the very 
existence of classes or, at most, admitted them as a result of the con­
stitutional monarchy; in the hypocritical phrases of the factions of 
the bourgeoisie which until then had been excluded from power, 
the rule of the  bourgeoisie  was abolished with the introduction of the 
republic. At that time all the royalists were transformed into 
republicans and all the millionaires of Paris into workers. The phrase 
which corresponded to this imaginary abolition of class relations was 
fraternité, universal fraternisation and brotherhood. This pleasant 

=====第81页=====
58 Karl Marx 
dissociation from class antagonisms, this sentimental reconciliation 
of contradictory class interests, this visionary elevation above the 
class struggle, this fraternité was the real catchword of the February 
Revolution. The classes were divided by a mere misunderstanding 
and Lamartine baptised the Provisional Government of February 24 
"un gouvernement qui suspende ce malentendu  terrible  qui existe entre 
les différentes classes". 3 The Paris proletariat revelled in this mag­
nanimous intoxication of fraternity. 
The Provisional Government, on its part, once it was compelled to 
proclaim the republic, did everything to make it acceptable to the 
bourgeoisie and to the provinces. The bloody terror of the first 
French republic was disavowed by the abolition of the death penalty 
for political offences; the press was opened to all opinions; the army, 
the courts, the administration remained with a few exceptions in the 
hands of their old dignitaries; none of the July monarchy's great 
offenders was brought to book. The bourgeois republicans of the 
National amused themselves by exchanging monarchist names and 
costumes for old republican ones. To them the republic was only a 
new ball dress for the old bourgeois society. The young republic 
sought its chief merit not in frightening, but rather in constantly 
taking fright  itself,b  and in winning existence and disarming 
resistance by easy compliance and non-resistance. At home to the 
privileged classes, abroad to the despotic powers, it was loudly 
announced that the republic was of a peaceful nature. Live and 
let live was its professed motto. What is more, shortly after the 
February Revolution the Germans, Poles, Austrians, Hungarians 
and Italians revolted, each people in accordance with its im­
mediate situation. Russia and England—the latter itself agitated, 
the former cowed—were not prepared. The republic, therefore, 
had no national enemy to face. Consequently, there were no great 
foreign complications which could fire the energies, hasten the 
revolutionary process, drive the Provisional Government forward or 
throw it overboard. The Paris proletariat, which looked upon the 
republic as its own creation, naturally acclaimed each act of the 
Provisional Government which facilitated the firm emplacement of 
the latter in bourgeois society. It willingly allowed itself to be 
a "A government that removes this terrible misunderstanding which exists  between  the 
different classes." (From Lamartine's speech made in the Chamber of Deputies on 
February 24, 1848. Italics by Marx.)— Ed. 
b In his copy of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Revue Engels changed the words 
beständig zu erschrecken (constantly taking fright) to anständig zu erscheinen (looking 
inoffensive).—-Ed. 

=====第82页=====
The Class Struggles in France 59 
employed on police service by Caussidière in order to protect 
property in Paris, just as it allowed Louis Blanc to arbitrate wage 
disputes between workers and masters. It made it a point d'honneur 
to preserve the bourgeois honour of the republic unblemished in 
the eyes of Europe. 
The republic encountered no resistance either abroad or at home. 
This disarmed it. Its task was no longer the revolutionary trans­
formation of the world, but consisted only in adapting itself to the 
relations of bourgeois society. Concerning the fanaticism with 
which the Provisional Government undertook this task there is no 
more eloquent testimony than its financial measures. 
Public credit and private credit were naturally shaken. Public credit 
rests on confidence that the state will allow itself to be exploited by 
the wolves of finance. But the old state had vanished and the 
revolution was directed above all against the finance aristocracy. The 
tremors of the last European commercial crisis had not yet ceased. 
Bankruptcy still followed bankruptcy. 
Private credit was therefore paralysed, circulation restricted, 
production at a standstill before the February Revolution broke out. 
The revolutionary crisis increased the commercial crisis. And if 
private credit rests on confidence that bourgeois production in the 
entire scope of its relations, that the bourgeois order, will not be 
touched, will remain inviolate, what effect must a revolution have 
had which questioned the basis of bourgeois production, the eco­
nomic slavery of the proletariat, which set up against the Bourse the 
sphinx of the Luxembourg? The raising up of the proletariat is the 
abolition of bourgeois credit; for it is the abolition of bourgeois 
production and its order. Public credit and private credit are the 
economic thermometer by which the intensity of a revolution can be 
measured. The more  they  fall, the more the fervour and generative  power of 
the revolution rises. 
The Provisional Government wanted to strip the republic of its 
anti-bourgeois appearance. And so it had, above all, to try to peg the 
exchange value of this new form of state, its quotation on the Bourse. 
Private credit necessarily rose again, together with the current 
Bourse quotation of the republic. 
In order to allay the very suspicion that it would not or could not 
honour the obligations assumed by the monarchy, in order to build 
up confidence in the republic's bourgeois morality and capacity to 
pay, the Provisional Government took refuge in braggadocio as 
undignified as it was childish. In advance of the legal date of payment 
it paid out the interest on the 5 per cent, 4l/2 per cent and 4 per cent 
bonds to the state creditors. The bourgeois aplomb, the  self-

=====第83页=====
60 Karl Marx 
assurance of the capitalists, suddenly awoke when they saw the 
anxious haste with which it was sought to buy their confidence. 
The financial embarrassment, of the Provisional Government was 
naturally not lessened by a theatrical stroke which robbed it of its 
stock of ready cash. The financial pinch could no longer be 
concealed and petty  bourgeois,  domestic servants and  workers  had to pay 
for the pleasant surprise which had been prepared for the state 
creditors. 
It was announced that no money could be drawn on savings 
bank accounts for amounts of over one hundred francs. The sums 
deposited in the savings banks were confiscated and by decree 
transformed into an irredeemable state debt. This embittered the 
already hard pressed petty bourgeois against the republic. Since he 
received state debt certificates in place of his savings bank books, he 
was forced to go to the Bourse in order to sell them and thus deliver 
himself directly into the hands of the Bourse jobbers, against whom 
he had made the February Revolution. 
The finance aristocracy, which ruled under the July monarchy, 
had its high church in the Bank Just as the Bourse governs state 
credit, the Bank governs commercial credit. 
Directly threatened not only in its rule but in its very existence by 
the February Revolution, the Bank tried from the outset to discredit 
the republic by making the lack of credit general. It suddenly 
stopped the credits of the bankers, the manufacturers and the 
merchants. As it did not immediately call forth a counter-revolution, 
this manoeuvre necessarily reacted on the Bank  itself.  The capitalists 
drew out the money which they had deposited in the vaults of the 
Bank. The possessors of bank-notes rushed to the pay office in order 
to exchange them for gold and silver. 
The Provisional Government could have forced the* Bank into 
bankruptcy without forcible interference, in a legal manner; it would 
only have had to remain passive and leave the Bank to its fate. The 
bankruptcy of the Bank would have been the deluge which in a trice 
would have swept from French soil the finance aristocracy, the most 
powerful and dangerous enemy of the republic, the golden pedestal 
of the July monarchy. And once the Bank was bankrupt, the 
bourgeoisie itself would have had to regard it as a last desperate 
attempt at rescue, if the government had formed a national bank and 
subjected national credit to the control of the nation. 
The Provisional Government, on the contrary, fixed a compulsory 
quotation for the notes of the Bank. It did more. It transformed all 
provincial banks into branches of the Banque de  France  and allowed it 
to cast its net over the whole of France. Later it pledged the state 

=====第84页=====
The Class Struggles in France 61 
forests  to the Bank as a guarantee for a loan that it contracted from it. 
In this way the February Revolution directly strengthened and 
enlarged the bankocracy which it should have overthrown. 
Meanwhile the Provisional Government was writhing under the 
incubus of a growing deficit. In vain it begged for patriotic sacrifices. 
Only the workers threw it their alms. Recourse had to be had to a 
heroic measure, to the imposition of a new tax. But who was to be 
taxed? The Bourse wolves, the,bank kings, the state creditors, the 
rentiers, the industrialists? That was not the way to ingratiate the 
republic with the bourgeoisie. That would have meant, on the one 
hand, to endanger state credit and commercial credit, while, on the 
other, attempts were made to purchase them with such great 
sacrifices and humiliations. But someone had to fork out the cash. 
Who was sacrificed to bourgeois credit? Jacques le bonhomme, the 
peasant. 
The Provisional Government imposed an additional tax of 45 
centimes in the franc on the four direct taxes. The government press 
cajoled the Paris proletariat into believing that this tax would fall 
chiefly on the big landed proprietors, on the possessors of the 
milliard granted by the Restoration.72 But in truth it hit the peasant 
class  above all, that is, the large majority of the French people. They 
had to pay the costs of the February Revolution; in them the 
counter-revolution gained its main material. The 45 centimes tax was 
a question of life and death for the French peasant; he made it a 
life-and-death question for the republic. From that moment the 
republic meant to the French peasant the 45 centimes tax, and he saw 
in the Paris proletariat the spendthrift who did himself well at his 
expense. 
Whereas the Revolution of 1789 began by shaking the feudal 
burdens off the peasants, the Revolution of 1848 announced itself to 
the rural population by the imposition of a new tax, in order not to 
endanger capital and to keep its state machine going. 
There was only one means by which the Provisional Government 
could set aside all these inconveniences and jerk the state out of its 
old rut—a declaration of state bankruptcy. Everyone recalls how 
Ledru-Rollin in the National Assembly subsequently proclaimed 
with what virtuous indignation he repudiated this presumptuous 
proposal of the Bourse wolf Fould,a now French Finance Minister. 
Fould had handed him the apple from the tree of knowledge. 
a From Ledru-Rollin's speech delivered in the Constituent Assembly on April 21, 
1849.—  Ed. 

=====第85页=====
62 Karl Marx 
By honouring the bills drawn on the state by the old bourgeois 
society, the Provisional Government succumbed to the latter. It had 
become the hard pressed debtor of bourgeois society instead of 
confronting it as the pressing creditor that had to collect the 
revolutionary debts of many years. It had to consolidate the shaky 
bourgeois relationships in order to fulfil obligations which are only 
to be fulfilled within these relationships. Credit became a condition 
of life for it, and the concessions to the proletariat, the promises 
made to it, became so many fetters which had to be struck off. The 
emancipation of the workers—even as a phrase—became an unbear­
able danger to the new republic, for it was a standing protest against 
the restoration of credit, which rests on undisturbed and untroubled 
recognition of the existing economic class relations. Therefore, it was 
necessary to have done with the workers. 
The February Revolution had cast the army out of Paris. The 
National Guard, that is, the bourgeoisie in its different gradations, 
constituted the sole power. Alone, however, it did not feel itself a 
match for the proletariat. Moreover, it was forced gradually and 
piecemeal to open its ranks and admit armed proletarians, albeit 
after the most tenacious resistance and after setting up a hundred 
different obstacles. There consequently remained but one way out: to 
play off one part of the proletariat against the other. 
For this purpose the Provisional Government formed 24 battalions 
of Mobile Guards, each a thousand strong, composed of young men 
from 15 to 20 years.73  They belonged for the most part to the 
lumpenproletariat, which in all big towns forms a mass sharply 
differentiated from the industrial proletariat, a recruiting ground 
for thieves and criminals of all kinds, living on the crumbs of society, 
people without a definite trade, vagabonds, gens sans  feu et sans aveu, 
varying according to the degree of civilisation of the nation to which 
they belong, but never renouncing their lazzaroni 74 character; at the 
youthful age at which the Provisional Government recruited them, 
thoroughly malleable, as capable of the most heroic deeds and the 
most exalted sacrifices as of the basest banditry and the foulest 
corruption. The Provisional Government paid them 1 franc 50 cen­
times a day, that is, it bought them. It gave them their own uniform, 
that is, it made them outwardly distinct from the blouse-wearing 
workers. In part it had assigned them officers from the standing 
army as leaders; in part they themselves elected young sons of the 
bourgeoisie whose rodomontades about death for the fatherland 
and devotion to the republic captivated them. 
And so the Paris proletariat was confronted with an army, drawn 
from its own midst, of 24,000 young, strong, foolhardy men. It gave 

=====第86页=====
The Class Struggles in France 63 
cheers for the Mobile Guard on its marches through Paris. It 
acknowledged it to be its foremost fighters on the barricades. It 
regarded it as the proletarian guard in contradistinction to the 
bourgeois National Guard. Its error was pardonable. 
Besides the Mobile Guard, the government decided to rally round 
itself an army of industrial workers. A hundred thousand workers, 
thrown on the streets by the crisis and the revolution, were enrolled 
by the Minister Marie in so-called national ateliers. Under this 
grandiose name was hidden nothing else than the employment of the 
workers on tedious, monotonous, unproductive  earthworks  at a wage 
of 23 sous. English workhouses75 in the open—that is what these 
national ateliers were. The Provisional Government believed that it 
had formed, in them, a second proletarian army against the workers 
themselves. This time the bourgeoisie was mistaken in the national 
ateliers, just as the workers were mistaken in the Mobile Guard. It 
had created an army for mutiny. 
But one purpose was achieved. 
National ateliers was the name of the people's workshops, which 
Louis Blanc preached in the Luxembourg palace. Marie's ateliers, 
devised in direct antagonism to the Luxembourg, offered occasion, 
thanks to the common label, for a plot of errors worthy of the 
Spanish comedy of servants. The Provisional Government itself 
surreptitiously spread the report that these national  ateliers  were the 
invention of Louis Blanc, and this seemed the more plausible because 
Louis Blanc, the prophet of the national  ateliers,  was a member of the 
Provisional Government. And in the half naive, half intentional 
confusion of the Paris bourgeoisie, in the artificially moulded 
opinion of France, of Europe, these workhouses were the first 
realisation of socialism, which was put in the pillory with them. 
In their appellation, though not in their content, the national 
ateliers were the embodied protest of the proletariat against 
bourgeois industry, bourgeois credit and the bourgeois republic. 
The whole hate of the bourgeoisie was, therefore, turned upon 
them. It had found in them, simultaneously, the point against which 
it could direct the attack, as soon as it was strong enough to break 
openly with the February illusions. All the discontent, all the 
ill-humour of the petty bourgeois too was directed against these 
national ateliers, the common target. With real fury they reckoned up 
the sums that the proletarian loafers swallowed up, while their own 
situation was becoming daily more unbearable. A state pension for 
sham labour, so that's socialism! they grumbled to themselves. They 
sought the reason for their misery in the national ateliers, the 
declamations of the Luxembourg, the processions of the workers 

=====第87页=====
64 Karl Marx 
through Paris. And no one was more fanatic about the alleged 
machinations of the Communists than the petty bourgeoisie, who 
hovered hopelessly on the brink of bankruptcy. 
Thus in the imminent skirmish between bourgeoisie and pro­
letariat, all the advantages, all the decisive posts, all the middle strata 
of society were in the hands of the bourgeoisie, at the same time as 
the waves of the February Revolution rose high over the whole 
Continent, and each new post brought a new bulletin of revolution, 
now from Italy, now from Germany, now from the remotest parts of 
South-Eastern Europe, and maintained the general ecstasy of the 
people, giving it constant testimony of a victory that it had already 
forfeited. 
March 17 and April 16 were the first skirmishes in the big class 
struggle, which the bourgeois republic hid under its wings. 
March 17 revealed the ambiguous situation of the proletariat, 
which permitted of no decisive act. Its demonstration originally 
pursued the purpose of pushing the Provisional Government back 
onto the path of revolution, of effecting the exclusion of its 
bourgeois members, according to circumstances, and of compelling 
the postponement of the election days for the National Assembly and 
the National Guard.76  But on March 16 the bourgeoisie represented 
in the National Guard staged a hostile demonstration against the 
Provisional Government. With the cry: A bas Ledru-Rollin! a it surged 
to the Hôtel de Ville. And the people were forced, on March 17, to 
shout: Long live Ledru-Rollin! Long live the Provisional Govern­
ment! They were forced to take sides against the bourgeoisie in 
support of the bourgeois republic, which seemed to them to be in 
danger. They strengthened the Provisional Government, instead of 
subordinating it to themselves. March 17 went off in a melodramatic 
scene, and whereas the Paris proletariat on this day once more 
displayed its giant body, the bourgeoisie both inside and outside the 
Provisional Government was all the more determined to smash it. 
April 16 was a misunderstanding engineered by the Provisional 
Government in alliance with the bourgeoisie. The workers had 
gathered in great numbers in the Field of Mars and in the 
Hippodrome to prepare their elections to the general staff of the 
National Guard. Suddenly throughout Paris, from one end to the 
other, a rumour spread as quick as lightning, to the effect, that the 
workers had met armed in the Field of Mars, under the leadership of 
Louis Blanc, Blanqui, Cabet and Raspail, in order to march thence 
on the Hôtel de Ville, overthrow the Provisional Government and 
a Down with Ledru-Rollin! — Ed. 

=====第88页=====
The Class Struggles in France 65 
proclaim a communist government. The general alarm is sound­
ed—Ledru-Rollin, Marrast and Lamartine later contended for the 
honour of having initiated this—and in an hour 100,000 men are 
under arms; the Hôtel de Ville is occupied at all points by the National 
Guard; the cry: Down with the Communists! Down with Louis Blanc, 
with Blanqui, with Raspail, with Cabet! thunders throughout Paris. 
Innumerable deputations pay homage to the Provisional Govern­
ment, all ready to save the fatherland and society. When the workers 
finally appear before the Hôtel de Ville, in order to hand over to the 
Provisional Government a patriotic collection which they had made 
in the Field of Mars, they learn to their amazement that bourgeois 
Paris had defeated their shadow in a very carefully calculated sham 
battle. The terrible attempt of April 16 furnished the excuse for 
recalling the army to Paris—the real purpose of the clumsily staged 
comedy — and for the reactionary federalist demonstrations in the 
provinces. 
On May 4 the National Assembly* the result of the direct general 
elections, convened. Universal suffrage did not possess the magic 
power which republicans of the old school had ascribed to it. They 
saw in the whole of France, at least in the majority of Frenchmen, 
citoyens with the same interests, the same understanding, etc. This 
was their cult of the people. Instead of their imaginary people, the 
elections brought the real people to the light of day, that is, 
representatives of the different classes into which it falls. We have 
seen why peasants and petty bourgeois had to vote under the 
leadership of a bourgeoisie spoiling for a fight and of big landowners 
frantic for restoration. But if universal suffrage was not the 
miracle-working magic wand for which the republican worthies had 
taken it, it possessed the incomparably higher merit of unchaining 
the class struggle, of letting the various middle strata of bourgeois 
society rapidly get over their illusions and disappointments, of 
tossing all the sections of the exploiting class at one throw to the apex 
of the state, and thus tearing from them their deceptive mask, 
whereas the monarchy with its property qualifications only let certain 
factions of the bourgeoisie compromise themselves, allowing the 
others to lie hidden behind the scenes and surrounding them with 
the halo of a common opposition. 
In the Constituent National Assembly, which met on May 4, the 
bourgeois republicans, the republicans of the National, had the upper 
hand. Even Legitimists and Orleanists77 at first dared to show 
Here and below (up to p. 94) the reference is to the Constituent National 
Assembly which was in office between May 4, 1848, and May 1849.— Ed. 

=====第89页=====
66 Karl Marx 
themselves only under the mask of bourgeois republicanism. The 
fight against the proletariat could be undertaken only in the name of 
the republic. 
The republic dates from May 4, not from February 25, that is, the 
republic recognised by the French people; it is not the republic which 
the Paris proletariat thrust upon the Provisional Government, not 
the republic with social institutions, not the vision which hovered 
before the fighters on the barricades. The republic proclaimed by 
the National Assembly, the sole legitimate republic, is a republic 
which is no revolutionary weapon against the bourgeois order, but 
rather its political reconstitution, the political reconsolidation of 
bourgeois society, in a word, a bourgeois republic. This contention 
resounded from the tribune of the National Assembly, and in the 
entire republican and anti-republican bourgeois press it found its 
echo. 
And we have seen how the February republic in reality was not and 
could not be other than a bourgeois republic; how the Provisional 
Government, nevertheless, was forced by the immediate pressure of 
the proletariat to announce it as a republic with social institutions; how 
the Paris proletariat was still incapable of going beyond the 
bourgeois republic otherwise than in its fancy, in imagination; how 
everywhere it acted in its service when it really came to action; how 
the promises made to it became an unbearable danger for the new 
republic; how the whole life process of the Provisional Government 
was comprised in a continuous fight against the demands of the 
proletariat. 
In the National Assembly all France sat in judgment upon the 
Paris proletariat. The Assembly broke immediately with the social 
illusions of the February Revolution; it roundly proclaimed the 
bourgeois republic, nothing but the bourgeois republic. It at once 
excluded the representatives of the proletariat, Louis Blanc and 
Albert, from the Executive Commission 78  appointed by it; it threw 
out the proposal for a special Labour Ministry, and received with 
acclamation the statement of the Minister Trélat: "Now it is only a 
matter of leading labour back to its old conditions."* 
But all this was not enough. The February republic was won by the 
workers with the passive support of the bourgeoisie. The pro­
letarians rightly regarded themselves as the victors of February, and 
they made the arrogant claims of victors. They had to be vanquished 
a From Trélat's speech made in the Constituent Assembly on June 20, 1848. Marx 
is quoting his own article published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 29, June 29, 
1848 (see present edition, Vol. 7, p. 148).— Ed. 

=====第90页=====
The Class Struggles in France 67 
in the streets, they had to be shown that they were worsted as soon as 
they did not fight with the bourgeoisie, but against the bourgeoisie. 
Just as the February republic, with its socialist concessions, required a 
battle of the proletariat, united with the bourgeoisie, against the 
monarchy, so a second battle was necessary in order to sever the 
republic from the socialist concessions, in order to officially work out 
the bourgeois republic as dominant. The bourgeoisie had to refute, 
arms in hand, the demands of the proletariat. And the real 
birthplace of the bourgeois republic is not the February victory; it is 
the June defeat. 
The proletariat hastened the decision when, on the 15th of May, it 
pushed its way into the National Assembly, sought in vain to 
recapture its revolutionary influence and only delivered its energetic 
leaders to the jailers of the bourgeoisie.79  Il faut en finir! This 
situation must end! With this cry the National Assembly gave vent to 
its determination to force the proletariat into a decisive struggle. The 
Executive Commission issued a series of provocative decrees, such as 
that prohibiting congregations of people, 80 etc. The workers were 
directly provoked, insulted and derided from the tribune of the 
Constituent National Assembly. But the real point of the attack was, 
as we have seen, the national ateliers. The Constituent Assembly 
imperiously pointed these out to the Executive Commission, which 
only waited to hear its own plan proclaimed the command of the 
National Assembly. 
The Executive Commission began by making admission to the 
national ateliers more difficult, by turning the day wage into a piece 
wage, by banishing workers not born in Paris to Sologne, 
ostensibly for the construction of earthworks. These earthworks 
were only a rhetorical formula with which to embellish their exile, as 
the workers, returning disillusioned, announced to their comrades. 
Finally, on June 21, a decree appeared in the Moniteur which 
ordered the forcible expulsion of all unmarried workers from the 
national ateliers or their enrolment in the army. 81 
The workers were left no choice; they had to starve or take action. 
They answered on June 22 with the tremendous insurrection in 
which the first great battle was fought between the two classes that 
split modern society. It was a fight for the preservation or 
annihilation of the bourgeois order. The veil that shrouded the 
republic was torn asunder. 
It is well known how the workers, with unexampled bravery and 
ingenuity, without leaders, without a common plan, without means 
and, for the most part, lacking weapons, held in check for five days 
the army, the Mobile Guard, the Paris National Guard, and the 

=====第91页=====
68 Karl Marx 
National Guard that streamed in from the provinces. It is well known 
how the bourgeoisie compensated itself for the mortal anguish it 
suffered by unheard-of brutality, massacring over 3,000 prisoners. 
The official representatives of French democracy were steeped in 
republican ideology to such an extent that it was only some weeks 
later that the significance of the June fight began to dawn on them. 
They were stupefied by the gunpowder smoke in which their 
fantastic republic dissolved. 
The immediate impression which the news of the June defeat 
made on us, the reader will allow us to describe in the words of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung 3: 
"The Executive Committee, that last official vestige of the 
February revolution, vanished like a ghost in the face of these grave 
events. Lamartine's fireworks have turned into the incendiary 
rockets of Cavaignac. Fraternité, the brotherhood of antagonistic 
classes, one of which exploits the other, this fraternité which in 
February was proclaimed and inscribed in large letters on the 
façades of Paris, on every prison and every barracks—this fraternité 
found its true, unadulterated and prosaic expression in civil  war,  civil 
war in its most terrible aspect, the war of labour against capital. This 
brotherhood blazed in front of all the windows of Paris on the 
evening of June 25, when the Paris of the bourgeoisie held 
illuminations while the Paris of the proletariat was burning, 
bleeding, groaning in the throes of death. This brotherhood lasted 
only as long as there was a fraternity of interests between the 
bourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
"Pedants sticking to the old revolutionary tradition of 1793; 
socialist doctrinaires who begged alms for the people from the 
bourgeoisie and who were allowed to deliver lengthy sermons and 
compromise themselves so long as the proletarian lion had to be 
lulled to sleep; republicans who wanted to keep the old bourgeois 
order in toto, but without the crowned head; members of the 
dynastic opposition on whom chance imposed the task of bringing 
about the downfall of a dynasty instead of a change of government; 
legitimists, who did not want to cast off their livery but merely to 
change its style—these were the allies with whom the people had 
fought their February revolution.... 
"The February revolution was the nice revolution, the revolution 
of universal sympathies, because the contradictions which erupted 
in it against the monarchy were still undeveloped and peacefully 
Quoted from Marx's article "The June Revolution" (see present edition, Vol. 7, 
pp. 144-48).— Ed. 

=====第92页=====
The Class Struggles in France 69 
dormant, because the social struggle which formed their background 
had only achieved a nebulous existence, an existence in phrases, in 
words. The June revolution is the  ugly  revolution, the nasty revolution, 
because the phrases have given place to the real thing, because the 
republic has bared the head of the monster by knocking off the 
crown which shielded and concealed it.— Order! was Guizot's 
war-cry. Order! shouted Sébastiani, the Guizotist, when Warsaw 
became Russian. Order! shouts Cavaignac, the brutal echo of the 
French National Assembly and of the republican bourgeoisie. Order! 
thundered his grape-shot as it tore into the body of the proletariat. 
None of the numerous revolutions of the French bourgeoisie since 
1789 assailed the existing order, for they retained the class rule, the 
slavery of the workers, the  bourgeois  order, even though the political 
form of this rule and this slavery changed frequently. The June 
uprising did assail this order. Woe to the June uprising!" (JV. Rh. Z., 
June 29, 1848.) 
Woe to June! re-echoes Europe. 
The Paris proletariat was forced into the June insurrection by the 
bourgeoisie. This sufficed to mark its doom. Its immediate, avowed 
needs did not drive it to engage in a fight for the forcible overthrow 
of the bourgeoisie, nor was it equal to this task. The Moniteur had to 
inform it officially that the time was past when the republic saw any 
occasion to bow and scrape to its illusions, and only its defeat 
convinced it of the truth that the slightest improvement in its 
position remains a  Utopia  within the bourgeois republic, a Utopia that 
becomes a crime as soon as it wants to become a reality. In place of its 
demands, exuberant in form, but petty and even bourgeois still in 
content, the concession of which it wanted to wring from the 
February republic, there appeared the bold slogan of revolutionary 
struggle: Overthrow of the bourgeoisie! Dictatorship of the working 
class! 
By making its burial place the birthplace of the bourgeois republic, 
the proletariat compelled the latter to come out forthwith in its pure 
form as the state whose admitted object it is to perpetuate the rule of 
capital, the slavery of labour. Having constantly before its eyes the 
scarred, irreconcilable, invincible enemy—invincible because his 
existence is the condition of its own life—bourgeois rule, freed from 
all fetters, was bound to turn immediately into bourgeois terrorism. 
With the proletariat removed for the time being from the stage and 
bourgeois dictatorship recognised officially, the middle strata of 
bourgeois society, the petty bourgeoisie and the peasant class, had to 
adhere more and more closely to the proletariat as their position 
became more unbearable and their antagonism to the bourgeoisie 

=====第93页=====
70 Karl Marx 
more acute. Just as earlier they had to find the cause of their distress 
in its upsurge, so now in its defeat. 
If the June insurrection raised the self-assurance of the bour­
geoisie all over the Continent, and caused it to league itself openly 
with the feudal monarchy against the people, who was the first 
victim of this alliance? The Continental bourgeoisie  itself.  The 
June defeat prevented it from consolidating its rule and from 
bringing the people, half satisfied and half out of humour, to a 
standstill at the lowest stage of the bourgeois revolution. 
Finally, the defeat of June divulged to the despotic powers of 
Europe the secret that France must maintain peace abroad at any 
price in order to be able to wage civil war at home. Thus the peoples 
who had begun the fight for their national independence were 
abandoned to the superior power of Russia, Austria and Prussia, but, 
at the same time, the fate of these national revolutions was made 
subject to the fate of the proletarian revolution, and they were 
robbed of their apparent autonomy, their independence of the great 
social revolution. The Hungarian shall not be free, nor the Pole, nor 
the Italian, as long as the worker remains a slave! 
Finally, with the victories of the Holy Alliance, Europe has taken 
on a form in which every fresh proletarian upheaval in France 
directly involves a world war. The new French revolution is forced 
to leave its national soil forthwith and conquer the European terrain, 
on which alone the social revolution of the nineteenth century 
can be accomplished. 
Thus only the June defeat has created all the conditions under 
which France can seize the initiative of the European revolution. 
Only after being dipped in the blood of the June insurgents did the 
tricolour become the flag of the European revolution—the red flagl 
And we exclaim: The revolution is dead!—Long live the revolution! 

=====第94页=====
71 
H 
JUNE 13, 1849 
February 25, 1848, had granted the republic to France, June 25 
thrust the revolution upon her. And revolution, after June, meant: 
overthrow of  bourgeois  society,  whereas before February it had meant: 
overthrow of the form of government. 
The June fight had been led by the republican faction of the 
bourgeoisie; with victory political power necessarily fell to its share. 
The state of siege laid gagged Paris unresisting at its feet, and in the 
provinces there prevailed a moral state of siege, the threatening, 
brutal arrogance of victory of the bourgeoisie and the unleashed 
property fanaticism of the peasants. No danger, therefore, from 
belowl 
The collapse of the revolutionary might of the workers was 
also a collapse of the political influence of the democratic re­
publicans, that is, of the republicans in the sense of the petty 
bourgeoisie, represented in the Executive Commission by Ledru-
Rollin, in the Constituent National Assembly by the party of the 
Montagne and in the press by the Réforme. 82 Together with the 
bourgeois republicans they had conspired on April 16 against the 
proletariat, together with them they had warred against it in the June 
days.  Thus they themselves blasted the background against which 
their party stood out as a power, for the petty bourgeoisie can 
preserve a revolutionary attitude toward the bourgeoisie only as long 
as it has the backing of the proletariat. They were dismissed. The 
sham alliance concluded with them reluctantly and secretly 
during the epoch of the Provisional Government and the 
Executive Commission was openly broken by the bourgeois republi­
cans.  Spurned and repulsed as allies, they sank down to subordinate 

=====第95页=====
72 Karl Marx 
henchmen of the tricolour-men, from whom they could not wring 
any concessions, but whose domination they had to support 
whenever it, and with it the republic, seemed to be put in jeopardy by 
the anti-republican bourgeois factions. Lastly, these factions, the 
Orleanists and the Legitimists, were from the very beginning in a 
minority in the Constituent National Assembly. Before the June 
days,  they dared to react only under the mask of bourgeois 
republicanism; the June victory made for a moment the whole of 
bourgeois France greet its saviour in Cavaignac, and when, shortly 
after the June days, the anti-republican party regained independ­
ence,  the military dictatorship and the state of siege in Paris 
permitted it to put out its antennae only very timidly and cautiously. 
Since 1830, the bourgeois republican faction, in the person of its 
writers, its spokesmen, its men of talent and ambition, its deputies, 
generals, bankers and lawyers, had grouped itself round a Parisian 
journal, the National. In the provinces this journal had its branch 
newspapers. The coterie of the National was the  dynasty  of the tricolour 
republic. It immediately took possession of all state dignities, of the 
ministries, the prefecture of police, the post-office directorship, the 
positions of prefect, the higher army officers' posts now become 
vacant. At the head of the executive power stood its general, 
Cavaignac; its editor-in-chief, Marrast, became permanent President 
of the Constituent National Assembly. As master of ceremonies he at 
the same time did the honours, in his salons, of the respectable 
republic. 
Even revolutionary French writers, awed, as it were, by the 
republican tradition, have strengthened the mistaken belief that the 
royalists dominated the Constituent National Assembly. On the 
contrary, after the June days, the Constituent Assembly remained 
the exclusive representative of  bourgeois  republicanism, and it emphasised 
this aspect all the more resolutely, the more the influence of the 
tricolour republicans collapsed outside the Assembly. If the question 
was one of maintaining the form of the bourgeois republic, then the 
Assembly had the votes of the democratic republicans at its disposal; 
if one of maintaining the content, then even its mode of speech no 
longer separated it from the royalist bourgeois factions, for it is the 
interests of the bourgeoisie, the material conditions of its class rule 
and class exploitation, that form the content of the bourgeois 
republic. 
Thus it was not royalism but bourgeois republicanism that was 
realised in the life and work of this Constituent Assembly, which in 
the end did not die, nor was killed, but decayed. 
For the entire duration of its rule, as long as it gave its grand 

=====第96页=====
The Class Struggles in France 73 
performance of state on the proscenium,83 an unbroken sacrificial 
feast was being staged in the background—the continual sentencing 
by courts-martial of the captured June insurgents or their deporta­
tion without trial. The Constituent Assembly had the tact to admit 
that in the June insurgents it was not judging criminals but wiping 
out enemies. 
The first act of the Constituent National Assembly was the setting 
up of a commission of enquiry into the events of June and of May 15, 
and into the part played by the socialist and democratic party leaders 
during these days. The enquiry was directly aimed at Louis Blanc, 
Ledru-Rollin and Caussidière. The bourgeois republicans burned 
with impatience to rid themselves of these rivals. They could have 
entrusted the venting of their spleen to no more suitable subject than 
M. Odilon Barrot, the former chief of the dynastic opposition, the 
incarnation of liberalism, the nullité  grave,*  the thoroughly shallow 
person who not only had a dynasty to revenge, but even had to settle 
accounts with the revolutionists for thwarting his premiership. A 
sure guarantee of his relentlessness. This Barrot was, therefore, 
appointed chairman of the commission of enquiry, and he con­
structed a complete legal process against the February Revolution, 
which process may be summarised thus: March 17, demonstration; 
April 16, conspiracy; May 15, attempt; June 23, civil warl Why did he 
not stretch his erudite criminologist's researches as far back as 
February 24? The Journal  des Débats  answered b: February 24—that is 
the foundation of Rome. The origin of states gets lost in a myth, in 
which one may believe, but which one may not discuss. Louis Blanc 
and Caussidière were handed over to the courts. The National 
Assembly completed the work of purging itself which it had begun 
on May 15. 
The plan formed by the Provisional Government, and again taken 
up by Goudchaux, of taxing capital—in the form of a mortgage 
tax—was rejected by the Constituent Assembly; the law that limited 
the working day to ten hours was repealed; imprisonment for debt 
was once more introduced; the large section of the French 
population that can neither read nor write was excluded from jury 
service. Why not from the franchise also? Journals again had to 
deposit caution money; the right of association was restricted. 
But in their haste to give back to the old bourgeois relationships 
their old guarantees, and to wipe out every trace left behind by the 
Self-important nonentity.— Ed. 
"France. Paris, 27 août", editorial article in the Journal des Débats for August 
28, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第97页=====
74 Karl Marx 
waves of the revolution, the bourgeois republicans encountered a 
resistance which threatened them with unexpected danger. 
No one had fought more fanatically in the June days for the 
salvation of property and the restoration of credit than the Parisian 
petty bourgeois—keepers of cafés and restaurants, marchands de vins, 
small traders, shopkeepers, handicraftsmen, etc. The shopkeeper 
had pulled himself together and marched against the barricades in 
order to restore the traffic which leads from the road into the shop. 
But behind the barricade stood the customers and the debtors; 
before it the shop's creditors. And when the barricades were thrown 
down and the workers were crushed and the shopkeepers, drunk 
with victory, rushed back to their shops, they found the entrance 
barred by a saviour of property, an official agent of credit, who 
presented them with threatening notices: Overdue promissory note! 
Overdue house rent! Overdue bond! Doomed shop! Doomed 
shopkeeper! 
Salvation of  property!  But the house in which they lived was not their 
property; the shop which they kept was not their property; the 
commodities in which they dealt were not their property. Neither 
their business, nor the plate from which they ate, nor the bed on 
which they slept belonged to them any longer. It was precisely from 
them that  this property  had to  be saved—for the houseowner who let the 
house, for the banker who discounted the promissory note, for the 
capitalist who made the advances in cash, for the manufacturer who 
entrusted the sale of his commodities to these retailers, for the 
wholesale dealer who had credited the raw materials to these 
handicraftsmen. Restoration of credit! But credit, having regained 
strength, proved itself a vigorous and jealous god, for it turned 
out the debtor who could not pay out of his four walls, together 
with wife and child, surrendered his sham property to capital, and 
threw the man himself into the debtors' prison, which had once 
more reared its head threateningly over the corpses of the June 
insurgents. 
The petty bourgeois saw with horror that by striking down the 
workers they had delivered themselves without resistance into the 
hands of their creditors. Their bankruptcy, which since February 
had been dragging on in chronic fashion and had been apparently 
ignored, was openly declared after June. 
Their nominal  property  had been left unassailed as long as it was of 
consequence to drive them to the battlefield in the name of  property. 
Now that the great issue with the proletariat had been settled, the 
small matter of the épicier could be settled as well. In Paris the mass 
of overdue paper amounted to over 21,000,000 francs; in the 

=====第98页=====
The Class Struggles in France 75 
provinces to over 11,000,000. The proprietors of more than 7,000 
Paris firms had not paid their rent since February. 
While the National Assembly had instituted an enquête into the 
political guilt, going right up to February, the petty bourgeois, on 
their part, now demanded an enquête into the civil debts up to 
February 24. They assembled en masse in the Bourse hall and 
threateningly demanded, on behalf of every businessman who could 
prove that his insolvency was due solely to the stagnation caused by 
the revolution and that his business had been in good condition on 
February 24, an extension of the term of payment by order of a 
commerce court and the compulsory liquidation of creditors' claims 
in consideration of a moderate percentage payment. As a legislative 
proposal, this question was dealt with in the National Assembly in the 
form of "concordats à l'amiable". The Assembly vacillated; then it 
suddenly learnt that, at the same time at the Porte St. Denis, 
thousands of wives and children of the insurgents had prepared an 
amnesty petition. 
In the presence of the resurrected spectre of June, the petty 
bourgeoisie trembled and the Assembly retrieved its implacability. 
The concordats à l'amiable, the amicable settlement between debtor 
and creditor, was rejected in its most essential points. 
Thus,  long after the democratic representatives of the petty 
bourgeois had been repulsed within the National Assembly by the 
republican representatives of the bourgeoisie, this parliamentary 
breach received its bourgeois, its real economic meaning by the petty 
bourgeois as debtors being handed over to the bourgeois as 
creditors. A large part of the former were completely ruined and the 
remainder were allowed to continue their businesses only under 
conditions which made them absolute serfs of capital. On August 22, 
1848,  the National Assembly rejected the concordats à l'amiable; on 
September 19, 1848, in the midst of the state of siege, Prince Louis 
Bonaparte and the prisoner of Vincennes, the Communist Raspail, 
were elected representatives of Paris. 84 The bourgeoisie, however, 
elected the Jewish money-changer and Orleanist Fould. From all 
sides at once, therefore, open declaration of war against the 
Constituent National Assembly, against bourgeois republicanism, 
against Cavaignac. 
It needs no argument to show how the mass bankruptcy of the 
Paris petty bourgeois was bound to produce after-effects far 
transcending the circle of its immediate victims, and to convulse 
bourgeois commerce once more, while the state deficit was swollen 
anew by the costs of the June insurrection, and state revenues sank 
continuously through the hold-up of production, the restricted 

=====第99页=====
76 Karl Marx 
consumption and the decreasing imports. Cavaignac and the 
National Assembly could have recourse to no other expedient than a 
new loan, which forced them still further under the yoke of the 
finance aristocracy. 
While the petty bourgeois had harvested bankruptcy and liquida­
tion by order of court as the fruit of the June victory, Cavaignac's 
Janissaries, the Mobile Guards, found their reward in the soft arms of 
the courtesans, and as "the youthful saviours of society" they 
received all kinds of homage in the salons of Marrast, the 
gentilhomme of the tricolour, who at the same time served as the 
Amphitryon and the troubadour of the respectable republic. 
Meanwhile, this social favouritism and the disproportionately higher 
pay of the Mobile Guard embittered the Army, while at the same time 
all those national illusions vanished with which bourgeois republican­
ism, through its journal, the National, had been able to attach to itself 
a part of the army and peasant class under Louis Philippe. The role 
of mediator which Cavaignac and the National Assembly played in 
North Italy in order, together with England, to betray it to 
Austria—this one day of rule destroyed eighteen years of opposition 
on the part of the National. No government was less national than 
that of the National, none more dependent on England, and, under 
Louis Philippe, the National lived by paraphrasing daily Cato's 
dictum: Carthaginem esse delendam a; none was more servile towards 
the Holy Alliance, and from a Guizot the National had demanded the 
tearing up of the Treaties of Vienna.85  The irony of history made 
Bastide, the ex-editor for foreign affairs of the National, Minister of 
Foreign Affairs of France, so that he might refute every one of his 
articles in every one of his dispatches. 
For a moment, the army and the peasant class had believed that, 
simultaneously with the military dictatorship, war abroad and 
"gloire" had been placed on the order of the day in France. But 
Cavaignac was not the dictatorship of the sabre over bourgeois 
society; he was the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie by the sabre. And 
of the soldier they now required only the gendarme. Under the stern 
features of antique-republican resignation Cavaignac concealed 
humdrum submission to the humiliating conditions of his bourgeois 
office. L'argent n'a pas de maître! Money has no master! He, as well as 
the Constituent Assembly in general, idealised this old election cry of 
the tiers état by translating it into political speech: The bourgeoisie 
has no king; the true form of its rule is the republic. 
a Carthage must be destroyed (an allusion to bellicose remarks made by the leaders 
of the National party in reference to England during the July monarchy).— Ed. 

=====第100页=====
The Class Struggles in France 77 
And the "great organic work" of the Constituent National 
Assembly consisted in working out this form, in producing a 
republican constitution. The re-christening of the Christian calendar 
as a republican one, of the saintly Bartholomew as the saindy 
Robespierre, made no more change in the wind and weather than 
this constitution made or was supposed to make in bourgeois society. 
Where it went beyond a change of  costume,  it put on record the existing 
facts.  Thus it solemnly registered the fact of the republic, the fact of 
universal suffrage, the fact of a single sovereign National Assembly 
in place of two limited constitutional chambers. Thus it registered 
and settled the fact of the dictatorship of Cavaignac by replacing 
the stationary, non-responsible, hereditary monarchy with an ambu­
latory, responsible, elective monarchy, with a quadrennial presi­
dency. Thus it elevated no less to an organic law the fact of the 
extraordinary powers with which the National Assembly, after the 
horrors of May 15 and June 25, had providently invested its 
President in the interest of its own security. The remainder of the 
constitution was a work of terminology. The royalist labels were torn 
off the mechanism of the old monarchy and republican labels stuck 
on. Marrast, former editor-in-chief of the National, now editor-in-
chief of the constitution, acquitted himself of this academic task not 
without talent. 
The Constituent Assembly resembled that Chilean official who 
wanted to regulate property relations in land more firmly by a 
cadastral survey just at the moment when subterranean rumblings 
already announced the volcanic eruption that was to pull away the 
ground from under his very feet. While in theory it demarcated the 
forms in which the rule of the bourgeoisie found republican 
expression, in reality it held its own only by the abolition of all 
formulas, by force sans  phrase,  by the state of  siege.  Two days before it 
began its work on the constitution, it proclaimed a prolongation of 
the state of siege. Formerly, constitutions had been made and 
adopted as soon as the process of social revolution had reached a 
point of rest, the newly formed class relationships had established 
themselves and the contending factions of the ruling class had had 
recourse to a compromise which allowed them to continue the 
struggle among themselves and at the same time to keep the 
exhausted masses of the people out of it. This constitution, on the 
contrary, did not sanction any social revolution; it sanctioned the 
momentary victory of the old society over the revolution. 
The first draft of the constitution,86  made before the June days, 
still contained the "droit au travail", the right to work, the first clumsy 
formula wherein the revolutionary demands of the proletariat are 

=====第101页=====
78 Karl Marx 
summarised. It was transformed into the droit à l'assistance,  the right 
to public  relief,  and what modern state does not feed its paupers in 
some way or other? The right to work is, in the bourgeois sense, an 
absurdity, a miserable, pious wish. But behind the right to work 
stands the power over capital; behind the power over capital, the 
appropriation of the means of production, their subjection to the 
associated working class and, therefore, the abolition of wage labour, 
of capital and of their mutual relations. Behind the "right to work" 
stood the June insurrection. The Constituent Assembly, which in fact 
put the revolutionary proletariat hors la loi, outside the law, had on 
principle to throw the proletariat's formula out of the constitution, the 
law of laws, had to pronounce its anathema upon the "right to 
work". But it did not stop there. As Plato banned the poets from his 
republic, 3 so it banished for ever from its republic—  the progressive  tax. 
And the progressive tax is not only a bourgeois measure, which can 
be carried out within the existing relations of production to a greater 
or less degree; it was the only means of binding the middle strata of 
bourgeois society to the "respectable" republic, of reducing the state 
debt, of holding the anti-republican majority of the bourgeoisie in 
check. 
In the matter of the  concordats  à l'amiable, the tricolour republicans 
had actually sacrificed the petty bourgeoisie to the big bourgeoisie. 
They elevated this isolated fact to a principle by the legal prohibition 
of a progressive tax. They put bourgeois reform on the same level as 
proletarian revolution. But what class then remained as the mainstay 
of their republic? The big bourgeoisie. And its mass was anti-
republican. While it exploited the republicans of the National in 
order to consolidate once again the old economic conditions, it 
thought, on the other hand, of exploiting the once more consoli­
dated social relations in order to restore the political forms that 
corresponded to them. Already at the beginning of October, 
Cavaignac felt compelled to make Dufaure and Vivien, previously 
ministers of Louis Philippe, ministers of the republic, however 
much the brainless puritans of his own party growled and 
blustered. 
While the tricolour constitution rejected every compromise with 
the petty bourgeoisie and was unable to win the attachment of any 
new social element to the new form of government, it hastened, on 
the other hand, to restore its traditional inviolability to a body that 
constituted the most hard-bitten and fanatical defender of the old 
state.  It raised the irremovability of judges, which had been questioned 
a Plato, Politico, X, Book 8.— Ed. 

=====第102页=====
The Class Struggles in France 79 
by the Provisional Government, to an organic law. The one king 
whom it had removed rose again, by the score, in these irremovable 
inquisitors of legality. 
The French press has analysed from numerous aspects the con­
tradictions of M. Marrast's constitution; for example, the coex­
istence of two sovereigns, the National Assembly and the President, 
etc., etc. 
The fundamental contradiction of this constitution, however, 
consists in the following: The classes whose social slavery the 
constitution is to perpetuate, proletariat, peasantry, petty bourgeoi­
sie, it puts in possession of political power through universal  suf­
frage. And from the class whose old social power it sanctions, the 
bourgeoisie, it withdraws the political guarantees of this power. It 
forces the political rule of the bourgeoisie into democratic condi­
tions,  which at every moment help the hostile classes to victory and 
jeopardise the very foundations of bourgeois society. From the ones 
it demands that they should not go forward from political to social 
emancipation; from the others that they should not go back from 
social to political restoration. 
These contradictions perturbed the bourgeois republicans little. 
To the extent that they ceased to be indispensable—and they were 
indispensable only as the protagonists of the old society against the 
revolutionary proletariat—they fell, a few weeks after their victory, 
from the position of a party to that of a  coterie.  And they treated the 
constitution as a big intrigue. What was to be constituted in it was, 
above all, the rule of the coterie. The President was to be a 
protracted Cavaignac; the Legislative Assembly a protracted Con­
stituent Assembly. They hoped to reduce the political power of the 
masses of the people to a semblance of power, and to be able to make 
sufficient play with this sham power itself to keep continually 
hanging over the majority of the bourgeoisie the dilemma of the 
June days: realm of the "National" or realm of anarchy. 
The work on the constitution, which was begun on September 4, 
was finished on October 23. On September 2 the Constituent 
Assembly had decided not to dissolve until the organic laws 
supplementing the constitution were enacted. Nonetheless, it now 
decided to bring to life the creation that was most peculiarly its own, 
the President, already on December 10, long before the circle of its 
own activity was closed. So sure was it of hailing, in the homunculus of 
the constitution, the son of his mother. As a precaution it was 
provided that if none of the candidates received two million votes, 
the election should pass over from the nation to the Constituent 
Assembly. 

=====第103页=====
80 Karl Marx 
Futile provisions! The first day of the realisation of the consti­
tution was the last day of the rule of the Constituent Assembly. 
In the abyss of the ballot box lay its sentence of death. It sought the 
"son of his mother" and found the "nephew of his uncle". Saul 
Cavaignac slew one million votes, but David Napoleon slew six 
million. Saul Cavaignac was beaten six times over. 
December 10, 1848, was the day of the peasant insurrection. Only 
from this day does the February of the French peasants date. The 
symbol that expressed their entry into the revolutionary movement, 
clumsily cunning, knavishly naive, doltishly sublime, a calculated 
superstition, a pathetic burlesque, a cleverly stupid anachronism, a 
world-historic piece of buffoonery and an undecipherable hiero­
glyphic for the understanding of the civilised—this symbol bore the 
unmistakable physiognomy of the class that represents barbarism 
within civilisation. The republic had announced itself to this class 
with the tax-collector; it announced itself to the republic with the 
Emperor. Napoleon was the only man who had exhaustively 
represented the interests and the imagination of the peasant class, 
newly created in 1789. By writing his name on the frontispiece of the 
republic, it declared war abroad and the enforcing of its class 
interests at home. Napoleon was to the peasants not a person but a 
programme. With banners, with beat of drums and blare of 
trumpets, they marched to the polling booths shouting: plus d'impôts, 
à bas les riches, à bas la république, vive l'Empereur! No more taxes, 
down with the rich, down with the republic, long live the Emperor! 
Behind the Emperor was hidden the peasant war. The republic that 
they voted down was the republic of the rich. 
December 10 was the coup d'état of the peasants, which overthrew 
the existing government. And from that day on, when they had 
taken a government from France and given a government to her, 
their eyes were fixed steadily on Paris. For a moment active heroes of 
the revolutionary drama, they could no longer be forced back into 
the inactive and spineless role of the chorus. 
The other classes helped to complete the election victory of the 
peasants. To the proletariat, the election of Napoleon meant the 
deposition of Cavaignac, the overthrow of the Constituent Assembly, 
the dismissal of bourgeois republicanism, the cassation of the June 
victory. To the petty bourgeoisie, Napoleon meant the rule of the 
debtor over the creditor. For the majority of the big bourgeoisie, the 
election of Napoleon meant an open breach with the faction of which 
it had had to make use, for a moment, against the revolution, but 
which became intolerable to it as soon as this faction sought to 
consolidate the position of the moment into a constitutional position. 

=====第104页=====
The Class Struggles in France 81 
Napoleon in place of Cavaignac meant to this majority the monarchy 
in place of the republic, the beginning of the royalist restoration, a 
shy hint at Orleans, the lily hidden beneath the violets.87 Lastly, the 
army voted for Napoleon against the Mobile Guard, against the peace 
idyll, for war. 
Thus it happened, as the Neue Rheinische Zeitung stated, that the 
most simple-minded man in France acquired the most multiplex 
significance. 3 Just because he was nothing, he could signify every­
thing save  himself.  Meanwhile, different as the meaning of the name 
Napoleon might be in the mouths of the different classes, with this 
name each class wrote on its ballot: Down with the party of the 
National, down with Cavaignac, down with the Constituent Assem­
bly, down with the bourgeois republic. Minister Dufaure publicly 
declared in the Constituent Assembly: December 10 is a second 
February 24. 
Petty bourgeoisie and proletariat had voted en bloc for Napoleon, in 
order to vote against Cavaignac and, by pooling their votes, to wrest 
the final decision from the Constituent Assembly. The more 
advanced sections of the two classes, however, put forward their own 
candidates. Napoleon was the collective name of all parties in 
coalition against the bourgeois republic; Ledru-Rollin and Raspail 
were the proper names, the former of the democratic petty bour­
geoisie, the latter of the revolutionary proletariat. The votes for 
Raspail—the proletarians and their socialist spokesmen declared it 
loudly—were to be merely a demonstration, so many protests 
against any presidency, that is, against the constitution  itself,  so 
many votes against Ledru-Rollin, the first act by which the proletar­
iat, as an independent political party, declared its separation from 
the democratic party. This party, on the other hand—the demo­
cratic petty bourgeoisie and its parliamentary representative, the 
Montagne —treated the candidature of Ledru-Rollin with all the 
seriousness with which it is in the habit of solemnly duping  itself. 
For the rest, this was its last attempt to set itself up as an indepen­
dent party, as against the proletariat. Not only the republican bour­
geois party, but also the democratic petty bourgeoisie and its 
Montagne were beaten on December 10. 
France now possessed a Napoleon side by side with a Montagne, 
proof that both were only the lifeless caricatures of the great realities 
In the original a pun: einfältig (simple-minded) and vielfältig (multiplex). 
Reference to the report from Paris dated December 18. It was published in the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung No. 174, December 21, 1848, and marked with Ferdinand Wolff's 
correspondent's sign; some of the facts quoted below are taken from this report.— Ed. 

=====第105页=====
82 Karl Marx 
whose names they bore. Louis Napoleon, with the emperor's hat and 
the eagle, parodied the old Napoleon no more miserably than the 
Montagne, with its phrases borrowed from 1793 and its demagogic 
poses,  parodied the old Montagne. Thus the traditional 1793 
superstition was stripped off at the same time as the traditional 
Napoleon superstition. The revolution had come into its own only 
when it had won its own, its original name, and it could do that only 
when the modern revolutionary class, the industrial proletariat, 
came dominatingly into its foreground. One can say that December 
10 dumbfounded the Montagne and caused it to grow confused in its 
own mind, if for no other reason than because that day laughingly 
cut short with a contemptuous peasant jest the classical analogy to 
the old revolution. 
On December 20, Cavaignac laid down his office and the Con­
stituent Assembly proclaimed Louis Napoleon President of the Re­
public. On December 19, the last day of its sole rule, it rejected the 
proposal of amnesty for the June insurgents. Would revoking the 
decree of June 27, under which it had condemned 15,000 insurgents 
to deportation without judicial sentence, not have meant revoking 
the June battle itself? 
Odilon Barrot, the last minister of Louis Philippe, became the first 
minister of Louis Napoleon. Just as Louis Napoleon dated his rule, 
not from December 10, but from a decree of the Senate of 1804, so 
he found a prime minister who did not date his ministry from 
December 20, but from a royal decree of February 24.88 As the 
legitimate heir of Louis Philippe, Louis Napoleon moderated the 
change of government by retaining the old ministry, which, 
moreover, had not had time to wear itself out, since it had not found 
time to embark upon life. 
The leaders of the royalist bourgeois factions advised him in this 
choice. The head of the old dynastic opposition, who had 
unconsciously effected the transition to the republicans of the Na­
tional, was still more fitted to effect with full consciousness the 
transition from the bourgeois republic to the monarchy. 
Odilon Barrot was the leader of the one old opposition party 
which, always fruitlessly struggling for the ministerial portfolio, was 
not yet used up. In rapid succession the revolution hurled all the 
old opposition parties to the top of the state, so that they would have 
to deny, to repudiate their old phrases not only in deeds but even in 
words, and might finally be flung all together, combined in a 
repulsive commixture, on the dung heap of history by the people. 
And no apostasy was spared this Barrot, this incarnation of 
bourgeois liberalism, who for eighteen years had hidden the rascally 

=====第106页=====
The Class Struggles in France 83 
vacuity of his mind behind the serious demeanour of his body.3 If, at 
certain moments, the far too striking contrast between the thistles of 
the present and the laurels of the past startled the man  himself,  one 
glance in the mirror gave him back his ministerial composure and 
human self-admiration. What beamed at him from the mirror was 
Guizot, whom he had always envied, who had always mastered him, 
Guizot  himself,  but Guizot with the Olympian forehead of Odilon. 
What he overlooked were the ears of Midas. 
The Barrot of February 24 first became manifest in the Barrot of 
December 20. Associated with him, the Orleanist and Voltairian, was 
the Legitimist and Jesuit Falloux, as Minister of Religious Affairs. 
A few days later', the Ministry of the Interior was given to Léon 
Faucher, the Malthusian. Law, religion and political economy! The 
ministry of Barrot contained all this and, in addition, a combination 
of Legitimists and Orleanists. Only the Bonapartist was lacking. 
Bonaparte still hid his longing to signify Napoleon, for Soulouque did 
not yet play Toussaint-Louverture. 
The party of the National was immediately relieved of all the 
higher posts, where it had entrenched  itself.  The Prefecture of 
Police, the office of the Director of the Post, the office of the 
Procurator-General, the Mairie of Paris, were all filled with old 
creatures of the monarchy. Changarnier, the Legitimist, received the 
unified supreme command of the National Guard of the Depart­
ment of the Seine, of the Mobile Guard and the troops of the line of 
the first military division; Bugeaud, the Orleanist, was appointed 
commander-in-chief of the Alpine army. This change of officials 
continued uninterruptedly under the Barrot government. The first 
act of his ministry was the restoration of the old royalist administra­
tion. The official scene was transformed in a trice—scenery, 
costumes, speech, actors, supers, mutes, prompters, the position of 
the parties, the theme of the drama, the content of the conflict, the 
whole situation. Only the premundane Constituent Assembly still 
remained in its place. But from the hour when the National 
Assembly had installed Bonaparte, Bonaparte Barrot and Barrot 
Changarnier, France stepped out of the period of the republican 
constitution into the period of the constituted republic. And what 
place was there for a Constituent Assembly in a constituted republic? 
After the earth had been created, there was nothing else for its 
creator to do but to flee to heaven. The Constituent Assembly was 
a A paraphrase from L. Sterne, The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, 
Gentleman, Vol. 1, Ch. 11 ("A mysterious carriage of the body to cover the defects of 
the mind").— Ed. 

=====第107页=====
84 Karl Marx 
determined not to follow his example; the National Assembly was the 
last asylum of the party of the bourgeois republicans. If all levers of 
executive power had been wrested from it, was there not left to it 
constituent omnipotence? Its first thought was to hold under all 
circumstances the position of sovereignty that it occupied, and 
thence to reconquer the lost ground. Once the Barrot ministry was 
displaced by a ministry of the National, the royalist personnel would 
have to vacate the palaces of the administration forthwith and the 
tricolour personnel would move in again triumphantly. The 
National Assembly resolved on the overthrow of the ministry and the 
ministry itself offered an opportunity for the attack, than which the 
Constituent Assembly could not have invented a better. 
It will be remembered that for the peasants Louis Bonaparte 
signified: No more taxes! Six days he sat in the President's chair, and 
on the seventh, on December 27, his ministry proposed the retention 
of the salt tax, the abolition of which the Provisional Government had 
decreed. The salt tax shares with the wine tax the privilege of being 
the scapegoat of the old French financial system, particularly in the 
eyes of the countryfolk. The Barrot ministry could not have put into 
the mouth of the choice of the peasants a more mordant epigram on 
his electors than the words: Restoration of  the salt tax! With the salt tax, 
Bonaparte lost his revolutionary salt—the Napoleon of the peasant 
insurrection dissolved like an apparition, and nothing remained 
but the great unknown of royalist bourgeois intrigue. And not 
without intention did the Barrot ministry make this act of tact­
lessly rude disillusionment the first governmental act of the Pre­
sident. 
The Constituent Assembly, on its part, seized eagerly on the 
double opportunity of overthrowing the ministry, and, as against the 
elect of the peasantry, of setting itself up as the representative of 
peasant interests. It rejected the proposal of the Finance Minister, 
reduced the salt tax to a third of its former amount, thus increasing 
by sixty millions a state deficit of five hundred and sixty millions, 
and, after this vote of no  confidence,  calmly awaited the resignation of 
the ministry. So little did it comprehend the new world that 
surrounded it and its own changed position. Behind the ministry 
stood the President and behind the President stood six millions, who 
had placed in the ballot box as many votes of no confidence in the 
Constituent Assembly. The Constituent Assembly gave the nation 
back its no confidence vote. Absurd exchange! It forgot that its votes 
were no longer legal tender. The rejection of the salt tax only 
matured the decision of Bonaparte and his ministry "to end" the 
Constituent Assembly. There began that long duel which lasted the 

=====第108页=====
The Class Struggles in France 85 
entire latter half of the life of the Constituent Assembly. January 29, 
March 21 and May 8 are the journées, the great days of this crisis, just 
so many forerunners of June 13. 
Frenchmen, for example Louis Blanc, have construed January 29 
as the date of the emergence of a constitutional contradiction, the 
contradiction between a sovereign, indissoluble National Assembly 
born of universal suffrage, and a President who, to go by the 
wording, was responsible to the Assembly, but who, to go by reality, 
was not only similarly sanctioned by universal suffrage and, in 
addition, united in his own person all the votes that were split up a 
hundred times and distributed among the individual members of the 
National Assembly, but who was also in full possession of the whole 
executive power, above which the National Assembly hovered as a 
merely moral force. This interpretation of January 29 confuses the 
language of the struggle on the platform, through the press and in 
the clubs with its real content. Louis Bonaparte as against the 
Constituent National Assembly—that was not one unilateral con­
stitutional power as against another; that was not the executive 
power as against the legislative; that was the constituted bourgeois 
republic itself as against the instruments of its constitution, as against 
the ambitious intrigues and ideological demands of the revolutionary 
faction of the bourgeoisie that had founded it and was now amazed 
to find that its constituted republic looked like a restored monarchy, 
and now desired forcibly to prolong the constituent period with its 
conditions, its illusions, its language and its personages and to 
prevent the mature bourgeois republic from emerging in its 
complete and peculiar form. As the Constituent National Assembly 
represented Cavaignac, who had fallen back into its midst, so 
Bonaparte represented the Legislative National Assembly that had 
not yet been divorced from him, that is, the National Assembly of the 
constituted bourgeois republic. 
The election of Bonaparte could only be understood by putting 
in the place of the one name its manifold meanings, by repeat­
ing itself in the election of the new National Assembly. The mand­
ate of the old was annulled by December 10. Thus on January 29, 
it was not the President and the National Assembly of the same 
republic that were face to face; it was the National Assembly of the 
republic that was coming into being and the President of the republic 
that had come into being, two powers that embodied quite different 
periods in the life process of the republic; the one, the small 
republican faction of the bourgeoisie that alone could proclaim the 
republic, wrest it from the revolutionary proletariat by street fighting 
and a reign of terror, and draft its ideal basic features in the 
5-1124 

=====第109页=====
86 Karl Marx 
constitution; and the other, the whole royalist mass of the 
bourgeoisie that alone could rule in this constituted bourgeois 
republic, strip the constitution of its ideological trimmings, and 
realise by its legislation and administration the indispensable 
conditions for the subjugation of the proletariat. 
The storm which broke on January 29 gathered its elements 
during the whole month of January. The Constituent Assembly 
wanted to drive the Barrot ministry to resign by its no confidence 
vote.  The Barrot ministry, on the other hand, proposed to the 
Constituent Assembly that it should give itself a definitive no 
confidence Vote, decide on suicide and decree its own dissolution. On 
January 6 Râteau, one of the most obscure deputies, brought this 
motion at the order of the ministry before the Constituent Assembly, 
the same Constituent Assembly that already in August had resolved 
not to dissolve until a whole series of organic laws supplementing the 
constitution had been enacted by it. Fould, the ministerialist, bluntly 
declared to it that its dissolution was necessary "for  the restoration  of the 
deranged credit"? And did it not derange credit when it prolonged the 
provisional stage and, with Barrot, again called Bonaparte in 
question, and, with Bonaparte, the constituted republic? Barrot the 
Olympian became a rampaging Roland on the prospect of seeing the 
finally pocketed premiership, which the republicans had already 
withheld from him once for a decennium, that is, for ten months, 
again torn from him after scarcely two weeks' enjoyment of 
it—Barrot, confronting this wretched Assembly, out-tyrannised the 
tyrant. His mildest words were "no future is possible with it". And 
actually it did only represent the past. "It is incapable," he added 
ironically, "of providing the republic with the institutions which are 
necessary for its consolidation." 13 Incapable indeed! Its bourgeois 
energy was broken simultaneously with its exceptional antagonism to 
the proletariat, and with its antagonism to the royalists its republican 
exuberance lived anew. Thus it was doubly incapable of consolidat­
ing the bourgeois republic, which it no longer comprehended, by 
means of the corresponding institutions. 
Simultaneously with Rateau's motion the ministry evoked a storm of 
petitions throughout the land, and from all corners of France came 
flying daily at the head of the Constituent Assembly bundles of billets 
a Presumably Marx made use of the report from Paris published in the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung No. 191, January 10, 1849, and marked with Ferdinand Wolff's 
correspondent's sign.— Ed. 
A summary of Barrot's speech made in the Constituent Assembly on January 12, 
1849.—  Ed. 

=====第110页=====
The Class Struggles in France 87 
doux* in which it was more or less categorically requested to dissolve 
and make its will. The Constituent Assembly, on its side, called forth 
counter-petitions, in which it caused itself to be requested to remain 
alive. The election struggle between Bonaparte and Cavaignac was 
renewed as a petition struggle for and against the dissolution of the 
National Assembly. The petitions were to be belated commentaries 
on December 10. This agitation continued during the whole of 
January. 
In the conflict between the Constituent Assembly and the 
President, the former could not refer back to the general election as 
its origin, for the appeal was from the Assembly to universal 
suffrage. It could base itself on no regularly constituted power, for 
the issue was the struggle against the legal power. It could not 
overthrow the ministry by no confidence votes, as it again essayed to 
do on January 6 and 26, for the ministry did not ask for its 
confidence. Only  one  possibility was left to it, that of insurrection. The 
fighting forces of the insurrection were the republican part of the 
National  Guard,  the Mobile Guard and the centres of the revolution­
ary proletariat, the clubs. The Mobile Guard, those heroes of the 
June days, in December formed the organised fighting force of the 
republican faction of the bourgeoisie, just as before June the national 
ateliers  had formed the organised fighting force of the revolutionary 
proletariat. As the Executive Commission of the Constituent 
Assembly directed its brutal attack on the national ateliers, when it 
had to put an end to the claims, become unbearable, of the 
proletariat, so the ministry of Bonaparte directed its attack on the 
Mobile Guard, when it had to put an end to the claims, become 
unbearable, of the republican faction of the bourgeoisie. It ordered 
the disbandment of  the Mobile  Guard.  One half of it was dismissed and 
thrown on the street, the other was organised on monarchist instead 
of democratic lines, and its pay was reduced to the usual pay of 
troops of the line. The Mobile Guard found itself in the position of 
the June insurgents and every day the press carried public  confessions 
in which it admitted its blame for June and implored the proletariat 
to forgive it. 
And the clubs? From the moment when the Constituent Assembly 
in the person of Barrot called in question the President, and in the 
person of the President the constituted bourgeois republic, and in 
the person of the constituted bourgeois republic the bourgeois 
republic in general, all the constituent elements of the February 
Love-letters.— Ed. 
5* 

=====第111页=====
88 Karl Marx 
republic necessarily ranged themselves around it—all  the  parties 
that wished  to overthrow  the  existing republic  and by a  violent 
retrograde process  to transform  it into  a republic  of their class 
interests  and  principles.  The  scrambled eggs were unscrambled,  the 
crystallisations  of the  revolutionary movement  had  again become 
fluid,  the republic that  was  being fought  for was  again  the indefinite 
republic  of the  February days,  the  defining  of which each party 
reserved  to itself. For a  moment  the  parties again took  up their  old 
February positions, without sharing  the  illusions  of February.  The 
tricolour republicans  of the  National again leant  on the  democratic 
republicans  of the  Réforme  and pushed them  as protagonists into  the 
foreground  of the  parliamentary struggle.  The  democratic republi­
cans again leant  on the  socialist republicans—on January  27 a  public 
manifesto 3 announced their reconciliation  and  union—and pre­
pared their insurrectional background  in the  clubs.  The  ministerial 
press rightly treated  the  tricolour republicans  of the  National  as the 
resurrected insurgents  of June.  In order  to maintain themselves  at 
the head  of the  bourgeois republic, they called  in question  the 
bourgeois republic  itself. On  January  26 Minister Faucher proposed 
a law on the  right  of association, 89 the first paragraph  of which read: 
"Clubs are forbidden.  " He  moved that this bill should immediately  be 
discussed  as urgent.  The  Constituent Assembly rejected  the mo­
tion of urgency,  and on  January  27 Ledru-Rollin  put  forward  a 
proposition, with  230  signatures appended  to it, to  impeach  the 
ministry  for violation  of the  constitution.  The  impeachment  of the 
ministry  at times when such  an act was a  tactless disclosure  of the 
impotence  of the  judge,  to wit, the  majority  of the  Chamber,  or an 
impotent protest  of the  accuser against this majority itself—that  was 
the great revolutionary trump that  the  latter-day Montagne played 
from  now on at  each high point  of the  crisis. Poor Montagne, crushed 
by the weight  of its own  name! 
On May 15,  Blanqui, Barbes, Raspail,  etc., had  attempted  to 
break  up the  Constituent Assembly  by forcing  an entrance into  its 
hall of session  at the  head  of the  Paris proletariat. Barrot prepared  a 
moral  May 15 for the  same Assembly when  he wanted  to dictate 
its self-dissolution  and  close  the  hall.  The  same Assembly  had 
commissioned Barrot  to make  the  enquête against  the May  accused, 
and now, at the  moment when  he appeared before  it as a  royalist 
Blanqui, when  it sought  for allies against  him in the  clubs, among  the 
a "Aux  électeurs républicains démocrates socialistes"  (La Réforme No.  27, January 
28, 1849).  The  manifesto  was  reprinted  in the  Neue Rheinische Zeitung  No. 209, 
January  31,  1849.—  Ed. 

=====第112页=====
The Class Struggles in France 89 
revolutionary proletarians, in the party of Blanqui—at this moment 
the relentless Barrot tormented it with the proposal to withdraw the 
May prisoners from the Court of Assizes with its jury and hand them 
over to the High Court, to the haute  cour devised by the party of the 
National. 3 Remarkable how panic fear -for a ministerial portfolio 
could pound out of the head of a Barrot points worthy of a 
Beaumarchais! After much vacillation the National Assembly 
accepted his proposal. As against the makers of the May attempt, it 
reverted to its normal character. 
If the Constituent Assembly, as against the President and the 
ministers, was driven to insurrection, the President and the ministers, 
as against the Constituent Assembly, were driven to a coup d'état for 
they had no legal means of dissolving it. But the Constituent 
Assembly was the mother of the constitution and the constitution was 
the mother of the President. With the coup d'état the President tore 
up the constitution and extinguished his republican legal title. He 
was then forced to pull out his imperial legal title, but the imperial 
legal title woke up the Orleanist legal title and both paled before the 
Legitimist legal title. The downfall of the legal republic could shoot 
to the top only its extreme antipode, the Legitimist monarchy, at a 
moment when the Orleanist party was still only the vanquished of 
February and Bonaparte was still only the victor of December 10, 
when both could oppose to republican usurpation only their likewise 
usurped monarchist titles. The Legitimists were aware of the 
propitiousness of the moment; they conspired openly. They could 
hope to find their Monk 90 in General Changarnier. The imminence 
of the White monarchy was as openly announced in their clubs as was 
that of the Red republic in the proletarian clubs. 
The ministry would have escaped all difficulties by a happily 
suppressed rising. "Legality is the death of us," cried Odilon Barrot.b 
A rising would have allowed it, under the pretext of the salut  public, 1 
to dissolve the Constituent Assembly, to violate the constitution in 
the interests of the constitution  itself.  The brutal behaviour of 
Odilon Barrot in the National Assembly, the motion for the 
dissolution of the clubs, the tumultuous removal of 50 tricolour 
prefects and their replacement by royalists, the dissolution of the 
Mobile Guard, the ill-treatment of their chiefs by Changarnier, the 
a An allusion to Barrot's speech made in the Constituent Assembly on January 17, 
1849.—  Ed. 
Here Barrot quoted an expression used by the Right-wing deputy Viennet in his 
speech in the Chamber of Deputies on March 23,  1833.—  Ed. 
Public welfare.— Ed. 

=====第113页=====
90 Karl Marx 
reinstatement of Lerminier, the professor who was impossible even 
under Guizot, the toleration of the Legitimist braggadocio—all these 
were just so many provocations to mutiny. But the mutiny remained 
mute. It expected its signal from the Constituent Assembly and not 
from the ministry. 
Finally came January 29, the day on which the decision was to be 
taken on the motion of Mathieu (de la Drôme) for unconditional 
rejection of Rateau's motion. Legitimists, Orleanists, Bonapartists, 
Mobile Guard, Montagne, clubs—all conspired on this day, each just 
as much against the ostensible enemy as against the ostensible ally. 
Bonaparte, mounted on horseback, mustered a part of the troops on 
the Place de la Concorde; Chan garnier play-acted with a display of 
strategic manoeuvres; the Constituent Assembly found its building 
occupied by the military. This Assembly, the centre of all the 
conflicting hopes, fears, expectations, ferments, tensions and 
conspiracies, this lion-hearted Assembly did not falter for a moment 
when it came nearer to the world spirit [Weltgeist] than ever. It was 
like that fighter who not only feared to make use of his own weapons, 
but also felt himself obliged to maintain the weapons of his opponent 
unimpaired. Scorning death, it signed its own death warrant, and 
rejected the unconditional rejection of the Râteau motion. Itself in a 
state of siege, it set limits to a constituent activity whose necessary 
frame had been the state of siege of Paris. It revenged itself worthily 
when, on the following day, it instituted an enquiry into the fright 
that the ministry had given it on January 29. The Montagne showed 
its lack of revolutionary energy and political understanding by 
allowing itself to be used by the party of the National in this great 
comedy of intrigues as the crier in the contest. The party of the 
National had made its last attempt to continue to maintain, in the 
constituted republic, the monopoly of rule that it had possessed 
during the inchoate period of the bourgeois republic. It was 
shipwrecked. 
While in the January crisis it was a question of the existence of the 
Constituent Assembly, in the crisis of March 21 it was a question of 
the existence of the constitution—there of the personnel of the 
National party, here of its ideal. There is no need to point out that 
the respectable republicans surrendered the exaltation of their 
ideology more cheaply than the worldly enjoyment of governmental 
power. 
On March 21 Faucher's bill against the right of association, the 
suppression of the clubs, was on the order of the day in the National 
Assembly. Article 8 of the constitution guarantees to all Frenchmen 
the right to associate. The ban on the clubs was, therefore, an une-

=====第114页=====
The Class Struggles in France 91 
quivocal violation of the constitution, and the Constituent Assem­
bly itself was to canonise the profanation of its holy places. But the 
clubs—these were the gathering points, the conspiratorial seats of 
the revolutionary proletariat. The National Assembly had itself 
forbidden the coalition of the workers against the bourgeois. And 
the clubs—what were they but a coalition of the whole working class 
against the whole bourgeois class, the formation of a workers' state 
against the bourgeois state? Were they not just so many constituent 
assemblies of the proletariat and just so many military detachments 
of revolt in fighting trim? What the constitution was to constitute 
above all else was the rule of the bourgeoisie. By the right of 
association the constitution, therefore, could manifestly mean only 
associations that harmonised with the rule of the bourgeoisie, that is, 
with bourgeois order. If, for reasons of theoretical propriety, it 
expressed itself in general terms, was not the government and the 
National Assembly there to interpret and apply it in a special case? 
And if in the primeval epoch of the republic, the clubs actually were 
forbidden by the state of siege, had they not to be forbidden in the 
ordered, constituted republic by the law? The tricolour republicans 
had nothing to oppose to this prosaic interpretation of the 
constitution but the high-flown phraseology of the constitution. A 
section of them, Pagnerre, Duclerc, etc., voted for the ministry and 
thereby gave it a majority. The others, with the archangel Cavaignac 
and the father of the church Marrast at their head, retired, after the 
article on the prohibition of the clubs had gone through, to a special 
committee room, jointly with Ledru-Rollin and the Montagne —"and 
held a council". The National Assembly was paralysed; it no longer 
had a quorum. At the right time, M. Crémieux remembered in the 
committee room that the way from here led directly to the street and 
that it was no longer February 1848, but March 1849. The party of 
the National, suddenly enlightened, returned to the National 
Assembly's hall of session, behind it the Montagne, duped once more. 
The latter, constantly tormented by revolutionary longings, just as 
constantly clutched at constitutional possibilities, and still felt itself 
more in place behind the bourgeois republicans than in front of the 
revolutionary proletariat. Thus the comedy was played out. And the 
Constituent Assembly itself had decreed that the violation of the 
letter of the constitution was the only appropriate realisation of its 
spirit. 
There was only one point left to settle, the relation of the 
constituted republic to the European revolution, its foreign  policy.  On 
May 8, 1849, unwonted excitement prevailed in the Constituent 
Assembly, whose term of life was due to end in a few days. The attack 

=====第115页=====
92 Karl Marx 
of the French army on Rome, its repulse by the Romans,91  its political 
infamy and military disgrace, the foul assassination of the Roman 
republic by the French republic, the first Italian campaign of the 
second Bonaparte was on the order of the day. The Montagne had 
once more played its great trump; Ledru-Rollin had laid on the 
President's 3 table the inevitable bill of impeachment against the 
ministry, and this time also against Bonaparte, for violation of the 
constitution. 
The motif of May 8 was repeated later as the motif of June 13. 
Let us get clear about the expedition to Rome. 
Already in the middle of November 1848, Cavaignac had sent a 
battle fleet to Civitavecchia in order to protect the Pope,b to take him 
on board and to ship him over to France. The Pope was to consecrate 
the respectable republic, and to ensure the election of Cavaignac as 
President. With the Pope, Cavaignac wanted to angle for the priests, 
with the priests for the peasants, and with the peasants for the 
presidency. The expedition of Cavaignac, an election advertise­
ment in its immediate purpose, was at the same time a protest and a 
threat against the Roman revolution. It contained in embryo 
France's intervention in favour of the" Pope. 
This intervention on behalf of the Pope in association with Austria 
and Naples against the Roman republic was decided on at the first 
meeting of Bonaparte's ministerial council on December 23. Falloux 
in the ministry, that meant the Pope in Rome and—in the Rome of 
the Pope. Bonaparte did not need the Pope any longer in order to 
become the President of the peasants; but he needed the conserva­
tion of the Pope in order to conserve the peasants of the President. 
Their credulity had made him President. With faith they would lose 
credulity, and with the Pope, faith. And the Orleanists and 
Legitimists in coalition, who ruled in Bonaparte's name! Before the 
king was restored, the power that consecrates kings had to be 
restored. Apart from their royalism: without the old Rome, subject 
to his temporal rule, no Pope; without the Pope, no Catholicism; 
without Catholicism, no French religion; and without religion, what 
would become of the old French society? The mortgage that the 
peasant has on heavenly possessions guarantees the mortgage that 
the bourgeois has on peasant possessions. The Roman revolution 
was, therefore, an attack on property, on the bourgeois order, dread­
ful as the June Revolution. Re-established bourgeois rule in France 
required the restoration of papal rule in Rome. Finally, to smite the 
a The President of the Assembly.— Ed. 
b Pius IX— Ed, 

=====第116页=====
The Class Struggles in France 93 
Roman revolutionists was to smite the allies of the French 
revolutionists; the alliance of the counter-revolutionary classes in the 
constituted French republic was necessarily supplemented by the 
alliance of the French republic with the Holy Alliance, with Naples 
and Austria. The decision of the ministerial council of December 23 
was no secret for the Constituent Assembly. On January 8, 
Ledru-Rollin had already questioned the ministry concerning it; 
the ministry had denied it and the National Assembly had proceeded 
to the order of the day. Did it trust the word of the ministry? We 
know that it spent the whole month of January in giving the ministry 
no confidence votes. But if it was part of the ministry's role to lie, it 
was part of the National Assembly's role to feign belief in its lie and 
thereby save the republican dehors? 
Meanwhile Piedmont was beaten, Charles Albert had abdicated 
and the Austrian army knocked at the gates of France.92 Ledru-
Rollin vehemently intervened. The ministry proved that it had 
only continued in North Italy the policy of Cavaignac, and Cavaignac 
only the policy of the Provisional Government, that is, of Ledru-
Rollin. This time it even reaped a vote of confidence from the 
National Assembly and was authorised to occupy temporarily a 
suitable point in Upper Italy in order to give support to peaceful 
negotiations with Austria concerning the integrity of Sardinian 
territory and the question of Rome. It is known that the fate of Italy 
is decided on the battlefields of North Italy. Hence Rome would fall 
with Lombardy and Piedmont, or France would have to declare 
war on Austria and thereby on the European counter-revolution. 
Did the National Assembly suddenly take the Barrot ministry 
for the old Committee of Public Safety93? Or itself for the Con­
vention? Why, then, the military occupation of a point in 
Upper Italy? This transparent veil covered the expedition against 
Rome. 
On April 14, 14,000 men sailed under Oudinot for Civitavecchia; 
on April 16, the National Assembly voted the ministry a credit of 
1,200,000  francs for the maintenance of a fleet of intervention in the 
Mediterranean Sea for three months. Thus it gave the ministry every 
means of intervening against Rome, while it adopted the pose of 
letting it intervene against Austria. It did not see what the ministry 
did; it only heard what it said. Such faith was not found in Israel; the 
Constituent Assembly had fallen into the position of not daring to 
know what the constituted republic had to do. 
a Appearances.— Ed. 

=====第117页=====
94 Karl Marx 
Finally, on May 8, the last scene of the comedy was played; the 
Constituent Assembly urged the ministry to take swift measures to 
bring the Italian expedition back to the aim set for it. Bonaparte that 
same evening inserted a letter in the Moniteur, in which he lavished 
the greatest appreciation on Oudinot. 3 On May 11, the National 
Assembly rejected the bill of impeachment against this same 
Bonaparte and his ministry. And the Montagne, which, instead of 
tearing this web of deceit to pieces, took the parliamentary comedy 
tragically in order itself to play in it the role of Fouquier-Tinville, did 
it not betray its natural petty-bourgeois calf's hide under the 
borrowed lion's skin of the Convention! 
The latter half of the life of the Constituent Assembly is 
summarised thus: On January 29 it admits that the royalist bourgeois 
factions are the natural superiors of the republic constituted by it; on 
March 21, that the violation of the constitution is its realisation; and 
on May 11, that the bombastically proclaimed passive alliance of the 
French republic with the struggling peoples means its active alliance 
with the European counter-revolution. 
This miserable Assembly left the stage after it had given itself the 
satisfaction, two days before the anniversary of its birthday, May 4, of 
rejecting the motion of amnesty for the June insurgents. Its power 
shattered, held in deadly hatred by the people, repulsed, maltreated, 
contemptuously thrown aside by the bourgeoisie, whose tool it was, 
forced in the second half of its life to disavow the first, robbed of its 
republican illusions, without having created anything great in the 
past, without hope in the future and with its living body dying bit by 
bit, it was able to galvanise its own corpse into life only by continually 
recalling and living through the June victory over and over again, 
affirming itself by constantly repeated damnation of the damned. 
Vampire that lived on the blood of the June insurgents! 
It left behind a state deficit increased by the costs of the June 
insurrection, by the loss of the salt tax, by the compensation it paid 
the plantation owners for abolishing Negro slavery, by the costs of 
the Roman expedition, by the loss of the wine tax, the abolition of 
which it resolved upon when already at its last gasp, a malicious old 
man, happy to impose on his laughing heir a compromising debt of 
honour. 
With the beginning of March the agitation for the election of the 
Legislative National Assembly had commenced. Two main groups 
It was published in the newspaper La Patrie on May 8,1849, and reprinted in the 
report on the Constituent Assembly session of May 9, 1849 (Le Moniteur universel 
No. 130, May 10, 1849).— Ed. 

=====第118页=====
The Class Struggles in France 95 
opposed each other, the party of Order and the  democratic-socialist,  or 
Red, party; between the two stood the Friends of the Constitution, under 
which name the tricolour republicans of the National sought to put 
forward a party. The party of Order was formed directly after the 
June days: only after December 10 had allowed it to cast off the 
coterie of the National, of the bourgeois republicans, was the secret 
of its existence, the coalition of Or leanists and Legitimists into  one party, 
disclosed. The bourgeois class fell apart into two big factions, which 
had alternately maintained a monopoly of power—the big landed 
proprietors  under the  restored  monarchy,  and the finance  aristocracy  and 
the industrial bourgeoisie under the July monarchy. Bourbon was the 
royal name for the predominant influence of the interests of the one 
faction, Orleans the royal name for the predominant influence of the 
interests of the other faction—the nameless realm of the republic was 
the only one in which both factions could maintain with equal power 
the common class interest without giving up their mutual rivalry. If 
the bourgeois republic could not be anything but the perfected and 
clearly expressed rule of the whole bourgeois class, could it be 
anything but the rule of the Orleanists supplemented by the 
Legitimists, and of the Legitimists supplemented by the Orleanists, 
the synthesis of the restoration and the July monarchy? The bourgeois 
republicans of the National did not represent any large faction of 
their class resting on economic foundations. They possessed only the 
importance and the historical claim of having asserted, under the 
monarchy, as against the two bourgeois factions that only under­
stood their particular régime, the general régime of the bourgeois 
class,  the nameless realm of the republic, which they idealised and 
embellished with antique arabesques, but in which, above all, they 
hailed the rule of their coterie. If the party of the National grew 
confused in its own mind when it descried the royalists in coalition at 
the top of the republic founded by it, these royalists deceived 
themselves no less concerning the fact of their united rule. They did 
not comprehend that if each of their factions, regarded separately, 
by itself,  was royalist, the product of their chemical combination had 
necessarily to be republican, that the white and the blue monarchy 
were bound to neutralise each other in the tricolour republic. 
Forced, by antagonism to the revolutionary proletariat and the 
transition classes thronging more and more round it as their centre, 
to summon their united strength and to conserve the organisation of 
this united strength, each faction of the party of Order had to assert, 
as against the desire for restoration and the overweening presump­
tion of the other, their joint rule, that is, the republican form of 
bourgeois rule. Thus we find these royalists in the beginning 

=====第119页=====
96 Karl Marx 
believing in an immediate restoration, later preserving the republi­
can form with foaming rage and deadly invective against it on their 
lips, and finally confessing that they can endure each other only in 
the republic and postponing the restoration indefinitely. The 
enjoyment of the united rule itself strengthened each of the two 
factions, and made each of them still more unable and unwilling to 
subordinate itself to the other, that is, to restore the monarchy. 
The party of Order directly proclaimed in its election programme 
the rule of the bourgeois class, that is, the preservation of the life 
conditions of its rule: property, family, religion, orderl Naturally it 
represented its class rule and the conditions of its class rule as the 
rule of civilisation and as the necessary conditions of material 
production as well as of the relations of social intercourse arising 
from it. The party of Order had enormous money resources at its 
command; it organised its branches throughout France; it had all the 
ideologists of the old society in its pay; it had the influence of the 
existing governmental power at its disposal; it possessed an army of 
unpaid vassals in the whole mass of petty bourgeois and peasants, 
who,  still remote from the revolutionary movement, found in the 
high dignitaries of property the natural representatives of their petty 
property and its petty prejudices. This party, represented through­
out the country by countless petty kings, could punish the rejection 
of their candidates as insurrection, dismiss the rebellious workers, 
the recalcitrant farm hands, domestic servants, clerks, railway 
officials, penmen, all the functionaries civilly subordinate to it. 
Finally, here and there, it could maintain the delusion that the 
republican Constituent Assembly had prevented the Bonaparte of 
December 10 from manifesting his wonder-working powers. We 
have not mentioned the Bonapartists in connection with the party of 
Order. They were not a serious faction of the bourgeois class, but 
a collection of old, superstitious wounded veterans and of young, 
unbelieving soldiers of fortune.— The party of Order was vic­
torious in the elections; it sent a large majority into the Legisla­
tive Assembly. 
As against the coalitioned counter-revolutionary bourgeois class, 
the sections of the petty bourgeoisie and peasant class already 
revolutionised had naturally to ally themselves with the high dig­
nitary of revolutionary interests, the revolutionary proletariat. We 
have seen how the democratic spokesmen of the petty bourgeoi­
sie in parliament, i.e., the Montagne, were driven by parliamentary 
defeats to the socialist spokesmen of the proletariat, and how the 
actual petty bourgeoisie, outside parliament, was driven by the 
concordats à l'amiable, by the brutal enforcement of bourgeois 

=====第120页=====
The Class Struggles in France 97 
interests and by bankruptcy, to the actual proletarians. On January 
27, Montagne and Socialists had celebrated their reconciliation 3; at 
the great banquet of February 1849, they repeated their act of union. 
The social and the democratic party, the party of the workers and 
that of the petty bourgeois, united to form the  social-democratic  party, 
that is, the Red party. 
Paralysed for a moment by the agony that followed the June days, 
the French républic had lived through a continuous series of feverish 
excitements since the raising of the state of siege, since October 19. 
First the struggle for the presidency, then the struggle between the 
President and the Constituent Assembly; the struggle for the clubs; 
the trial in Bourges, 94 which, in contrast with the petty figures of the 
President, the coalitioned royalists, the respectable republicans, the 
democratic Montagne and the socialist doctrinaires of the proletar­
iat, caused the proletariat's real revolutionists to appear as primor­
dial monsters, such as only a deluge leaves behind on the surface 
of society, or such as could only precede a social deluge; the elec­
tion agitation; the execution of the Bréa murderers 95; the continu­
al proceedings against the press; the violent interference of the 
government with the banquets by police action; the insolent royalist 
provocations; the exhibition of the portraits of Louis Blanc and 
Caussidière on the pillory; the unbroken struggle between the 
constituted republic and the Constituent Assembly, which each 
moment drove the revolution back to its starting point, which each 
moment made the victors the vanquished and the vanquished the 
victors and, in a trice, changed around the positions of the parties 
and the classes, their separations and connections; the rapid march 
of the European counter-revolution; the glorious Hungarian fight; 
the armed uprisings in Germany 96; the Roman expedition; the 
ignominious defeat of the French army before Rome—in this vortex 
of movement, in this torment of historical unrest, in this dramatic 
ebb and flow of revolutionary passion, hopes and disappointments, 
the different classes of French society had to count their epochs of 
development in weeks where they had previously counted them in 
half centuries. A considerable part of the peasants and of the 
provinces was revolutionised. Not only were they disappointed in 
Napoleon, but the Red party offered them, instead of the name, the 
content, instead of illusory freedom from taxation, repayment of the 
milliard paid to the Legitimists, the adjustment of mortgages and the 
abolition of usury. 
a See this volume, p.  88.—  Ed. 

=====第121页=====
98 Karl Marx 
The army itself was infected with the revolutionary fever. In 
voting for Bonaparte it had voted for victory, and he gave it defeat. 
In him it had voted for the Little Corporal,3  behind whom the great 
revolutionary general is concealed, and he once more gave it the 
great generals, behind whom the pipe-clay corporal shelters  himself. 
There was no doubt that the Red party, that is, the coalesced 
democratic party, was bound to celebrate, if not victory, still, great 
triumphs; that Paris, the army and a great part of the provinces 
would vote for it. Ledru-Rollin, the leader of the Montagne, was 
elected by five departments; no leader of the party of Order carried 
off such a victory, no candidate belonging to the proletarian party 
proper. This election reveals to us the secret of the democratic-
socialist party. If, on the one hand, the Montagne, the parliamentary 
champion of the democratic petty bourgeoisie, was forced to unite 
with the socialist doctrinaires of the proletariat—the proletariat, 
forced by the terrible material defeat of June to raise itself up again 
through intellectual victories and not yet enabled through the 
development of the remaining classes to seize the revolutionary 
dictatorship, had to throw itself into the arms of the doctrinaires of 
its emancipation, the founders of socialist sects—the revolutionary 
peasants, the army and the provinces, on the other hand, ranged 
themselves behind the Montagne, which thus became the lord and 
master in the revolutionary army camp and through the understand­
ing with the Socialists had eliminated every antagonism in the 
revolutionary party. In the latter half of the life of the Constituent 
Assembly it represented the republican fervour of the same and 
caused to be buried in oblivion its sins during the Provisional 
Government, during the Executive Commission, during the June 
days.  In the same measure as the party of the National, in accordance 
with its half-and-half nature, had allowed itself to be put down by the 
royalist ministry, the party of the Mountain, which had been 
brushed aside during the omnipotence of the National, rose and 
asserted itself as the parliamentary representative of the revolution. 
In fact, the party of the National had nothing to oppose to the other, 
royalist factions but ambitious men and idealistic humbug. The party 
of the Mountain, on the contrary, represented a mass hovering 
between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, a mass whose material 
interests demanded democratic institutions. In comparison with the 
Cavaignacs and the Marrasts, Ledru-Rollin and the Montagne, 
therefore, represented the true revolution, and from the conscious-
A nickname for Napoleon.— Ed. 

=====第122页=====
The Class Struggles in France 99 
ness of this important situation they drew the greater courage the 
more the expression of revolutionary energy limited itself to 
parliamentary attacks, bringing in bills of impeachment, threats, 
raised voices, thundering speeches, and extremes which were only 
pushed as far as phrases. The peasants were in about the same 
position as the petty bourgeoisie; they had more or less the same 
social demands to put forward. All the middle strata of society, so far 
as they were driven into the revolutionary movement, were therefore 
bound to find their hero in Ledru-Rollin. Ledru-Rollin was the 
personage of the democratic petty bourgeoisie. As against the party 
of Order, the half conservative, half revolutionary and wholly 
Utopian reformers of this order had first to be pushed to the 
forefront. 
The party of the National, "the Friends of the Constitution quand 
même" , the re'publicains purs et simples, were completely defeated in 
the elections. A tiny minority of them was sent into the Legislative 
Chamber, their most noted leaders vanished from the stage, even 
Marrast, the editor-in-chief and the Orpheus of the respectable 
republic. 
On May 28, the Legislative Assembly convened; on June 11, the 
collision of May 8 was renewed and, in the name of the Montagne, 
Ledru-Rollin brought in a bill of impeachment against the President 
and the ministry for violation of the constitution, for the bombard­
ment of Rome. On June 12, the Legislative Assembly rejected the bill 
of impeachment, just as the Constituent Assembly had rejected it on 
May 11, but the proletariat this time drove the Montagne onto the 
streets, not to a street battle, however, but only to a street procession. 
It is enough to say that the Montagne was at the head of this 
movement to know that the movement was defeated, and that June 
1849 was a caricature, as ridiculous as it was repulsive, of June 1848. 
The great retreat of June 13 was only eclipsed by the still greater bat­
tle report of Changarnier, 3 the great man that the party of Or­
der improvised. Every social epoch needs its great men, and when it 
does not find them, it invents them, as Helvétius says. 
On December 20 only one half of the constituted bourgeois 
republic as yet existed, the President; on May 28 it was completed by 
the other  half,  the Legislative Assembly. In June 1848, the  self-
constituted bourgeois republic, by an atrocious battle against the 
proletariat, and in June 1849, the constituted bourgeois republic, by 
an unutterable comedy with the petty bourgeoisie, had engraved 
their names in the birth register of history. June 1849 was the 
a Rapport du général Changarnier au ministre de la guerre, le 16 juin 1849.— Ed. 

=====第123页=====
100 Karl Marx 
Nemesis of June 1848. In June 1849, it was not the workers that were 
vanquished; it was the petty bourgeois, who stood between them and 
the revolution, that were felled. June 1849 was not a bloody tragedy 
between wage labour and capital, but a prison-filling and lamentable 
play of debtors and creditors. The party of Order had won, it was 
all-powerful; it had now to show what it was.* 
* Due to lack of space the concluding section will be printed in the next 
issue.— Note by the editors of the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue". 

=====第124页=====
101 
III 
CONSEQUENCES OF JUNE 13, 1849 
On December 20, the Janus head of the constitutional republic had 
still shown only one face, the executive face with the indistinct, plain 
features of L. Bonaparte; on May 28, 1849, it showed its second face, 
the legislative, pitted with the scars that the orgies of the Restoration 
and the July monarchy had left behind. With the Legislative National 
Assembly the phenomenon of the constitutional republic was com­
pleted, that is, the republican form of government in which the rule 
of the bourgeois class is constituted, the common rule, therefore, of 
the two great royalist factions that form the French bourgeoisie, 
the coalesced Legitimists and Orleanists, the party of Order. While the 
French republic thus became the property of the coalition of the 
royalist parties, the European coalition of the counter-revolutionary 
powers embarked, simultaneously, upon a general crusade against 
the last places of refuge of the March revolutions. Russia invaded 
Hungary; Prussia marched against the army defending the 
Imperial Constitution, and Oudinot bombarded Rome.97 The 
European crisis was evidently approaching a decisive turning point; 
the eyes of all Europe were turned on Paris, and the eyes of all Paris 
on the Legislative Assembly. 
On June 11 Ledru-Rollin mounted its tribune. He made no 
speech; he formulated a requisitory against the ministers, naked, 
unadorned, factual, concentrated, forceful. 
The attack on Rome is an attack on the constitution; the attack on 
the Roman republic is an attack on the French republic. Article V of 
the constitution98 reads: "The French republic never employs its 
forces against the liberty of any people whatsoever"—and the 
President employs the French army against Roman liberty. Article 

=====第125页=====
102 Karl Marx 
54 of the constitution forbids the executive power to declare any war 
whatsoever without the consent of the National Assembly.3 The 
Constituent Assembly's resolution of May 8 expressly commands the 
ministers to make the Rome expedition conform with the utmost 
speed to its original mission; it therefore just as expressly prohibits 
war on Rome—and Oudinot bombards Rome. Thus Ledru-Rollin 
called the constitution itself as a witness for the prosecution against 
Bonaparte and his ministers. At the royalist majority of the National 
Assembly, he, the tribune of the constitution, hurled the threatening 
declaration: 
"The republicans will know how to command respect for the constitution by every 
means, be it even by force of arms!" 
"By force of arms/" repeated the hundredfold echo of the 
Montagne. The majority answered with a terrible tumult; the 
President of the National Assembly 15 called Ledru-Rollin to order; 
Ledru-Rollin repeated the challenging declaration, and finally laid 
on the President's table a motion for the impeachment of Bonaparte 
and his ministers. By 361 votes to 203, the National Assembly 
resolved to pass on from the bombardment of Rome to the next item 
on the agenda. 
Did Ledru-Rollin believe that he could beat the National Assembly 
by means of the constitution, and the President by means of the 
National Assembly? 
To be sure, the constitution forbade any attack on the liberty of 
foreign peoples, but what the French army attacked in Rome was, 
according to the ministry, not "liberty" but the "despotism of 
anarchy". Had the Montagne still not comprehended, all experiences 
in the Constituent Assembly notwithstanding, that the interpretation 
of the constitution did not belong to those who had made it, but only 
to those who had accepted it? That its wording must be construed in 
its viable meaning and that the bourgeois meaning was its only viable 
meaning? That Bonaparte and the royalist majority of the National 
Assembly were the authentic interpreters of the constitution, as the 
priest is the authentic interpreter of the Bible, and the judge the 
authentic interpreter of the law? Should the National Assembly, 
freshly emerged from the general elections, feel itself bound by the 
testamentary provisions of the dead Constituent Assembly, whose 
will while living an Odilon Barrot had broken? When Ledru-Rollin 
a Here and in what follows the reference is to the Legislative National Assembly 
which was in office from May 28, 1849, to December  1851.—  Ed 
André Marie Dupin.  — Ed. 

=====第126页=====
The Class Struggles in France 103 
cited the Constituent Assembly's resolution of May 8, had he for­
gotten that the same Constituent Assembly on May 11 had reject­
ed his first motion for the impeachment of Bonaparte and the min­
isters;  that it had acquitted the President and the ministers; that 
it had thus sanctioned the attack on Rome as "constitutional"; that 
he only lodged an appeal against a judgment already delivered; that 
he, lastly, appealed from the republican Constituent Assembly to the 
royalist Legislative Assembly? The constitution itself calls insurrec­
tion to its aid by summoning, in a special article, every citizen to 
protect it. Ledru-Rollin based himself on this article. But, at the same 
time,  are not the public authorities organised for the defence of the 
constitution, and does not the violation of the constitution begin only 
from the moment when one of the constitutional public authorities 
rebels against the other? And the President of the republic, the 
ministers of the republic and the National Assembly of the republic 
were in the most harmonious agreement. 
What the Montagne attempted on June 11 was "an insurrection 
within the limits of pure reason", that is, a purely parliamentary 
insurrection. The majority of the Assembly, intimidated by the 
prospect of an armed rising of the popular masses, was, in Bonaparte 
and the ministers, to destroy its own power and the significance of its 
own election. Had not the Constituent Assembly similarly attempted 
to annul the election of Bonaparte, when it insisted so obstinately on 
the dismissal of the Barrot-Falloux ministry? 
Neither were there lacking from the time of the Convention 
models for parliamentary insurrections which had suddenly trans­
formed completely the relation between the majority and the 
minority—and should the young Montagne not succeed where the 
old had succeeded?—nor did the conditions at the moment seem 
unfavourable for such an undertaking. Popular unrest in Paris had 
reached a disquietingly high point; the army, according to its vote at 
the election, did not seem favourably inclined towards the govern­
ment; the legislative majority itself was still too young to have become 
consolidated and, in addition, it consisted of old gendemen. If the 
Montagne were successful in a parliamentary insurrection, the helm 
of state would fall directly into its hands. The democratic petty 
bourgeoisie, for its part, wished, as always, for nothing more 
fervently than to see the battle fought out in the clouds over its head 
between the departed spirits of parliament. Finally, both of them, the 
democratic petty bourgeoisie and its representative, the Montagne, 
would, through a parliamentary insurrection, achieve their great 
purpose, that of breaking the power of the bourgeoisie without 
unleashing the proletariat or letting it appear otherwise than in 

=====第127页=====
104 Karl Marx 
perspective; the proletariat would have been used without becoming 
dangerous. 
After the vote of the National Assembly on June 11, a conference 
took place between some members of the Montagne and delegates of 
the secret workers' societies. The latter urged that the attack be 
started the same evening. The Montagne decisively rejected this plan. 
On no account did it want to let the leadership slip out of its hands; 
its allies were as suspect to it as its antagonists, and rightly so. The 
memory of June 1848 surged through the ranks of the Paris 
proletariat more vigorously than ever. Nevertheless it was chained 
to the alliance with the Montagne. The latter represented the largest 
part of the departments; it exaggerated its influence in the army; it 
had at its disposal the democratic section of the National Guard; it 
had the moral power of the shopkeepers behind it. To begin the 
insurrection at this moment against the will of the Montagne would 
have meant for the proletariat, decimated moreover by cholera and 
driven out of Paris in considerable numbers by unemployment, to 
repeat uselessly the June days of 1848, without the situation which 
had forced this desperate struggle. The proletarian delegates did the 
only rational thing. They obliged the Montagne to compromise  itself, 
that is, to come out beyond the confines of the parliamentary 
struggle in the event of its bill of impeachment being rejected. 
During the whole of June 13, the proletariat maintained this same 
sceptically watchful attitude, and awaited a seriously engaged 
irrevocable mêlée between the democratic National Guard and the 
army, in order then to plunge into the fight and push the revolution 
forward beyond the petty-bourgeois aim set for it. In the event of 
victory a proletarian commune was already formed which would take 
its place beside the official government. The Parisian workers had 
learned in the bloody school of June 1848. 
On June 12 Minister Lacrosse himself brought forward in the 
Legislative Assembly the motion to proceed at once to the discussion 
of the bill of impeachment. During the night the government had 
made every provision for defence and attack; the majority of the 
National Assembly was determined to drive the rebellious minority 
out into the streets; the minority itself could no longer retreat; the 
die was cast; the bill of impeachment was rejected by 377 votes to 8. 
The Mountain, which had abstained from voting, rushed resentfully 
into the propaganda halls of the "pacific democracy", into the 
newspaper offices of the Démocratie pacifique. " 
Its withdrawal from the parliament building broke its strength as 
withdrawal from the earth broke the strength of Antaeus, her giant 
son. Samsons in the precincts of the Legislative Assembly, they were 

=====第128页=====
The Class Struggles in France 105 
only philistines in the precincts of the "pacific democracy". A long, 
noisy, rambling debate ensued. The Montagne was determined to 
compel respect for the constitution by every means, "  only  not by force 
of arms". In this determination it was supported by a manifesto 100 
and by a deputation of the "Friends of the Constitution". "Friends 
of the Constitution" was what the wreckage of the coterie of the 
National, of the bourgeois-republican party, called  itself.  While six of 
its remaining parliamentary representatives had voted against, the 
others in a body voting for, the rejection of the bill of impeachment, 
while Cavaignac placed his sabre at the disposal of the party of 
Order, the larger, extra-parliamentary part of the coterie greedily 
seized the opportunity to emerge from its position of a political 
pariah, and to press into the ranks of the democratic party. Did they 
not appear as the natural shield-bearers of this party, which hid itself 
behind their shield, behind their principles, behind the constitution? 
Till break of day the "Mountain" was in labour.3 It gave birth to 
"a proclamation to the people", which, on the morning of June 13, 
occupied a more or less shamefaced place in two socialist jour­
nals. 101 It declared the President, the ministers and the majority of 
the Legislative Assembly "outside the constitution" (hors la Constitution) 
and summoned the National Guard, the army and finally also the 
people "to arise". "Long live the Constitution!" was the slogan that it 
put forward, a slogan that signified nothing other than "Down with 
the revolution!" 
In conformity with the constitutional proclamation of the Moun­
tain, there was a so-called peaceful demonstration of the petty 
bourgeois on June 13, that is, a street procession from the Château 
d'Eau through the boulevards, 30,000 strong, mainly National 
Guards, unarmed, with an admixture of members of the secret 
workers' sections, moving along with the cry: "Long live the Con­
stitution!" which was uttered mechanically, coldly, and with a bad 
conscience by the members of the procession  itself,  and thrown back 
ironically by the echo of the people that surged along the sidewalks, 
instead of swelling up like thunder. From the many-voiced song the 
chest notes were missing. And when the procession swung by the 
meeting hall of the "Friends of the Constitution" and a hired herald 
of the constitution appeared on the housetop, violently cleaving the 
air with his claqueur hat and from tremendous lungs letting the 
catchcry "Long live the Constitution!" fall like hail on the heads of the 
pilgrims, they themselves seemed overcome for a moment by the 
" Evidently an allusion to the expression "The mountain gave birth to a mouse" 
which is to be found in Horace's The Art of  Poetry.  Earlier it appeared in the Banquet  of 
the Learned, a work by the Greek poet Athenaeus.— Ed. 

=====第129页=====
106 Karl Marx 
comedy of the situation. It is known how the procession, having 
arrived at the termination of the rue de la Paix, was received in the 
boulevards by the dragoons and chasseurs of Changarnier in an 
altogether unparliamentary way, how in a trice it scattered in all 
directions and how it threw behind it a few shouts of "to arms" only 
in order that the parliamentary call to arms of June 11 might be 
fulfilled. 
The majority of the Montagne assembled in the rue du Hasard 
scattered when this violent dispersion of the peaceful procession, the 
muffled rumours of murder of unarmed citizens on the boulevards 
and the growing tumult in the streets seemed to herald the approach 
of a rising. Ledru-Rollin at the head of a small band of deputies saved 
the honour of the Mountain. Under the protection of the Paris 
Artillery, which had assembled in the Palais National, they betook 
themselves to the Conservatoire des arts et métiers, a where the fifth and 
sixth legions of the National Guard were to arrive. But the 
Montagnards waited in vain for the fifth and sixth legions; these 
discreet National Guards left their representatives in the lurch; the 
Paris Artillery itself prevented the people from throwing up 
barricades; chaotic disorder made any decision impossible; the 
troops of the line advanced with fixed bayonets; some of the 
representatives were taken prisoner, while others escaped. Thus 
ended June 13. 
If June 23, 1848, was the insurrection of the revolutionary 
proletariat, June 13, 1849, was the insurrection of the democratic 
petty bourgeois, each of these two insurrections being the classically 
pure expression of the class which had been its vehicle. 
Only in Lyons did it come to an obstinate, bloody conflict.102 Here, 
where the industrial bourgeoisie and the industrial proletariat stand 
directly opposed to one another, where the workers' movement is 
not, as in Paris, included in and determined by the general 
movement, June 13, in its repercussions, lost its original character. 
Wherever else it broke out in the provinces it did not kindle fire—a 
cold lightning flash. 
June 13 closes the first period in the life of  the constitutional republic, 
which had attained its normal existence on May 28, 1849, with the 
meeting of the Legislative Assembly. The whole period of this 
prologue is filled with vociferous struggle between the party of 
Order and the Montagne, between the big bourgeoisie and the petty 
bourgeoisie, which strove in vain against the consolidation of the 
bourgeois republic, for which it had itself continuously conspired in 
a Museum of Arts and Trades, an educational institution in  Paris.—  Ed. 

=====第130页=====
The Class Struggles in France 107 
the Provisional Government and in the Executive Commission, and 
for which, during the June days, it had fought fanatically against the 
proletariat. The 13th of June breaks its resistance and makes the 
legislative dictatorship of the united royalists a fait  accompli.  From this 
moment the National Assembly is only a Committee of Public Safety of 
the party of Order. 
Paris had put the President, the ministers and the majority of the 
National Assembly in a "state of impeachment"; they put Paris in a 
"state of siege". The Mountain had declared the majority of the 
Legislative Assembly "outside the constitution"; for violation of the 
constitution the majority handed over the Mountain to the haute 
cour*  and proscribed everything in it that still had vital force. 103 It was 
decimated to a rump without head or heart. The minority had gone 
as far as to attempt a parliamentary insurrection; the majority elevated 
its parliamentary  despotism  to law. It decreed new standing orders,  which 
annihilate the freedom of the tribune and authorise the President of 
the National Assembly to punish representatives for violation of the 
standing orders with censure, with fines, with stoppage of their 
salaries, with suspension of membership, with incarceration. Over 
the rump of the Mountain it hung the rod instead of the sword. The 
remainder of the deputies of the Mountain owed it to their honour 
to make a mass exit. By such an act the dissolution of the party of 
Order would have been hastened. It would have had to break up into 
its original component parts the moment that not even the 
semblance of an opposition would hold it together any longer. 
Simultaneously with his parliamentary power, the democratic 
petty bourgeois was robbed of his armed power through the 
dissolution of the Paris Artillery and the 8th, 9th and 12th legions of 
the National Guard. On the other hand, the legion of high finance, 
which on June 13 had raided the printshops of Boulé and Roux, 
demolished the presses, played havoc with the offices of the 
republican journals and arbitrarily arrested editors, compositors, 
printers, shipping clerks and errand boys, received encouraging 
approval from the tribune of the National Assembly. All over France 
the disbandment of National Guards suspected of republicanism was 
repeated. 
A new press law, a new law of  association,  a new law on the state of 
siege, the prisons of Paris overflowing, the political refugees driven 
out, all the journals that go beyond the limits of the National 
suspended, Lyons and the five departments surrounding it aban­
doned to the brutal persecution of military despotism, the courts 
a High Court.— Ed. 

=====第131页=====
108 Karl Marx 
ubiquitous and the army of officials, so often purged, purged once 
more—these were the inevitable, the constantly recurring common­
places of victorious reaction, worth mentioning after the massacres 
and the deportations of June only because this time they were 
directed not only against Paris, but also against the departments, not 
only against the proletariat, but, above all, against the middle classes. 
The repressive laws, by which the declaration of a state of siege was 
left to the discretion of the government, the press still more firmly 
muzzled and the right of association annihilated, absorbed the whole 
of the legislative activity of the National Assembly during the months 
of June, July and August. 
However, this epoch is characterised not by the exploitation of 
victory in fact, but in principle; not by the resolutions of the National 
Assembly, but by the grounds advanced for these resolutions; not by 
the thing, but by the phrase; not by the phrase but by the accent and 
the gesture which enliven the phrase. The brazen, unreserved 
expression of royalist sentiments, the contemptuously aristocratic 
insults to the republic, the coquettishly frivolous babbling of the 
restoration aims, in a word, the boastful violation of republican 
decorum give its peculiar tone and colour to this period. Long live the 
Constitution! was the battle cry of the vanquished of June 13. The 
victors were therefore absolved from the hypocrisy of constitutional, 
that is, republican, speech. The counter-revolution subjugated 
Hungary, Italy and Germany, and they believed that the restoration 
was already at the gates of France. Among the masters of ceremony 
of the factions of Order there ensued a real competition to document 
their royalism in the Moniteur, and to confess, repent and crave 
pardon before God and man for liberal sins perchance committed by 
them under the monarchy. No day passed without the February 
Revolution being declared a national calamity from the tribune of 
the National Assembly, without some Legitimist provincial cabbage-
Junker solemnly stating that he had never recognised the republic, 
without one of the cowardly deserters of and traitors to the July 
monarchy relating the belated deeds of heroism in the performance 
of which only the philanthropy of Louis Philippe or other 
misunderstandings had hindered him. What was admirable in the 
February days was not the magnanimity of the victorious people, but 
the self-sacrifice and moderation of the royalists, who had allowed it 
to be victorious. One representative of the people proposed to divert 
part of the money destined for the relief of those wounded in 
February to the Municipal Guards, 104 who alone in those days had 
deserved well of the fatherland. Another wanted to have an 
equestrian statue decreed to the Duke of Orleans in the Place du 

=====第132页=====
The Class Struggles in France 109 
Carrousel* Thiers called the constitution a dirty piece of paper. 
There appeared in succession on the tribune Orleanists, to repent of 
their conspiracy against the legitimate monarchy; Legitimists, who 
reproached themselves with having hastened the overthrow of 
monarchy in general by resisting the illegitimate monarchy; Thiers, 
who repented of having intrigued against Mole; Mole, who repented 
of having intrigued against Guizot; Barrot, who repented of having 
intrigued against all three. The cry "Long live the Social-Democratic 
Republic!" was declared unconstitutional; the cry "Long live the 
Republic!" was persecuted as social-democratic. On the anniversary 
of the Battle of Waterloo,105 a representative declared: "I fear an 
invasion of the Prussians less than the entry of the revolutionary 
refugees into France." b  To the complaints about the terrorism which 
was organised in Lyons and in the neighbouring departments, 
Baraguay d'Hilliers answered: "I prefer the White terror to the Red 
terror." (J'aime mieux la terreur blanche que la terreur rouge.) 0 And 
the Assembly applauded frantically every time that an epigram 
against the republic, against the revolution, against the constitution, 
for the monarchy or for the Holy Alliance fell from the lips of its 
orators. Every infringement of the minutest republican formality, 
for example, of addressing the representatives as  citoyens,  filled the 
knights of order with enthusiasm. 
The by-elections in Paris on July 8, held under the influence of the 
state of siege and of the abstention of a great part of the proletariat 
from the ballot box, the taking of Rome by the French army, the 
entry into Rome of the scarlet eminences106 and, in their train, of 
the Inquisition and monkish terrorism, added fresh victories to the 
victory of June and increased the intoxication of the party of Order. 
Finally, in the middle of August, half with the intention of 
attending the Department Councils just assembled, half through 
exhaustion after the tendentious orgy of many months, the royalists 
decreed the prorogation of the National Assembly for two months. 
With transparent irony they left behind a commission of twenty-five 
representatives,107  the cream of the Legitimists and the Orleanists, a 
Mole and a Changarnier, as proxies for the National Assembly and 
as guardians of the republic. The irony was more profound than they 
suspected. They, condemned by history to help to overthrow the 
a This refers to the motion made by Baron G. Gourgaud in the Legislative 
Assembly on October 15, 1849.— Ed. 
From L. Estancelin's speech made in the Legislative Assembly on June 19, 1849. 
The quoted passage is a summary of his speech.— Ed. 
c From Baraguay d'Hilliers' speeches made in the Legislative Assembly on June 27 
and July 7, 1849.—Ed. 

=====第133页=====
110 Karl Marx 
monarchy they loved, were destined by it to conserve the republic 
they hated. 
The secpnd period in the life of the constitutional republic, its royalist 
period of sowing wild  oats,  closes  with the proroguing of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
The state of siege in Paris had again been raised, the activities of 
the press had again begun. During the suspension of the social-
democratic papers, during the period of repressive legislation and 
royalist bluster, the Siècle, the old literary representative of the 
monarchist-constitutional petty  bourgeois,  republicanised  itself;  the Presse, 
the old literary exponent of the bourgeois reformers, democratised 
itself;  while the National, the old classic organ of the republican 
bourgeois, socialised  itself. 
The secret societies  grew in extent and intensity in the same degree 
that the public clubs became impossible. The workers' industrial 
co-operatives, tolerated as purely commercial societies, while of no 
account economically, became politically so many means of cement­
ing the proletariat. June 13 had struck off the official heads of the 
various semi-revolutionary parties; the masses that remained won a 
head of their own. The knights of order had practised intimidation 
by prophecies of the terror of the Red republic; the base excesses, 
the hyperborean atrocities of the victorious counter-revolution in 
Hungary, in Baden and in Rome washed the "Red republic" white. 
And the malcontent intermediate classes of French society began to 
prefer the promises of the Red republic with its problematic terrors 
to the terrors of the Red monarchy with its actual hopelessness. No 
Socialist in France spread more revolutionary propaganda than 
Haynau. A chaque capacité selon ses  œuvres! 71 
In the meantime Louis Bonaparte exploited the recess of the 
National Assembly to make princely tours of the provinces, the most 
hot-blooded Legitimists made pilgrimages to Ems, to the grandchild 
of the saintly Louis, 108 and the mass of the popular representatives on 
the side of order intrigued in the Department Councils, which had 
just met. It was necessary to make them pronounce what the 
majority of the National Assembly did not yet dare to pronounce, an 
urgent motion for immediate revision of  the constitution. According to the 
constitution, it could not be revised before 1852, and then only by a 
National Assembly called together expressly for this purpose. If, 
however, the majority of the Department Councils expressed 
To each man of talent according to his work! (Marx ironically uses 
Saint-Simon's well-known formula. See Doctrine de Saint-Simon. Exposition. Première 
année. 1829, Paris, 1830, p. 70.) — Ed. 

=====第134页=====
The Class Struggles in France 111 
themselves to this effect, was not the National Assembly bound to 
sacrifice the virginity of the constitution to the voice of France? The 
National Assembly entertained the same hopes in regard to these 
provincial assemblies as the nuns in Voltaire's Henriade entertained 
in regard to the pandours. But, some exceptions apart, the Potiphars 
of the National Assembly had to deal with just so many Josephs 
of the provinces. The vast majority did not want to understand 
the importunate insinuation. The revision of the constitution was 
frustrated by the very instruments by which it was to have been called 
into being, by the votes of the Department Councils. The voice of 
France, and indeed of bourgeois France, had spoken and had 
spoken against revision. 
At the beginning of October the Legislative National Assembly 
met once more—tantum mutatus ab illo! a Its physiognomy was 
completely changed. The unexpected rejection of revision on the 
part of the Department Councils had put it back within the limits of 
the constitution and indicated the limits of its term of life. The 
Orleanists had become mistrustful because of the pilgrimages of the 
Legitimists to Ems; the Legitimists had grown suspicious on account 
of the negotiations of the Orleanists with London 109; the journals of 
the two factions had fanned the fire and weighed the reciprocal 
claims of their pretenders. Orleanists and Legitimists grumbled in 
unison at the machinations of the Bonapartists, which showed 
themselves in the princely tours, in the more or less transparent 
emancipatory attempts of the President, in the presumptuous 
language of the Bonapartist newspapers; Louis Bonaparte grum­
bled at a National Assembly which found only the Legitimist-
Orleanist conspiracy legitimate,15 at a ministry which betrayed him 
continually to this National Assembly. Finally, the ministry was itself 
divided on the Roman policy and on the income tax proposed by 
Minister Passy, and decried as socialist by the conservatives. 
One of the first bills of the Barrot ministry in the reassembled 
Legislative Assembly was a demand for a credit of 300,000 francs for 
the payment of a widow's pension to the Duchess of Orleans. The 
National Assembly granted it and added to the list of debts of the 
French nation a sum of seven million francs. Thus, while Louis 
Philippe continued to play with success the role of the pauvre honteux, 
of the shamefaced beggar, the ministry neither dared to move an 
increase of salary for Bonaparte nor did the Assembly appear 
a How great was the change since then! (Virgil, Aeneid.) — Ed. 
In his copy of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Revue Engels changed the words 
gerecht erfand (found legitimate) to  berechtigt  fand (considered justified).— Ed. 

=====第135页=====
112 Karl Marx 
inclined to grant it. And Louis Bonaparte, as ever, vacillated in the 
dilemma: Aut Caesar aut Clichy!3 
The minister's second demand for a credit, one of nine million 
francs for the costs of the Rome expedition, increased the tension 
between Bonaparte, on the one hand, and the ministers and the 
National Assembly, on the other. Louis Bonaparte had inserted a 
letter to his military aide, Edgard Ney, in the Moniteur, in which he 
bound the papal government to constitutional guarantees. 13 The 
Pope, on his part, had issued a statement, "motu proprio" 110 in 
which he rejected any limitation of his restored rule. Bonaparte's 
letter, with studied indiscretion, raised the curtain of his cabinet, in 
order to expose himself to the eyes of the gallery as a benevolent 
genius who was, however, misunderstood and shackled in his own 
house. It was not the first time that he had coquetted with the 
"furtive flights of a free soul". c Thiers, the reporter of the 
commission, completely ignored Bonaparte's flight and contented 
himself with translating the papal allocution into French. It was not 
the ministry, but Victor Hugo that sought to save the President 
through an order of the day in which the National Assembly0  was to 
express its agreement with Napoleon's letter. Allons donc! Allons 
donc! e With this disrespectful, frivolous interjection the majority 
buried Hugo's motion. The policy of the President? The letter of the 
President? The President himself? Allons donc! Allons  donc!  Who the 
devil takes Monsieur Bonaparte au sérieux?  Do you believe, Monsieur 
Victor Hugo, that we believe you that you believe in the President? 
Allons donc! Allons donc! 
Finally, the breach between Bonaparte and the National Assembly 
was hastened by the discussion on the recall of the Orleans and the 
Bourbons. In default of the ministry, the cousin of the President, the 
son of the ex-king of Westphalia/ had put forward this motion, 
which had no other purpose than to push the Legitimist and the 
Orleanist pretenders down to the same level, or rather a  lower  level 
than the Bonapartist pretender, who at least stood in fact at the 
pinnacle of the state. 
Napoleon Bonaparte was disrespectful enough to make the recall 
Either Caesar o Clichy! Clichy: Paris prison for insolvent debtors. Paraphrase of 
Cesare Borgia's words "Aut Caesar, aut nihil" (either Caesar or nothing).— Ed. 
Lettre  adressée  par le président de la République au lieutenant-colonel Edgard Ney, son 
officier d'ordonnance à Rome (August 18, 1849).— Ed. 
Modified quotation from Georg Herwegh's poem "Aus den Bergen" (from the 
cycle Gedichte eines Lebendigen). — Ed. 
d At its sitting of October 19, 1849.— Ed. 
Get along with  you!  — Ed. 
Prince Napoleon Bonaparte, son of Jérôme Bonaparte.—Ed. 

=====第136页=====
The Class Struggles in France 113 
of the expelled  royal  families and the amnesty of  the June insurgents parts 
of one and the same motion. The indignation of the majority 
compelled him immediately to apologise for this sacrilegious con­
catenation of the sacred and the profane, of the royal races and 
the proletarian brood, of the fixed stars of society and of its swamp 
lights,  and to assign to each of the two motions its proper place. The 
majority energetically rejected the recall of the royal families, and 
Berryer, the Demosthenes of the Legitimists, left no doubt about the 
meaning of the vote. The civic degradation of the pretenders, that is 
what is intended! It is desired to rob them of their halo, of the last 
majesty that is left to them, the majesty of  exilel  What, cried Berryer, 
would be thought of him among the pretenders who, forgetting his 
august origin, came here to live as a simple private individual?3 It 
could not have been more clearly intimated to Louis Bonaparte that 
he had not gained the day by his presence, that whereas the royalists 
in coalition needed him here in France as a neutral man in the 
presidential chair, the serious pretenders to the throne had to be 
kept out of profane sight by the fog of exile. 
On November 1, Louis Bonaparte answered the Legislative 
Assembly with a message which in pretty brusque words announced 
the dismissal of the Barrot ministry and the formation of a new 
ministry.b The Barrot-Falloux ministry was the ministry of 
the royalist coalition, the d'Hautpoul ministry was the ministry of 
Bonaparte, the organ of the President as against the Legislative 
Assembly, the ministry of the clerks. 
Bonaparte was no longer the merely neutral man of December 10, 
1848.  Possession of the executive power had grouped a number of 
interests around him, the struggle with anarchy forced the party of 
Order itself to increase his influence, and if he was no longer 
popular, the party of Order was unpopular. Could he not hope to 
compel the Orleanists and the Legitimists, through their rivalry as 
well as through the necessity of some sort of monarchist restoration, 
to recognise the neutral pretender? 
From November 1, 1849, dates the third period in the life of the 
constitutional republic, a period which closes with March 10, 1850. 
The regular game, so much admired by Guizot, of the constitutional 
institutions, the wrangling between executive and legislative power, 
now begins. More, as against the hankering for restoration on the 
part of the united Orleanists and Legitimists, Bonaparte defends his 
From Berryer's speech made in the Legislative Assembly on October 24, 
1849.—  Ed. 
Message du Président de la République française à l'Assemblée législative (October 31, 
1849).—  Ed. 

=====第137页=====
114 Karl Marx 
title to his actual power, the republic; as against the hankering for 
restoration on the part of Bonaparte, the party of Order defends its 
title to its common rule, the republic; as against the Orleanists, the 
Legitimists, and as against the Legitimists, the Orleanists, defend the 
status  quo,  the republic. All these factions of the party of Order, each 
of which has its own king and its own restoration in petto* mutually 
enforce, as against their rivals' hankering for usurpation and revolt, 
the common rule of the bourgeoisie, the form in which the special 
claims remain neutralised and reserved—the republic. 
Just as Kant makes the republic, so these royalists make the 
monarchy the only rational form of state, a postulate of practical 
reason whose realisation is never attained, but whose attainment 
must always be striven for and mentally adhered to as the goal.b 
Thus the constitutional republic had gone forth from the hands of 
the bourgeois republicans as a hollow ideological formula to become 
a form full of content and life in the hands of the royalists in 
coalition. And Thiers spoke more truly than he suspects when he 
said: "We, the royalists, are the true pillars of the constitutional 
republic."0 
The overthrow of the ministry of the coalition and the appearance 
of the ministry of the clerks has a second significance. Its Finance 
Minister was  Fould.  Fould as Finance Minister signifies the official 
surrender of France's national wealth to the Bourse, the manage­
ment of the state's property by the Bourse and in the interests of the 
Bourse. With the nomination of Fould, the finance aristocracy 
announced its restoration in the Moniteur. This restoration necessari­
ly supplemented the other restorations, which form just so many 
links in the chain of the constitutional republic. 
Louis Philippe had never dared to make a genuine loup-cervier 
(stock-exchange wolf) finance minister. Just as his monarchy was 
the ideal name for the rule of the big bourgeoisie, so in his ministries 
the privileged interests had to bear ideologically disinterested names. 
The bourgeois republic everywhere pushed into the forefront what 
the different monarchies, Legitimist as well as Orleanist, kept 
concealed in the background. It made earthly what they had made 
heavenly. In place of the names of the saints it put the bourgeois 
proper names of the dominant class interests. 
Our whole exposition has shown how the republic, from the first 
day of its existence, did not overthrow but consolidated the finance 
In its bosom, secretly.— Ed. 
Immanuel Kant, Der Rechtslehre Zweiter Theil. Das öffentliche Recht. Erster 
Abschnitt. Das Staatsrecht. — Ed. 
From Thiers' speech made in the Legislative Assembly on July 24, 1849.— Ed. 

=====第138页=====
The Class Struggles in France 115 
aristocracy. But the concessions that were made to it were a fate to 
which submission was made without the desire to bring it about. 
With Fould, the initiative in the government returned to the finance 
aristocracy. 
The question will be asked, how the coalesced bourgeoisie could 
bear and suffer the rule of finance, which under Louis Philippe 
depended on the exclusion or subordination of the remaining 
bourgeois factions. 
The answer is simple. 
First of all, the finance aristocracy itself forms a weighty, au­
thoritative part of the royalist coalition, whose common govern­
mental power is denominated republic. Are not the spokesmen and 
leading lights among the Orleanists the old confederates and 
accomplices of the finance aristocracy? Is it not itself the golden 
phalanx of Orleanism? As far as the Legitimists are concerned, they 
had participated in practice already under Louis Philippe in all the 
orgies of the Bourse, mine and railway speculations. In general, the 
combination of large landed property with high finance is a normal 
fact. Proof:  England;  proof:  even Austria. 
In a country like France, where the volume of national production 
stands at a disproportionately lower level than the amount of the 
national debt, where government bonds form the most important 
object of speculation and the Bourse the chief market for the 
investment of capital that wants to turn itself to account in an 
unproductive way—in such a country a countless number of people 
from all bourgeois or semi-bourgeois classes must have an interest in 
the state debt, in the Bourse gamblings, in finance. Do not all these 
interested subalterns find their natural mainstays and commanders 
in the faction which represents this interest in its vastest outlines, 
which represents it as a whole? 
By what is the accrual of state property to high finance 
conditioned? By the constantly growing indebtedness of the state. 
And the indebtedness of the state? By the constant excess of its 
expenditure over its income, a disproportion which is simultaneously 
the cause and effect of the system of state loans. 
In order to escape from this indebtedness, the state must either 
restrict its expenditure, that is, simplify and curtail the government 
organism, govern as little as possible, employ as small a personnel 
as possible, enter as little as possible into relations with civil 
society. This path was impossible for the party of Order, whose 
means of repression, whose official interference in the name of the 
state and whose ubiquity through organs of state were bound to 
increase in the same measure as the number of quarters increased 

=====第139页=====
116 Karl Marx 
from which its rule arid the conditions for the existence of its class 
were threatened. The gendarmerie cannot be reduced in the same 
measure as attacks on persons and property increase. 
Or the state must seek to evade the debts and produce an 
immediate but transitory balance in its budget by putting extraordi­
nary taxes  on the shoulders of the wealthiest classes. But was the party 
of Order to sacrifice its own wealth on the altar of the fatherland in 
order to stop the national wealth from being exploited by the 
Bourse? Pas si bête! 3 
Therefore, without a complete revolution in the French state, no 
revolution in the French state budget. Along with this state budget 
necessarily goes state indebtedness, and with state indebtedness 
necessarily goes the power over the trade in state debts, the state 
creditors, the bankers, the money dealers and the wolves of the 
Bourse. Only one faction of the party of Order was directly 
concerned in the overthrow of the finance aristocracy—the manufac­
turers. We are not speaking of the middle, of the smaller 
industrialists; we are speaking of the reigning princes of the 
manufacturing interests, who had formed the broad basis of the 
dynastic opposition under Louis Philippe. Their interest is indubita­
bly reduction of the costs of production and hence reduction of the 
taxes,  which enter into production, and hence reduction of the state 
debts,  the interest on which enters into the taxes, hence the 
overthrow of the finance aristocracy. 
In England—and the largest French manufacturers are petty 
bourgeois compared with their English rivals—we really find the 
manufacturers, a Cobden, a Bright, at the head of the crusade 
against the bank and the stock-exchange aristocracy. Why not in 
France? In England industry predominates; in France, agriculture. 
In England industry requires free tradeb; in France, protective 
tariffs, national monopoly alongside of the other monopolies. 
French industry does not dominate French production, the French 
industrialists, therefore, do not dominate the French bourgeoisie. In 
order to secure the advancement of their interests as against the 
remaining factions of the bourgeoisie, they cannot, like the English, 
take the lead of the movement and simultaneously push their class 
interests to the fore; they must follow in the train of the revolution, 
and serve interests which are opposed to the collective interest:; of 
their class. In February they had misunderstood their position; 
February sharpened their wits. And who is more directly threatened 
by the workers than the employer, the industrial capitalist? The 
a It is not so stupid! — Ed. 
The two words are in English in the German original.— Ed. 

=====第140页=====
The Class Struggles in France 117 
manufacturer, therefore, of necessity became in France the most 
fanatical member of the party of Order. The reduction of his profit 
by finance, what is that compared with the abolition of profit by the 
proletariat} 
In France, the petty bourgeois does what normally the industrial 
bourgeois would have to do; the worker does what normally would 
be the task of the petty bourgeois; and the task of the worker, who 
accomplishes that? No one. In France it is not accomplished; in 
France it is proclaimed. It is not accomplished anywhere within the 
national walls111; the class war within French society turns into a 
world war, in which the nations confront one another. Accomplish­
ment begins only when, through the world war, the proletariat is 
pushed to the fore in the nation which dominates the world market, 
to the forefront in England. The revolution, which finds here not its 
end, but its organisational beginning, is no short-lived revolution. 
The present generation is like the Jews whom Moses led through the 
wilderness. It has not only a new world to conquer, it must go under 
in order to make room for the men who are able to cope with a new 
world. 
Let us return to Fould. 
On November 14, 1849, Fould mounted the tribune of the 
National Assembly and expounded his system of finance: an apology 
for the old system of taxes! Retention of the wine tax! Abandonment 
of Passy's income tax! 
Passy, too, was no revolutionist; he was an old minister of Louis 
Philippe's. He belonged to the puritans of the Dufaure brand and to 
the most intimate confidants of Teste, the scapegoat of the July 
monarchy.* Passy, too, had praised the old tax system and rec­
ommended the retention of the wine tax; but he had, at the same 
time,  torn the veil from the state deficit. He had declared the 
necessity for a new tax, the income tax, if the bankruptcy of the state 
was to be avoided. Fould, who had recommended state bankruptcy 
to Ledru-Rollin, recommended the state deficit to the Legislative 
Assembly. He promised economies, the secret of which later revealed 
itself in that, for example, expenditures diminished by sixty millions 
while the floating debt increased by two hundred millions—conjur-
* On July 8, 1847, before the Chamber of Peers in Paris, began the trial of 
Parmentier and General Cubières for bribing officials to obtain a salt works 
concession, and of the then Minister of Public Works, Teste, for accepting such money 
bribes. The latter attempted to commit suicide during the trial. All were heavily fined; 
Teste, in addition, was sentenced to three years' imprisonment.— Note  by Engek to the 
1895 edition. 
6-1124 

=====第141页=====
118 Karl Marx 
ers' tricks in the grouping of figures, in the drawing up of accounts, 
which all finally amounted to new loans. 
Alongside the other jealous bourgeois factions, the finance 
aristocracy naturally did not act in so shamelessly corrupt a manner 
under Fould as under Louis Philippe. But, once it existed, the system 
remained the same: constant increase in the debts, masking of the 
deficit. And, in time, the old Bourse swindling came out more openly. 
Proof:  the law concerning the Avignon Railway; the mysterious 
fluctuations in government securities, for a brief space the topic of 
the day throughout Paris; finally, the ill-starred speculations of 
Fould and Bonaparte on the elections of March 10. 
With the official restoration of the finance aristocracy, the French 
people had soon again to stand before a February 24. 
The Constituent Assembly, in an attack of misanthropy against its 
heir, had abolished the wine tax for the year of our Lord 1850. New 
debts could not be paid with the abolition of old taxes.  Creton,  a cretin 
of the party of Order, had moved the retention of the wine tax even 
before the prorogation of the Legislative Assembly. Fould took up 
this motion in the name of the Bonapartist ministry and on 
December 20, 1849, the anniversary of the day when Bonaparte was 
proclaimed President, the National Assembly decreed the restoration 
of the wine tax. 
The sponsor of this restoration was not a financier; it was the 
Jesuit chief Montalembert. His argument3  was strikingly simple: 
Taxation is the maternal breast on which the government is suckled. 
The government is the instruments of repression; it is the organs of 
authority; it is the army; it is the police; it is the officials, the judges, 
the ministers; it is the  priests.  An attack on taxation is an attack by the 
anarchists on the sentinels of order, who safeguard the material and 
spiritual production of bourgeois society from the inroads of the 
proletarian vandals. Taxation is the fifth god, side by side with 
property, the family, order and religion. And the wine tax is 
incontestably taxation and, moreover, not ordinary, but traditional, 
monarchically disposed, respectable taxation. Vive l'impôt des bois­
sons ! b Three cheers and one cheer more! c 
When the French peasant paints the devil, he paints him in the 
guise of a tax-collector. From the moment when Montalembert 
elevated taxation to a god, the peasant became godless, atheist, and 
threw himself into the arms of the devil, of Socialism. The religion of 
a In the Legislative Assembly on December 13, 1849.— Ed. 
Long live the tax on  drinks!  — Ed. 
This sentence is in English in the German original.— Ed. 

=====第142页=====
The Class Struggles in France 119 
order had given him up; the Jesuits had given him up; Bonaparte 
had given him up. December 20, 1849, had irrevocably compro­
mised December 20, 1848. The "nephew of his uncle" was not the 
first of his family whom the wine tax defeated, this tax which, in the 
expression of Montalembert, heralds the revolutionary storm. The 
real, the great Napoleon declared on St. Helena that the reintroduc­
tion of the wine tax had contributed more to his downfall than all 
else, since it had alienated from him the peasants of Southern 
France. Already under Louis XIV the favourite object of the hatred 
of the people (see the writings of Boisguillebert and Vauban), 
abolished by the first revolution, it was reintroduced by Napoleon in 
a modified form in 1808. When the restoration entered France, 
there trotted before it not only the Cossacks, but also promises to 
abolish the wine tax. The gentilhommerie* naturally did not need to 
keep its word to the gent taillable à merci et  miséricorde?  The year 1830 
promised the abolition of the wine tax. It was not that year's way to 
do what it said or say what it did. The year 1848 promised the 
abolition of the wine tax, just as it promised everything. Finally, the 
Constituent Assembly, which promised nothing, made, as already 
mentioned, a testamentary provision whereby the wine tax was to 
disappear on January 1, 1850. And just ten days before January 1, 
1850,  the Legislative Assembly introduced it once more, so that the 
French people perpetually pursued it, and when it had thrown it out 
the door saw it come in again through the window. 
The popular hatred of the wine tax is explained by the fact that it 
unites in itself all the odiousness of the French system of taxation. 
The mode of its collection is odious, the mode of its distribution 
aristocratic, for the rates of taxation are the same for the commonest 
as for the costliest wines-; it increases, therefore, in geometrical 
progression as the wealth of the consumers decreases, an inverted 
progressive tax. It accordingly directly provokes the poisoning of the 
labouring classes by putting a premium on adulterated and imitation 
wines.  It lessens consumption, since it sets up  octrois"  before the gates 
of all towns of over 4,000 inhabitants and transforms each such town 
into a foreign country with a protective tariff against French wine. 
The big wine merchants, but still more the small ones, the mar­
chands de vins, the keepers of wine bars, whose livelihood directly 
depends on the consumption of wine, are so many avowed enemies 
of the wine tax. And, finally, by lessening consumption the wine tax 
Nobility.— Ed. 
People liable to tax.— Ed. 
Local customs offices.— Ed. 
6* 

=====第143页=====
120 Karl Marx 
curtails the producers' market. While it renders the urban workers 
incapable of paying for wine, it renders the wine-growers incapable 
of selling it. And France has a wine-growing population of about 
twelve million. One can, therefore, understand the hatred of the 
people in general; one can, in particular, understand the fanaticism 
of the peasants against the wine tax. And, in addition, they saw in its 
restoration no isolated, more or less accidental, event. The peasants 
have a kind of historical tradition of their own, which is handed 
down from father to son, and in this historical school it is muttered 
that whenever any government wants to dupe the peasants, it 
promises the abolition of the wine tax, and as soon as it has duped 
the peasants, retains or reintroduces the wine tax. In the wine tax the 
peasant tests the bouquet of the government, its tendency. The 
restoration of the wine tax on December 20 meant: Louis Bonaparte is 
like the  rest.  But he was not like the rest; he was a peasant  discovery,  and 
in the petitions carrying millions of signatures against the wine tax 
they took back the votes that they had given a year before to the 
"nephew of his uncle". 
The rural population—over two-thirds of the total French 
population—consist for the most part of so-called free landowners. 
The first generation, gratuitously freed by the Revolution of 1789 
from its feudal burdens, had paid no price for the soil. But the 
following generations paid, in the form of the price of  land,  what their 
semi-serf forefathers had paid in the form of rent, tithes,  corvée,  etc. 
The more, on the one hand, the population grew and the more, on 
the other hand, the partition of holdings increased, the higher 
became the price of the plot, for the demand for them increased with 
their smallness. But in proportion as the price which the peasant 
paid for his plot rose, whether he bought it directly or whether he 
had it accounted as capital by his coheirs, necessarily also rose the 
indebtedness of the peasant, that is, the mortgage. The claim to a debt 
encumbering the land is termed a mortgage, a pawnticket in respect 
of the land. Just as privileges accumulated on the medieval estate, 
mortgages accumulate on the modern small holding.—On the other 
hand: under the system of parcellation the soil is purely an instrument 
of production for its proprietor. Now the fertility of land diminishes in 
the same measure as land is divided. The application of machinery to 
the land, the division of labour, major soil improvement measures, 
such as digging drainage and irrigation canals and the like, become 
more and more impossible, while the unproductive  costs  of cultivation 
increase in the same proportion as the division of the instrument of 
production  itself.  All this, regardless of whether the possessor of the 
small holding possesses capital or not. But the more the division 

=====第144页=====
The Class Struggles in France 121 
increases, the more does the plot of land with its utterly wretched 
inventory form the entire capital of the small-holding peasant, the 
more does investment of capital in the land diminish, the more does 
the cottager lack land, money and education for making use of the 
progress in agronomy, and the more does the cultivation of the soil 
retrogress. Finally, the net  proceeds  diminish in the same proportion 
as the gross consumption increases, as the whole family of the peasant 
is kept back from other occupations because of its holding and yet is 
not enabled to live by it. 
In the measure, therefore, that the population and, with it, the 
division of the land increases,  does the  instrument of production, the soil, 
become dearer and its fertility decrease, does agriculture decline and the 
peasant  become  loaded with  debt.  And what was the effect becomes, in its 
turn, the cause. Each generation leaves behind another more deeply 
in debt; each new generation begins under more unfavourable and 
more aggravating conditions; mortgaging begets mortgaging, and 
when it becomes impossible for the peasant to offer his small holding 
as security for new  debts,  that is, to encumber it with new mortgages, 
he falls a direct victim to usury, and usurious interest  rates  become so 
much the more exorbitant. 
Thus it came about that the French peasant cedes to the capitalist, 
in the form of interest on the mortgages encumbering the soil and in 
the form of interest on the advances made by the usurer without 
mortgages, not only rent, not only the industrial profit, in a word, not 
only the  whole  net profit, but even a part of  the wages, and that therefore 
he has sunk to the level of the Irish tenant farmer—all under the 
pretence of being a private proprietor. 
This process was accelerated in France by the evergrowing bur­
den of  taxes  and by court  costs  called forth in part directly by the for­
malities themselves with which French legislation encumbers the 
ownership of land, in part by the innumerable conflicts over plots 
everywhere bounding and crossing each other, and in part by the 
litigiousness of the peasants, whose enjoyment of property is limited 
to the fanatical assertion of their title to their fancied property, 
of their property rights. 
According to a statistical statement of 1840, the gross production 
of French agriculture amounted to 5,237,178,000 francs. Of this, the 
costs of cultivation come to 3,552,000,000 francs, including the 
consumption by the persons working. There remains a net product 
of 1,685,178,000 francs, from which 550,000,000 have to be 
deducted for interest on mortgages, 100,000,000 for law officials, 
350,000,000 for taxes and 107,000,000 for registration money, 
stamp duty, mortgage fees, etc. There is left one-third of the net 

=====第145页=====
122 Karl Marx 
product, or 538,000,000; when distributed over the population, 
not 25 francs per head net product.112 Naturally neither usury 
outside of mortgage nor lawyers' fees, etc., are included in this 
calculation. 
The condition of the French peasants, when the republic had 
added new burdens to their old ones, is comprehensible. It can be 
seen that their exploitation differs only in form from the exploitation 
of the industrial proletariat. The exploiter is the same: capital. The 
individual capitalists exploit the individual peasants through mort­
gages  and usury; the capitalist class exploits the peasant class through 
the state  taxes.  The peasant's title to property is the talisman by which 
capital held him hitherto under its spell, the pretext under which it 
set him against the industrial proletariat. Only the fall of capital can 
raise the peasant; only an anti-capitalist, a proletarian government 
can break his economic misery, his social degradation. The con­
stitutional republic is the dictatorship of his united exploiters; the 
social-democratic, the Red republic, is the dictatorship of his allies. And 
the scale rises or falls, according to the votes that the peasant casts 
into the ballot box. He himself has to decide his fate.—So spoke the 
Socialists in pamphlets, almanacs, calendars and leaflets of all kinds. 
This language became more understandable to him through the 
counter-writings of the party of Order, which, for its part, turned to 
him, and which, by gross exaggeration, by its brutal conception and 
representation of the intentions and ideas of the Socialists, struck the 
true peasant note and overstimulated his lust after forbidden fruit. 
Clearest of all, however, was the voice of the peasants' actual 
experience of using the vote, and the successive disappointments it 
rained down blow by blow with revolutionary speed upon them. 
Revolutions are the locomotives of history. 
The gradual revolutionising of the peasants was manifested by 
various symptoms. It already revealed itself in the elections to the 
Legislative Assembly; it was revealed in the state of siege in the five 
departments bordering Lyons; it was revealed a few months after 
June 13 in the election of a Montagnard^ in place of the former 
president of the Chambre introuvable* by the Department of the 
Gironde; it was revealed on December 20, 1849, in the election of a 
Red b in place of a deceased Legitimist deputy in the Department du 
* This is the name given by history to the fanatically ultra-royalist and reactionary 
Chamber of Deputies elected immediately after the second overthrow of Napoleon, in 
1815.—  Note by Engels to the 1895 edition. 
Lagarde, who was elected to replace the deceased Ravez.— Ed. 
Favand, who was elected to replace the deceased Beaune.— Ed. 

=====第146页=====
The Class Struggles in France 123 
Gara\in  that promised land of the Legitimists, the scene of the most 
frightful infamies committed against the republicans in 1794 and 
1795 and the centre of the terreur  blanche  in 1815, when liberals and 
Protestants were publicly murdered. This revolutionising of the most 
stationary class is most clearly evident since the reintroduction 
of the wine tax. The governmental measures and the laws of 
January and February 1850 are directed almost exclusively against 
the departments and the peasants. The most striking proof of their 
progress. 
The Hautpoul circular, by which the gendarme was appointed 
inquisitor of the prefect, of the sub-prefect and, above all, of the 
mayor, and by which espionage was organised even in the hidden 
corners of the remotest village community; the law against the 
schoolteachers,  by which they, the men of talent, the spokesmen, the 
educators and interpreters of the peasant class, were subjected to the 
arbitrary power of the prefect, they, the proletarians of the learned 
class,  were chased like hunted beasts from one community to 
another; the bill against the  mayors,  by which the Damocles sword of 
dismissal was hung over their heads, and they, the presidents of the 
peasant communities, were every moment set in opposition to the 
President of the Republic and the party of Order; the ordinance 
which transformed the seventeen military districts of France into 
four pashalics114 and forced the barracks and the bivouac on the 
French as their national salon; the education law,115 by which the party 
of Order proclaimed the unconsciousness and the forcible stupefac­
tion of France as the condition of its life under the regime of 
universal suffrage—what were all these laws and measures? 
Desperate attempts to reconquer the departments and the peasants 
of the departments for the party of Order. 
Regarded as repression, they were wretched methods that wrung 
the neck of their own purpose. The big measures, like the retention 
of the wine tax, of the 45 centimes tax, the scornful rejection of the 
peasant petitions for the repayment of the milliard, etc., all these 
legislative thunderbolts struck the peasant class onlyonce, wholesale, 
from the centre; the laws and measures instanced made attack and 
resistance general, the topic of the day in every hut; they inocu­
lated every village with revolution; they localised and peasantised the 
revolution. 
On the other hand, do not these proposals of Bonaparte and their 
acceptance by the National Assembly prove the unity of the two 
powers of the constitutional republic, so far as it is a question of 
repression of anarchy, that is, of all the classes that rise against the 
bourgeois dictatorship? Had not Soulouque, directly after his brusque 

=====第147页=====
124 Karl Marx 
message,3  assured the Legislative Assembly of his dévouement* to 
order, through the immediately following message of Carlier, u6 that 
dirty, mean caricature of Fouché, as Louis Bonaparte himself was the 
shallow caricature of Napoleon? 
The education law shows us the alliance of the young Catholics with 
the old Voltairians. Could the rule of the united bourgeois be 
anything but the coalitioned despotism of the pro-Jesuit Restoration 
and the pseudo-free-thinking July monarchy? And was it not 
inevitable that the weapons distributed to the people by one 
bourgeois faction against the other in their mutual struggle for 
supremacy should be torn away from them again, once the people 
stood in opposition to their united dictatorship? Nothing has 
aroused the Paris shopkeeper more than this coquettish étalage of 
Jesuitism, not even the rejection of the concordats à l'amiable. 
Meanwhile the collisions between the different factions of the 
party of Order, as well as between the National Assembly and 
Bonaparte, continued. The National Assembly was far from pleased 
that Bonaparte, immediately after his coup  d'état,  after appointing his 
own, Bonapartist, ministry, summoned the wounded veterans of the 
monarchy, newly appointed prefects, and made their unconstitution­
al agitation for his re-election as President the condition of their 
appointment; that Carlier celebrated his inauguration with the 
closing of a Legitimist club, or that Bonaparte founded a journal of 
his own, Le Napoléon, which betrayed to the public the secret longings 
of the President, while his ministers had to deny them from 
the tribune of the Legislative Assembly. The latter was far from 
pleased by the defiant retention of the ministry, notwithstanding its 
various votes of no confidence; far from pleased by the attempt to 
win the favour of the non-commissioned officers by a pay rise of 
four sous a day, and the favour of the proletariat by a plagiarisation 
of Eugène Sue's  Mystères,  by an honour loan bank c; far from pleased, 
finally, by the effrontery with which the ministers were made to 
move the deportation of the remaining June insurgents to Algiers, in 
order to heap unpopularity on the Legislative Assembly en gros,  while 
the President reserved popularity for himself en détail, by individual 
grants of pardon. Thiers let fall threatening words about "coup d'état" 
and "coups de tête", d and the Legislative Assembly revenged itself on 
Bonaparte by rejecting every proposed law which he put forward for 
a See this volume, pp.  112-13.—  Ed. 
Devotion.— Ed. 
For a criticism of the idea to set up a "bank for the poor", described in Eugène 
Sue's novel Les mystères de Paris, see present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 197-99.— Ed. 
A play on the words coup d'état and coups de tête (rash deeds).— Ed. 

=====第148页=====
The Class Struggles in France 125 
his own benefit, and by enquiring, with noisy mistrust, in every 
instance of his making a proposal in the common interest, whether 
he did not aspire, through increase of the executive power, to 
augment the personal power of Bonaparte. In a word, it revenged 
itself by a conspiracy of contempt. 
The Legitimist party, on its part, saw with vexation the more 
capable Orleanists once more occupying almost all posts and 
centralisation increasing, while on principle it sought its salvation in 
decentralisation. And it was so. The counter-revolution centralised 
forcibly, that is to say, it prepared the mechanism of the 
revolution. It even centralised the gold and silver of France in the 
Paris bank through the compulsory quotation of bank-notes, and so 
created the ready war  chest  of the revolution. 
Lastly, the Orleanists saw with vexation the emergent principle of 
legitimacy contrasted with their bastard principle, and themselves 
every moment snubbed and maltreated as the bourgeois mésalliance 
of a noble spouse. 
Little by little we have seen peasants, petty bourgeois, the middle 
classes in general, stepping alongside the proletariat, driven into 
open antagonism to the official republic and treated by it as 
antagonists. Revolt against bourgeois dictatorship, need of a change of 
society, adherence to democratic-republican institutions as organs of their 
movement, grouping round the proletariat as the decisive revolutionary 
power—these are the common characteristics of the  so-called  party of 
social-democracy,  the party of  the Red republic.  This party of Anarchy, as its 
opponents christened it, is no less a coalition of different interests 
than the party of Order. From the smallest reform of the old social 
disorder to the overthrow of the old social order, from bourgeois 
liberalism to revolutionary terrorism—as far apart as this lie the 
extremes that form the starting point and the finishing point of the 
party of "Anarchy". 
Abolition of all protective tariffs—Socialism! For it strikes at the 
monopoly of the industrial faction of the party of Order. Regulation 
of the state budget—Socialism! For it strikes at the monopoly of the 
financial faction of the party of Order. Free entry for foreign 
meat and corn—Socialism! For it strikes at the monopoly of the 
third faction of the party of Order, large landed property. The 
demands of the free-trade party, that is, of the most advanced 
English bourgeois party, appear in France as so many socialist 
demands. Voltairianism—Socialism! For it strikes at a fourth faction 
of the party of Order, the Catholic. Freedom of the press, right of 
association, universal public education—Socialism, Socialism! They 
strike at the general monopoly of the party of Order. 

=====第149页=====
126 Karl Marx 
So swiftly had the march of the revolution ripened conditions that 
the friends of reform of all shades, the most moderate claims of 
the middle classes, were compelled to group themselves round 
the banner of the most extreme party of revolution, round the red 
flag. 
Yet, manifold as the Socialism of the different large sections of the 
party of Anarchy was, according to the economic conditions and the 
total revolutionary requirements of their class or fraction of a class 
arising out of these, in one point it is in harmony: in proclaiming itself 
the means of emancipating the proletariat and the emancipation of the 
latter as its object. Deliberate deception on the part of some; 
self-deception on the part of the others, who give out the world 
transformed according to their own needs as the best world for all, as 
the realisation of all revolutionary claims and the elimination of all 
revolutionary collisions. 
Behind the general socialist phrases of the "party of Anarchy", which 
sound rather alike, there is concealed the Socialism of  the "National", 
of the "Presse" and the "Siècle", which more or less consistently wants 
to overthrow the rule of the finance aristocracy and to free industry 
and trade from their hitherto existing fetters. This is the Socialism of 
industry, of trade and of agriculture, whose bosses in the party of 
Order deny these interests, insofar as they no longer coincide with 
their private monopolies. Socialism proper,  petty-bourgeois  Socialism, 
Socialism par  excellence,  is distinct from this bourgeois Socialism, to 
which, as to every variety of Socialism, a section of the workers and 
petty bourgeois naturally rallies. Capital hounds this class chiefly as 
its creditor, so it demands credit institutions; capital crushes it by 
competition, so it demands  associations  supported by the state; capital 
overwhelms it by concentration, so it demands progressive taxes, 
limitations on inheritance, taking over of large construction projects 
by the state, and other measures that forcibly stem the growth of capital. 
Since it dreams of the peaceful achievement of its Socialism—allow­
ing, perhaps, for a second February Revolution lasting a brief day or 
so—the coming historical process naturally appears to it as an 
application of systems, which the thinkers of society, whether in 
companies or as individual inventors, devise or have devised. Thus 
they become the eclectics or adepts of the existing socialist  systems,  of 
doctrinaire Socialism, which was the theoretical expression of the 
proletariat only as long as it had not yet developed further into a free 
historical movement of its own. 
Thus,  while Utopia, doctrinaire Socialism, which subordinates the 
whole movement to one of its elements, which puts the cerebrations 
of the individual pedant in place of common, social production and, 

=====第150页=====
The Class Struggles in France 127 
above all, wishes away the necessities of the revolutionary class 
struggles by petty tricks or great sentimental rhetoric—while this 
doctrinaire Socialism, which basically only idealises present-day 
society, makes a shadowless picture of it and seeks to oppose its ideal 
to its reality, while this Socialism is ceded by the proletariat to the 
petty bourgeoisie, while the internal struggle between the different 
socialist leaders reveals each so-called system to be the pretentious 
adherence to one transitional position on the path to social upheaval 
as opposed to another—the proletariat increasingly organises itself 
around revolutionary Socialism, around Communism, for which the 
bourgeoisie itself has invented the name of Blanqui. This Socialism is 
the declaration of  the permanence of  the revolution, the  class  dictatorship of 
the proletariat as the necessary transit point to the abolition of  class 
distinctions  generally,  to the abolition of all the relations of production 
on which they rest, to the abolition of all the social relations that 
correspond to these relations of production, to the revolutionising of 
all the ideas that result from these social relations. 
The scope of this exposition does not permit of developing the 
subject further. 
We have seen that just as in the party of Order the finance 
aristocracy  necessarily took the lead, so in the party of "Anarchy" the 
proletariat. While the different classes, united in a revolutionary 
league, grouped themselves round the proletariat, while the depart­
ments became ever more unreliable and the Legislative Assembly 
itself ever more morose towards the pretensions of the French 
Soulouque, the long deferred and delayed election of substitutes for 
the Montagnards, proscribed after June 13, drew near. 
The government, scorned by its foes, maltreated and daily 
humiliated by its alleged friends, saw only one means of emerging 
from this repugnant and untenable position—a revolt. A revolt in 
Paris would have permitted the proclamation of a state of siege in 
Paris and the departments and thus the control of the elections. 
On the other hand, the friends of order, in face of a government 
that had gained victory over anarchy, were constrained to 
make concessions, if they did not want to appear as anarchists them­
selves. 
The government set to work. At the beginning of February 1850, 
provocation of the people by chopping down the trees of liberty.117 
In vain. If the trees of liberty lost their place, it itself lost its head and 
fell back, frightened by its own provocation. The National Assembly, 
however, received this clumsy attempt at emancipation on the part of 
Bonaparte with ice-cold mistrust. The removal of the wreaths of 
immortelles from the July column was no more successful.118 It gave 

=====第151页=====
128 Karl Marx 
a part of the army an opportunity for revolutionary demonstra­
tions and the National Assembly the occasion for a more or less 
veiled vote of no confidence in the ministry. In vain the government 
press threatened the abolition of universal suffrage and an invasion 
by the Cossacks. In vain was d'Hautpoul's direct challenge, issued 
to the Left3 in the Legislative Assembly  itself,  to betake themselves to 
the streets, and his declaration that the government was ready to 
receive them. Hautpoul received nothing but a call to order from the 
President,0 and the party of Order, with silent, malicious joy, allowed 
a deputy of the Left to mock Bonaparte's usurpatory longings. In 
vain, finally, was the prophecy of a revolution on February 24. The 
government caused February 24 to be ignored by the people. 
The proletariat did not allow itself to be provoked to revolt, 
because it was on the point of making a revolution. 
Unhindered by the provocations of the government, which only 
heightened the general exasperation at the existing situation, the 
election committee, wholly under the influence of the workers, put 
forward three candidates for Paris: Deflotte, Vidal and Carnot. Deflot-
te was a June deportee, amnestied through one of Bonaparte's 
popularity-seeking ideas; he was a friend of Blanqui and had taken 
part in the attempt of May 15. Vidal, known as a Communist writer 
through his book Concerning  the Distribution of Wealthy was formerly 
secretary to Louis Blanc in the Luxembourg Commission. Carnot, 
son of the man of the Convention who had organised the victory, d 
the least compromised member of the National party, Minister of 
Education in the Provisional Government and the Executive 
Commission, was through his democratic public education bill a 
living protest against the education law of the Jesuits. These three 
candidates represented the three allied classes: at the head, the June 
insurgent, the representative of the revolutionary proletariat; next to 
him, the doctrinaire Socialist, the representative of the socialist petty 
bourgeoisie; finally, the third, the representative of the republican 
bourgeois party, the democratic formulas of which had gained a 
socialist significance vis-à-vis the party of Order and had long lost 
their own significance. This was a general coalition against the 
bourgeoisie and the government, as in February. But this time the 
proletariat was at the head of the revolutionary league. 
a On February 16, 1850.— Ed 
Comte Napoléon Daru. — Ed 
F. Vidal, De la répartition des richesses ou de la justice distributive en économie 
sociale. — Ed 
Lazare Nicolas Carnot. — Ed. 

=====第152页=====
The Class Struggles in France 129 
In spite of all efforts the socialist candidates won. The army itself 
voted for the June insurgent against its own War Minister, La Hitte. 
The party of Order was thunderstruck. The elections in the 
departments did not solace them; they gave a majority to the 
Montagnards. 
The election of March 10, 1850! It  was the  revocation of June 1848: the 
butchers and deporters of the June insurgents returned to the 
National Assembly, but returned, bowed down, in the train of the 
deported, and with their principles on their lips. It was the revocation 
of June 13, 1849: the Montagne, proscribed by the National Assembly, 
returned to the National Assembly, but as advance trumpeters of the 
revolution, no longer as its commanders. It was the revocation of 
December 10: Napoleon had lost out with his Minister La Hitte. The 
parliamentary history of France knows only one analogy: the 
rejection of d'Haussez, minister of Charles X, in 1830. Finally, the 
election of March 10, 1850, was the cancellation of the election of 
May 13, which had given the party of Order a majority. The election 
of March 10 protested against the majority of May 13. March 10 was 
a revolution. Behind the ballots lie the paving stones. 
"The vote of March 10 means war," snouted Ségur d'Aguesseau,* 
one of the most advanced members of the party of Order. 
With March 10, 1850, the constitutional republic entered a new 
phase,  the phase  of its  dissolution.  The different factions of the majority 
are again united among themselves and with Bonaparte; they are 
again the saviours of order; he is again their neutral man. If they 
remember that they are royalists it happens only from despair of the 
possibility of a bourgeois republic; if he remembers that he is a 
pretender, it happens only because he despairs of remaining 
President. 
At the command of the party of Order, Bonaparte answers the 
election of Deflotte, the June insurgent, by appointing Baroche 
Minister of the Interior, Baroche, the accuser of Blanqui and Barbes, 
of Ledru-Rollin and Guinard. The Legislative Assembly answers the 
election of Carnot by adopting the education law, the election of 
Vidal by suppressing the socialist press. The party of Order seeks to 
blare away its own fears by the trumpet blasts of its press. "The 
sword is holy," cries one of its organs; "The defenders of order must 
take the offensive against the Red party," cries another; "Between 
Socialism and society there is a duel to the death, a war without 
surcease or mercy; in this duel of desperation one or the other must 
go under; if society does not annihilate Socialism, Socialism will 
a In the Legislative Assembly on March 16,  1850.—  Ed. 

=====第153页=====
130 Karl Marx 
annihilate society," crows a third cock of order.3 Throw up the 
barricades of order, the barricades of religion, the barricades of the 
family! An end must be made of the 127,000 voters of Paris! A 
Bartholomew's night for the Socialists! And the party of Order 
believes for a moment in its own certainty of victory. 
Their organs hold forth most fanatically of all against the 
"boutiquiers of Paris". The June insurgent of Paris elected by the 
shopkeepers of Paris as their representative! This means that a 
second June 1848 is impossible; this means that a second June 13, 
1849,  is impossible; this means that the moral influence of capital is 
broken; this means that the bourgeois assembly now represents only 
the bourgeoisie; this means that big property is lost, because its 
vassal, small property, seeks its salvation in the camp of the 
propertyless. 
The party of Order naturally returns to its inevitable commonplace. 
"More repression," it cries, "tenfold repression!" But its power of 
repression has diminished tenfold, while resistance has increased a 
hundredfold. Must not the chief instrument of repression, the army, 
itself be repressed? And the party of Order speaks its last word: 
"The iron ring of suffocating legality must be broken. The 
constitutional republic is impossible. We must fight with our true 
weapons; since February 1848, we have fought the revolution with its 
weapons and on its terrain. We have accepted its institutions; the 
constitution is a fortress which safeguards only the besiegers, not the 
besieged! By smuggling ourselves into holy Ilion in the belly of the 
Trojan horse, we have, unlike our forefathers, the Grecs,* not 
conquered the hostile town, but made prisoners of ourselves." 
The foundation of the constitution, however, is universal suffrage. 
Annihilation of universal suffrage—such is the last word of the party of 
Order, of the bourgeois dictatorship. 
On May 4, 1848, on December 20, 1848, on May 13, 1849, and on 
July 8, 1849, universal suffrage admitted that they were right.119 On 
March 10, 1850, universal suffrage admitted that it had itself been 
wrong. Bourgeois rule as the outcome and result of universal 
suffrage, as the express act of the sovereign will of the people—that 
is the meaning of the bourgeois constitution. But has the constitution 
* Grecs —play on words: Greeks, but also professional cheats.— Note  by Engels  to the 
1895 edition. 
a The organ of the party of Order referred to here is the newspaper La Patrie. 
Evidently, Marx made use of the newspaper La Voix du peuple Nos. 166 and 167 of 
March 17 and 18, 1850, in which these passages from La Patrie were quoted.— Ed 

=====第154页=====
The Class Struggles  in France 131 
any further meaning from  the  moment that  the  content  of this 
suffrage,  of this sovereign will,  is no  longer bourgeois rule?  Is it not 
the duty  of the  bourgeoisie  so to  regulate  the suffrage that  it wills  the 
reasonable,  its rule?  By ever  and  anon putting  an end to the  existing 
state power  and  creating  it anew  out of itself,  does  not  universal 
suffrage  put an end to all  stability, does  it not  every moment question 
all the  powers that  be, does  it not  annihilate authority, does  it not 
threaten  to elevate anarchy itself  to the  position  of authority? After 
March  10, 1850, who  would still doubt  it? 
By repudiating universal suffrage, with which  it hitherto draped 
itself  and  from which  it sucked  its omnipotence,  the  bourgeoisie 
openly confesses,  " Our  dictatorship  has hitherto existed by  the will of the 
people;  it must  now be  consolidated against  the will of the  people."  And, 
consistently,  it seeks  its props  no longer within  France,  but without,  in 
foreign countries,  in invasion. 
With  the  invasion,  it, a  second Coblenz,120  its seat established  in 
France  itself,  rouses  all the  national passions against  itself.  With  the 
attack  on universal suffrage  it provides  a general pretext  for the new 
revolution,  and the  revolution requires such  a pretext. Every special 
pretext would divide  the  factions  of the  revolutionary league,  and 
give prominence  to their differences.  The  general pretext stuns  the 
semi-revolutionary classes;  it permits them  to deceive themselves 
concerning  the  definite  character  of the  coming revolution, concern­
ing the  consequences  of their  own act.  Every revolution requires  a 
banquet question. Universal suffrage  is the  banquet question  of the 
new revolution. 
However,  the  coalitioned factions  of the  bourgeoisie  are  already 
condemned  by their retreat from  the constitutional republic—the only 
possible form  of their united power,  and the  most powerful  and  most 
complete form  of their class rule—to  the  subordinate, incomplete 
and weaker form  of the  monarchy. They  are  like that  old man who 
fetched  out his  boyhood clothes  and  painfully tried  to force  his 
withered limbs into them  in order  to regain  his youthful strength. 
Their republic  had  only  one  merit, that  of being  the forcing-house  of the 
revolution. 
March  10,  1850, bears  the  inscription: 
Après  moi le  déluge! After  me the  deluge! 3 
a Words attributed  to Louis XV.—  Ed. 

=====第155页=====
132 
IV 
THE ABOLITION 
OF UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE IN 1850 
(The continuation of the three foregoing chapters is contained in 
the Revue in the fifth and sixth double issue of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, the last to appear. 3 Here, after the great commercial crisis 
that broke out in England in 1847 had first been described and the 
coming to a head of the political complications on the European 
Continent in the revolutions of February and March 1848 had been 
explained by its reactions there, it was shown how the prosperity of 
trade and industry that again set in during the course of 1848 and 
increased still further in 1849 paralysed the revolutionary upsurge 
and made possible the simultaneous victories of reaction. It went on 
to say, with special reference to France:)0 
The same symptoms have shown themselves in France since 1849, 
and particularly since the beginning of 1850. The Parisian industries 
are abundantly employed and the cotton factories of Rouen and 
Mulhouse are also doing pretty well, although here, as in England, 
the high prices of the raw material have exercised a retarding 
influence. The development of prosperity in France was, in addition, 
especially promoted by the comprehensive tariff reform in Spain 
and by the reduction of the duties on various luxury articles in 
Mexico; the export of French commodities to both markets has 
considerably increased. The growth of capital in France led to a 
series of speculations, for which the large-scale exploitation of the 
Calif ornian gold-mines served as a pretext. 121 A swarm of companies 
has sprung up, the low denomination of whose shares and whose 
socialist-coloured prospectuses appeal directly to the purses of the 
a See this volume, pp. 507-10 and  516-25.—  Ed. 
The introductory paragraph was written by Engels for the 1895 edition.— Ed. 

=====第156页=====
The Class Struggles in France loo 
petty bourgeois and the workers, but which one and all result in that 
sheer swindling which is characteristic of the French and Chinese 
alone. One of these companies is even patronised directly by the 
government. The import duties in France during the first nine 
months of 1848 amounted to 63,000,000 francs, of 1849 to 
95,000,000 francs and of 1850 to 93,000,000 francs. Moreover, in 
the month of September 1850, they again rose by more than a 
million compared with the same month of 1849. Exports also rose in 
1849,  and still more in 1850. 
The most striking proof of restored prosperity is the bank's 
reintroduction of specie payment by the law of August 6, 1850. On 
March 15, 1848, the bank had been authorised to suspend specie 
payment. Its note circulation, including the provincial banks, 
amounted at that time to 373,000,000 francs (£14,920,000). On 
November 2, 1849, this circulation amounted to 482,000,000 francs, 
or £19,280,000, an increase of £4,360,000, and on September 2, 
1850,  to 496,000,000 francs, or £19,840,000, an increase of about 
£5,000,000. This was not accompanied by any devaluation of the 
notes;  on the contrary, the increased circulation of the notes was 
accompanied by the steadily increasing accumulation of gold and 
silver in the vaults of the bank, so that in the summer of 1850 its 
metallic reserve amounted to about £14,000,000, an unprecedented 
sum in France. That the bank was thus placed in a position to 
increase its circulation and therewith its active capital by 123,000,000 
francs, or £5,000,000, is striking proof of the correctness of our 
assertion in an earlier issue* that the finance aristocracy has not only 
not been overthrown by the revolution, but has even been 
strengthened. This result becomes still more evident from the 
following survey of French bank legislation during the last few years. 
On June 10, 1847, the bank was authorised to issue notes of 200 
francs; hitherto the smallest denomination had been 500 francs. A 
decree of March 15, 1848, declared the notes of the Bank of France 
legal tender and relieved the bank of the obligation of redeeming 
them in specie. Its note issue was limited to 350,000,000 francs. It 
was simultaneously authorised to issue notes of 100 francs. A decree 
of April 27 prescribed the merging of the departmental banks in the 
Bank of France; another decree, of May 2, 1848, increased the 
latter's note issue to 452,000,000 francs. A decree of December 22, 
1849,  raised the maximum of the note issue to 525,000,000 francs. 
Finally, the law of August 6, 1850, re-established the exchangeability 
of notes for specie. These facts, the continual increase in the 
a See this volume, pp. 114-18.— Ed. 

=====第157页=====
134 Karl Marx 
circulation, the concentration of the whole of French credit in the 
hands of the bank and the accumulation of all French gold and silver 
in the bank's vaults, led M. Proudhon to the conclusion that the bank 
must now shed its old snakeskin and metamorphose itself into a 
Proudhonist people's bank.122 He did not even need to know the 
history of the restriction on the English bank from 1797-1819123; he 
only needed to direct his glance across the Channel to see that this 
fact, for him unprecedented in the history of bourgeois society, was 
nothing more than a very normal bourgeois event, which now only 
occurred in France for the first time. One sees that the allegedly 
revolutionary theoreticians who, after the Provisional Government, 
talked big in Paris, were just as ignorant of the nature and the results 
of the measures taken as the gentlemen of the Provisional Gov­
ernment themselves. 
In spite of the industrial and commercial prosperity that France 
momentarily enjoys, the mass of the people, the twenty-five million 
peasants, suffer from a great depression. The good harvests of the 
last few years have forced the prices of corn in France much lower 
even than in England, and the position of the peasants under 
such circumstances, in debt, sucked dry by usury and crushed by 
taxes,  must be anything but splendid. The history of the last three 
years has, however, provided sufficient proof that this class 
of the population is absolutely incapable of any revolutionary ini­
tiative. 
Just as the period of crisis occurs later on the Continent than in 
England, so does that of prosperity. The original process always 
takes place in England; it is the demiurge of the bourgeois cosmos. 
On the Continent, the different phases of the cycle through which 
bourgeois society is ever speeding anew occur in secondary and 
tertiary form. First, the Continent exported incomparably more to 
England than to any other country. This export to England, 
however, in turn depends on the position of England, particularly 
with regard to the overseas market. Then England exports to the 
overseas lands incomparably more than the entire Continent, so that 
the quantity of Continental exports to these lands is always 
dependent on England's overseas exports at the time. While, 
therefore, the crises first produce revolutions on the Continent, the 
foundation for these is, nevertheless, always laid in England. Violent 
outbreaks must naturally occur rather in the extremities of the 
bourgeois body than in its heart, since the possibility of adjustment is 
greater here than there. On the other hand, the degree to which 
Continental revolutions react on England is at the same time the 
barometer which indicates how far these revolutions really call in 

=====第158页=====
The Class Struggles in France 135 
question the bourgeois conditions of life, or how far they only hit 
their political formations. 
With this general prosperity, in which the productive forces of 
bourgeois society develop as luxuriantly as is at all possible within 
bourgeois relationships, there can be no talk of a real revolution. 
Such a revolution is only possible in the periods when both these 
factors, the modern productive forces and the bourgeois forms of 
production, come in  collision  with each other. The various quarrels in 
which the representatives of the individual factions of the Continen­
tal party of Order now indulge and mutually compromise them­
selves, far from providing the occasion for new revolutions are, on 
the contrary, possible only because the basis of the relationships is 
momentarily so secure and, what the reaction does not know, so 
bourgeois.  All reactionary attempts to hold up bourgeois development 
will rebound off it just as certainly as all moral indignation and all 
enthusiastic proclamations of the democrats. A new revolution is 
possible  only in  consequence  of a new crisis. It is,  however,  just as certain as 
this crisis^ 
Let us now turn to France. 
The victory that the people, in conjunction with the petty 
bourgeois, had won in the elections of March 10 was annulled by it 
itself when it provoked the new election of April 28. Vidal was 
elected not only in Paris, but also in the Lower Rhine. The Paris 
Committee, in which the Montagne and the petty bourgeoisie were 
strongly represented,induced him to accept for the Lower Rhine. 
The victory of March 10 ceased to be a decisive one; the date of the 
decision was once more postponed; the tension of the people 
was relaxed; it became accustomed to legal triumphs instead of 
revolutionary ones. The revolutionary meaning of March 10, the 
rehabilitation of the June insurrection, was finally completely 
annihilated by the candidature of Eugène Sue, the sentimental 
petty-bourgeois social-fantasist, which the proletariat could at best 
accept as a joke to amuse the grisettes. As against this well-meaning 
candidature, the party of Order, emboldened by the vacillating 
policy of its opponents, put up a candidate who was to represent the 
June victory. This comic candidate was the Spartan pater familias 
Leclerc, 124 from whose person, however, the heroic armour was torn 
piece by piece by the press, and who experienced a crushing defeat 
in the election. The new election victory on April 28 put the 
Montagne and the petty bourgeoisie in high feather. They already 
a Here Engels omitted several pages from the third international review, pages 
referring to England (see this volume, pp. 510-16).— Ed. 

=====第159页=====
136 Karl Marx 
exulted in the thought of being able to arrive at the goal of their 
wishes in a purely legal way and without again pushing the 
proletariat into the foreground through a new revolution; they 
reckoned positively on bringing M. Ledru-Rollin into the presiden­
tial chair and a majority of Montagnards into the Assembly through 
universal suffrage in the new elections of 1852. The party of Order, 
rendered perfectly certain, by the prospective elections, by Sue's 
candidature and by the mood of the Montagne and the petty 
bourgeoisie, that the latter were resolved to remain quiet no matter 
what happened, answered the two election victories with an election 
law which abolished universal suffrage. 
The government took good care not to make this legislative 
proposal on its own responsibility. It made an apparent concession to 
the majority by entrusting the drafting of the bill to the high 
dignitaries of this majority, to the seventeen burgraves.125 Thus, it 
was not the government that proposed the repeal of universal 
suffrage to the Assembly; the majority of the Assembly proposed it 
to itself. 
On May 8, the project was brought into the Chamber. The entire 
social-democratic press rose as one man in order to preach to the 
people dignified composure, calme  majestueux,*  passivity and trust in 
its representatives. Every article of these journals was a confession 
that a revolution would, above all, annihilate the so-called revolu­
tionary press and that, therefore, it was now a question of its 
self-preservation. The allegedly revolutionary press betrayed its 
whole secret. It signed its own death warrant. 
On May 21, the Montagne put the preliminary question to debate 
and moved the rejection of the whole project on the ground that it 
violated the constitution. The party of Order answered that the 
constitution would be violated if it were necessary; there was, 
however, no need for this at present, because the constitution was 
capable of every interpretation, and because the majority alone was 
competent to decide on the correct interpretation. To the unbridled, 
savage attacks of Thiers and Montalembert the Montagne opposed a 
decorous and refined humanism. It took its stand on the ground of 
law; the party of Order referred it to the ground on which the law 
grows, to bourgeois property. The Montagne whimpered: Did they 
really want, then, to conjure up revolutions by main force? The party 
of Order replied: One should await them. 
An allusion to Victor Hugo's appeal to keep "majestic calm", made in his speech 
in the Legislative Assembly on May 21, 1850.—Ed. 

=====第160页=====
The Class Struggles in France 137 
On May 22, the preliminary question was settled by 462 votes to 
227. The same men who had proved with such solemn profundity 
that the National Assembly and every individual deputy would be 
renouncing his mandate if he renounced the people, his mandator, 
stuck to their seats and now suddenly sought to let the country 
act, through petitions at that, instead of acting themselves; and still 
sat there unmoved when, on May 31, the law went through in 
splendid fashion.126 They sought to revenge themselves by a protest 
in which they recorded their innocence of the rape of the 
constitution, a protest which they did not even submit openly, but 
smuggled into the President's3 pocket behind his back. 
An army of 150,000 men in Paris, the long deferment of the 
decision, the appeasing attitude of the press, the pusillanimity of the 
Montagne and of the newly elected representatives, the majestic calm 
of the petty bourgeois, but, above all, the commercial and industrial 
prosperity, prevented any attempt at revolution on the part of the 
proletariat. 
Universal suffrage had fulfilled its mission. The majority of the 
people had passed through the school of development, which is all 
that universal suffrage can serve for in a revolutionary period. It had 
to be set aside by a revolution or by the reaction. 
The Montagne developed a still greater display of energy on an 
occasion that arose soon afterwards. From the tribune War Minister 
d'Hautpoul had termed the February Revolution a baneful catas­
trophe. 15 The orators of the Montagne, who, as always, distinguished 
themselves by their morally indignant bluster, were not allowed by 
the President, Dupin, to speak. Girardin proposed to the Montagne 
that it should walk out at once en masse. Result: the Montagne 
remained seated, but Girardin was cast out from its midst as 
unworthy. 
The election law still needed one thing to complete it, a new press 
law. This was not long in coming. A proposal of the government, 
made many times more drastic by amendments of the party of 
Order, increased the caution money, put an extra stamp on 
feuilleton novels (answer to the election of Eugène Sue), taxed all 
publications appearing weekly or monthly up to a certain number of 
sheets and finally provided that every article of a journal must bear 
the signature of the author. The provisions concerning the caution 
money killed the so-called revolutionary press; the people regarded 
its extinction as satisfaction for the abolition of universal suffrage. 
The President of the Assembly.— Ed. 
This statement was made by the Minister of Justice Eugène Rouher.— Ed. 

=====第161页=====
138 Karl Marx 
However, neither the tendency nor the effect of the new law 
extended only to this section of the press. As long as the newspaper 
press was anonymous, it appeared as the organ of a numberless and 
nameless public opinion; it was the third power in the state. Through 
the signature of every article, a newspaper became a mere collection 
of literary contributions from more or less known individuals. Every 
article sank to the level of an advertisement. Hitherto the news­
papers had circulated as the paper money of public opinion; now 
they were resolved into more or less bad solo bills, whose worth 
and circulation depended on the credit not only of the drawer but 
also of the endorser. The press of the party of Order had agitated 
not only for the repeal of universal suffrage but also for the most 
extreme measures against the bad press. However, in its sinister 
anonymity even the good press was irksome to the party of Order 
and still more to its individual provincial representatives. As for 
itself,  it demanded only the paid writer, with name, address and 
description. In vain the good press bemoaned the ingratitude with 
which its services were rewarded. The law went through; the 
specification of the names of authors hit it hardest of all. The names 
of republican journalists were pretty well known; but the respectable 
firms of the Journal des Débats, the Assemblée nationale, the Con­
stitutionnel, etc., etc., cut a sorry figure in their high protestations of 
state wisdom, when the mysterious company all at once disintegrated 
into purchasable penny-a-liners 3 of long practice, who had defended 
all possible causes for cash, like Granier de Cassagnac, or into old 
milksops who called themselves statesmen, like Capefigue, or into 
coquettish fops, like M. Lemoinne of the Débats. 
In the debate on the press law the Montagne had already sunk to 
such a level of moral degeneracy that it had to confine itself to 
applauding the brilliant tirades of an old notability of Louis 
Philippe's time, M. Victor Hugo. 
With the election law and the press law the revolutionary and 
democratic party exits from the official stage. Before their departure 
home, shortly after the end of the session, the two factions of the 
Montagne, the socialist democrats and the democratic Socialists, 
issued two manifestos, two testimonia paupertatis, in which they 
proved that while power and success were never on their side, they 
nonetheless had ever been on the side of eternal justice and all the 
other eternal truths. b 
a This expression is given in English in the original.— Ed. 
"Compte-rendu de la Montagne au Peuple" and "Au Peuple! ", published in the 
newspaper Le Peuple de 1850 No. 6, August 11, and No. 7, August 14, 1850.— Ed. 

=====第162页=====
The Class Struggles in France 139 
Let us now consider the party of Order. The Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung had said (Heft 3, p. 16): "As against the hankering for 
restoration on the part of the united Orleanists and Legitimists, 
Bonaparte defends his title to his actual power, the republic; as 
against the hankering for restoration on the part of Bonaparte, the 
party of Order defends its title to its common rule, the republic. As 
against the Orleanists, the Legitimists, and as against the Legitimists, 
the Orleanists, defend the status  quo,  the republic. All these factions 
of the party of Order, each of which has its own king and its 
own restoration in petto, mutually enforce, as against their rivals' 
hankering for usurpation and revolt, the common rule of the 
bourgeoisie, the form in which the special claims remain neutralised 
and reserved—the republic... And Thiers spoke more truly than he 
suspected when he said: 'We, the royalists, are the true pillars of the 
constitutional republic' " a 
This comedy of the républicains malgré eux, b the antipathy to the 
status quo and the constant consolidation of it; the incessant friction 
between Bonaparte and the National Assembly; the ever renewed 
threat of the party of Order to split into its separate component 
parts,  and the ever repeated conjugation of its factions; the attempt 
of each faction to transform each victory over the common foe into a 
defeat for its temporary allies; the mutual petty jealousy, chicanery, 
harassment, the tireless drawing of swords that ever and again ends 
with a baiser-Lamourette 127—this whole unedifying comedy of errors 
never developed more classically than during the last six months. 
The party of Order regarded the election law at the same time as a 
victory over Bonaparte. Had not the government abdicated when it 
handed over the editing of and responsibility for its own proposal to 
the Commission of Seventeen? And did not the chief strength of 
Bonaparte as against the Assembly lie in the fact that he was the 
chosen of six millions? — Bonaparte, on his part, treated the election 
law as a concession to the Assembly, with which he claimed to have 
purchased harmony between the legislative and executive powers. As 
reward, the vulgar adventurer demanded an increase of three 
millions in his civil list. Dared the National Assembly enter into a 
conflict with the executive at a moment when it had excommunicated 
the great majority of Frenchmen? It was roused to anger; it ap­
peared to want to go to extremes; its Commission rejected the 
motion; the Bonapartist press threatened, and referred to the 
a See this volume, p. 114.— Ed. 
b Republicans in spite of themselves. (Allusion to Molière's comedy Le Médecin 
malgré  lui.) —Ed. 

=====第163页=====
140 Karl Marx 
disinherited people, deprived of its franchise; numerous noisy 
attempts at an arrangement took place, and the Assembly finally 
gave way in fact, but at the same time revenged itself in principle. 
Instead of increasing the civil list in principle by three millions per 
annum, it granted him an accommodation of 2,160,000 francs. Not 
satisfied with this, it made even this concession only after it had been 
supported by Changarnier, the general of the party of Order and the 
protector thrust upon Bonaparte. Therefore it really granted the 
two millions not to Bonaparte, but to Changarnier. 
This sop, thrown to him de mauvaise grâce? was accepted by 
Bonaparte quite in the spirit of the donor. The Bonapartist press 
blustered anew against the National Assembly. When, now in the 
debate on the press law, the amendment was passed on the signing 
of names, which, in turn, was directed especially against the less 
important papers, the representatives of the private interests of 
Bonaparte, the principal Bonapartist paper, the Pouvoir, published 
an open and vehement attack on the National Assembly. The 
ministers had to disavow the paper before the Assembly; the 
managing editor of the Pouvoir was summoned before the bar of the 
National Assembly and sentenced to pay the highest fine,  5,000 
francs. b Next day, the Pouvoir published a still more insolent article 
against the Assembly, and, as the government's revenge, the public 
prosecutor promptly prosecuted a number of Legitimist journals for 
violating the constitution. 
Finally there came the question of proroguing the Chamber. 
Bonaparte desired this in order to be able to operate unhindered by 
the Assembly. The party of Order desired it, partly for the purpose 
of carrying on its factional intrigues, partly for the pursuit of the 
private interests of the individual deputies. Both needed it in order 
to consolidate and push further the victories of reaction in the 
provinces. The Assembly therefore adjourned from August 11 until 
November 11. Since, however, Bonaparte in no way concealed that 
his only concern was to get rid of the irksome surveillance of the 
National Assembly, the Assembly imprinted on the vote of con­
fidence itself the stamp of want .of confidence in the President. 
All Bonapartists were kept off the permanent commission of 
twenty-eight members, who stayed on during the recess as guardians 
of the virtue of the republic.128  In their stead, even some republicans 
of the Siècle and the National were elected to it, in order to prove to 
a With a bad grace.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 39-40 and  520-21.—  Ed. 

=====第164页=====
The Class Struggles in France 141 
the President the attachment of the majority to the constitutional 
republic. 
Shortly before and, especially, immediately after the prorogation 
of the Chamber, the two big factions of the party of Order, the 
Orleanists and the Legitimists, appeared to want to be reconciled, 
and this by a fusion of the two royal houses under whose flags they 
were fighting. The papers were full of reconciliation proposals that 
were said to have been discussed at the sickbed of Louis Philippe at 
St. Leonards, when the death of Louis Philippe suddenly simpli­
fied the situation. Louis Philippe was the usurper; Henry V, the 
dispossessed; the Count of Paris,a  on the other hand, owing to the 
childlessness of Henry V, his lawful heir to the throne. Every pretext 
for objecting to a fusion of the two dynastic interests was now 
removed. But now, precisely, the two factions of the bourgeoisie first 
discovered that it was not zeal for a definite royal house that divided 
them, but that it was rather their divided class interests that kept the 
two dynasties apart. The Legitimists, who had made a pilgrimage to 
the residence of Henry V at Wiesbaden just as their competitors had 
to St. Leonards, received there the news of Louis Philippe's death. 
Forthwith they formed a ministry in partions infidelium, h which 
consisted mostly of members of that commission of guardians of the 
virtue of the republic 129 and which on the occasion of a squabble 
in the bosom of the party came out with the most outspoken 
proclamation of right by the grace of God. The Orleanists rejoiced 
over the compromising scandal that this manifesto  13° called forth in 
the press, and did not conceal for a moment their open enmity to the 
Legitimists. 
During the adjournment of the National Assembly, the Councils 
of the Departments met. The majority of them declared for a more 
or less qualified revision of the constitution, that is, they declared for 
a not definitely specified monarchist restoration, for a "solution", and 
confessed at the same time that they were too incompetent and too 
cowardly to find this solution. The Bonapartist faction at once 
construed this desire for revision in the sense of a prolongation of 
Bonaparte's presidency. 
The constitutional solution, the retirement of Bonaparte in May 
1852,  the simultaneous election of a new President by all the electors 
of the country, the revision of the constitution by a Chamber of 
a Louis Philippe Albert d'Orléans. — Ed. 
Ignoring the real situation (literally, in the country of the infidels—an addition 
to the title of Catholic bishops appointed to purely nominal dioceses in non-Christian 
countries).— Ed. 

=====第165页=====
142 Karl Marx 
Revision in the first months of the new presidency, is utterly 
inadmissible for the ruling class. The day of the new presidential 
election would be the day of rendezvous for all the hostile parties, the 
Legitimists, the Orleanists, the bourgeois republicans, the rev­
olutionists. It would have to come to a violent decision between the 
different factions. Even if the party of Order should succeed in 
uniting round the candidature of a neutral person outside the 
dynastic families, he would still be opposed by Bonaparte. In its 
struggle with the people, the party of Order is compelled constantly 
to increase the power of the executive. Every increase of the 
executive's power increases the power of its bearer, Bonaparte. In 
the same measure, therefore, as the party of Order strengthens its 
joint might, it strengthens the fighting resources of Bonaparte's 
dynastic pretensions, it strengthens his chance of frustrating a 
constitutional solution by force on the day of the decision. He will 
then have, as against the party of Order, no more scruples about the 
one pillar of the constitution than that party had, as against the 
people, about the other pillar in the matter of the election law. He 
would, seemingly even against the Assembly, appeal to universal 
suffrage. In a word, the constitutional solution questions the entire 
political status quo and behind the jeopardising of the status quo the 
bourgeois sees chaos, anarchy, civil war. He sees his purchases and 
sales,  his promissory notes, his marriages, his agreements, duly 
acknowledged before a notary, his mortgages, his ground rents, 
house rents, profits, all his contracts and sources of income called in 
question on the first Sunday in May 1852, 131 and he cannot expose 
himself to this risk. Behind the jeopardising of the political status quo 
lurks the danger of the collapse of the entire bourgeois society. The 
only possible solution in the sense of the bourgeoisie is the 
postponement of the solution. It can save the constitutional republic 
only by a violation of the constitution, by the prolongation of the 
power of the President. This is also the last word of the press of 
Order, after the protracted and profound debates on the "solutions" 
in which it indulged after the session of the general councils. The 
high and mighty party of Order thus finds  itself,  to its shame, 
compelled to take seriously the ridiculous, commonplace and, to it, 
odious person of the pseudo-Bonaparte. 
This dirty figure likewise deceived himself concerning the causes 
that clothed him more and more with the character of the in­
dispensable man. While his party had sufficient insight to ascribe 
the growing importance of Bonaparte to circumstances, he believed 
that he owed it solely to the magic power of his name and his 
continual caricaturing of Napoleon. He became more enterprising 

=====第166页=====
The Class Struggles in France 143 
every day. To offset the pilgrimages to St. Leonards and Wiesbaden, 
he made his round trips through France. The Bonapartists had so 
little faith in the magic effect of his personality that they sent with 
him everywhere as claqueurs people from the Society of December 
10,132  that organisation of the Paris lumpenproletariat, packed en  masse 
into railway trains and post-chaises. They put speeches into the 
mouth of their marionette which, according to the reception in the 
different towns, proclaimed republican resignation or perennial 
tenacity as the keynote of the President's policy. In spite of all 
manoeuvres these journeys were anything but triumphal proces­
sions. 
When Bonaparte believed he had thus enthused the people, he set 
out to win the army. He caused great reviews to be held on the plain 
of Satory, near Versailles, at which he sought to buy the soldiers with 
garlic sausages, champagne and cigars. Whereas the genuine 
Napoleon, amid the hardships of his campaigns of conquest, knew 
how to cheer up his weary soldiers with outbursts of patriarchal 
familiarity, the pseudo-Napoleon believed it was in gratitude that the 
troops shouted: Vive Napoléon, vive le saucisson! that is, hurrah for 
the sausage [Wwst], hurrah for the buffoon [Hanswurst]] 
These reviews led to the outbreak of the long suppressed dis­
sension between Bonaparte and his War Minister d'Hautpoul, on 
the one hand, and Changarnier, on the other. In Changarnier, the 
party of Order had found its real neutral man, in whose case there 
could be no question of his own dynastic claims. It had designated 
him Bonaparte's successor. In addition, Changarnier had become 
the great general of the party of Order through his conduct on 
January 29 and June 13, 1849, the modern Alexander, whose brutal 
intervention had, in the eyes of the timid bourgeois, cut the Gordian 
knot of the revolution. At bottom just as ridiculous as Bonaparte, he 
had thus become a power in the very cheapest manner and was set 
up by the National Assembly to watch the President. He himself 
played the coquette, e.g., in the matter of the salary grant, with 
the protection that he gave Bonaparte, and rose up ever more 
overpoweringly against him and the ministers. When, on the 
occasion of the election law, an insurrection was expected, he 
forbade his officers to take any orders whatever from the War 
Minister or the President. The press was also instrumental in 
magnifying the figure of Changarnier. With the complete absence of 
great personalities, the party of Order naturally found itself 
compelled to endow a single individual with the strength lacking in 
its class as a whole and so puff up this individual to a prodigy. Thus 
arose the myth of Changarnier, the "bulwark of  society".  The arrogant 

=====第167页=====
144 Karl Marx 
charlatanry, the secretive air of importance with which Changarnier 
condescended to carry the world on his shoulders, forms the most 
ridiculous contrast to the events during and after the Satory review, 
which irrefutably proved that it needed only a stroke of the pen by 
Bonaparte, the infinitely little, to bring this fantastic offspring of 
bourgeois fear, the colossus Changarnier, back to the dimensions of 
mediocrity, and transform him, society's heroic saviour, into a 
pensioned-off general. 
Bonaparte had for some time been revenging himself on 
Changarnier by provoking the War Minister to disputes in matters of 
discipline with the irksome protector. The last review of Satory 
finally brought the old animosity to a climax. The constitutional 
indignation of Changarnier knew no bounds when he saw the 
cavalry regiments file past with the unconstitutional cry: Vive 
l'Empereur! In order to forestall any unpleasant debate on this cry in 
the coming session of the Chamber, Bonaparte removed the War 
Minister d'Hautpoul by appointing him Governor of Algiers. In his 
place he put a reliable old general of the time of the empire, 3 one 
who was fully a match for Changarnier in brutality. But so that the 
dismissal of d'Hautpoul might not appear as a concession to 
Changarnier, he simultaneously transferred General Neumayer, the 
right hand of the great saviour of society, from Paris to Nantes. It 
had been Neumayer who at the last review had induced the whole of 
the infantry to file past the successor of Napoleon in icy silence. 
Changarnier, himself hit in the person of Neumayer, protested and 
threatened. To no purpose. After two days' negotiations, the decree 
transferring Neumayer appeared in the Moniteur^ and there was 
nothing left for the hero of order but to submit to discipline or 
resign. 
Bonaparte's struggle with Changarnier is the continuation of his 
struggle with the party of Order. The re-opening of the Nation­
al Assembly on November 11 will, therefore, take place under 
threatening auspices. It will be a storm in a teacup. In essence the old 
game must go on. Meanwhile the majority of the party of Order will, 
despite the clamour of the sticklers for principle of its different 
factions, be compelled to prolong the power of the President. 
Similarly, Bonaparte, already humbled by lack of money,  will,  despite 
all preliminary protestations, accept this prolongation of power from 
the hands of the National Assembly as simply delegated to him. Thus 
a J. P. Schramm.— Ed. 
b Le Moniteur universel No. 303, October 30, 1850.— Ed. 

=====第168页=====
The Class Struggles in France 145 
the solution is postponed; the status quo continued; one faction of 
the party of Order compromised, weakened, made impossible by the 
other; the repression of the common enemy, the mass of the nation, 
extended and exhausted, until the economic relations themselves 
have again reached the point of development where a new explosion 
blows into the air all these squabbling parties with their constitutional 
republic. 
For the peace of mind of the bourgeois it must be said, however, 
that the scandal between Bonaparte and the party of Order has the 
result of ruining a multitude of small capitalists on the Bourse and 
putting their assets into the pockets of the big wolves of the Bourse. 

=====第169页=====

=====第170页=====
FREDERICK ENGELS 
THE CAMPAIGN FOR THE GERMAN 
IMPERIAL CONSTITUTION 133 

=====第171页=====
Written between mid-August 1849 and Printed according to the journal 
February 1850 
Published in English for the first 
First published in the Neue Rheinische time 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue 
Nos.  1, 2 and 3, 1850 
Signed: Frederick Engels 

=====第172页=====
149 
Hecker, Struve, Blenker, Zitz und Blum, 
Bringt die deutschen Fürsten3 um! 
This refrain which on every highway and in every tavern from the 
Palatinate to the Swiss frontier rang out on the lips of the South 
German "people's militia" to the well-known tune of "Surrounded 
by the Sea",c a mixture of chorale and barrel-organ—this refrain 
sums up the whole character of the "magnificent uprising for the 
Imperial Constitution".134 Here you have in two lines their great 
men, their ultimate aims, their admirable staunchness, their noble 
hatred for the "tyrants" and at the same time their entire insight into 
the social and political situation. 
Amidst all the movements and convulsions in Germany which 
followed in the wake of the February Revolution and its subsequent 
development, the campaign for the Imperial Constitution stands out 
owing to its classically German character. Its occasion, its appear­
ance,  the way it conducted  itself,  its whole course, were through and 
through German. In the same way as the June days of 1848 mark the 
degree of the social and political development of France, so the 
campaign for the Imperial Constitution marks the degree of the 
social and political development of Germany, and especially of South 
Germany. 
a In the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue the words deutschen 
Fürsten (the German princes) were omitted because of the censorship and replaced by 
leaders.— Ed. 
Hecker, Struve, Blenker, Zitz and Blum slay the German  princes!  — Ed. 
c "Schleswig-Holstein meerumschlungen"—the first words of a patriotic song 
composed in 1844 and popular during the struggle of the duchies for liberation from 
Danish rule in 1848-49.— Ed. 
7-1124 

=====第173页=====
150 Frederick Engels 
The soul of the whole movement was the class of the petty 
bourgeoisie, usually known as the burghers, and it is precisely in 
Germany, and especially in South Germany, that this class is in 
preponderance. It was the petty bourgeoisie which, in the "March 
Clubs",135  the democratic constitutional clubs, the patriotic clubs, the 
multitude of so-called democratic clubs and almost the entire 
democratic press, swore to the Imperial Constitution its Grütli 
oaths, 136 as widespread as they were innocuous, and carried on its 
fight against the "refractory" princes of which the only immediate 
result was admittedly the elevating consciousness of having fulfilled 
one's civic duty. It was the petty bourgeoisie, represented by the 
resolute and so-called extreme Left of the Frankfurt Assembly, i.e. 
in particular by the Stuttgart Parliament and the "Imperial 
Regency",137 which furnished the entire movement with its official 
leadership; lastly, the petty bourgeoisie was dominant in the local 
committees of the provincial diets, committees of public safety, 
provisional governments and constituent assemblies which in 
Saxony, on the Rhine and in South Germany won greater or lesser 
credit in the cause of the Imperial Constitution. 
It is most unlikely that the petty bourgeoisie, if left to its own 
devices, would have gone outside the legal framework of lawful, 
peaceful and virtuous struggle and taken up the musket and the 
paving-stone in place of the so-called weapons of the spirit. The 
history of all political movements since 1830 in Germany, as in 
France and England, shows that this class is invariably full of bluster 
and loud protestations, at times even extreme as far as talking goes, 
as long as it perceives no danger; faint-hearted, cautious and 
calculating as soon as the slightest danger approaches; aghast, 
alarmed and wavering as soon as the movement it provoked is seized 
upon and taken up seriously by other classes; treacherous to the 
whole movement for the sake of its petty-bourgeois existence as soon 
as there is any question of a struggle with weapons in hand—and in 
the end, as a result of its indecisiveness, more often than not cheated 
and ill-treated as soon as the reactionary side has achieved victory. 
Standing everywhere behind the petty bourgeoisie, however, are 
other classes who take up the movement provoked by it and in its 
interest, give it a more defined and energetic character and wherever 
possible seek to take it over: the proletariat and a large part of the 
peasantry, to whom moreover the more advanced section of the petty 
bourgeoisie usually attaches itself for a while. 
These classes, headed by the proletariat of the larger towns, took 
the loudly protested assurances in favour of the Imperial Constitu­
tion more seriously than was to the liking of the petty-bourgeois 

=====第174页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 151 
agitators. If the petty bourgeois were prepared, as they swore at 
every moment, to stake "property and life"3 for the Imperial 
Constitution, the workers, and in many districts the peasants too, 
were ready to do the same, but under the condition, admittedly 
unspoken but perfectly understood by all parties, that after victory 
the petty bourgeoisie would have to defend this same Imperial 
Constitution against these same workers and peasants. These classes 
drove the petty bourgeoisie to an open break with the existing state 
power. If they could not prevent their allies, with their shopkeepers' 
mentality, from betraying them even while the battle was still going 
on, they at least had the satisfaction of seeing this treachery punished 
after the victory of the counter-revolution by the counter­
revolutionaries themselves. 
On the other hand at the beginning of the movement, the more 
resolute section of the bigger and middle bourgeoisie likewise 
attached itself to the petty bourgeoisie, just as we find in all earlier 
petty-bourgeois movements in England and France. The bourgeoisie 
never rules in its entirety; apart from the feudal castesb which have 
still retained some degree of the political power, even the big 
bourgeoisie itself splits, as soon as it has vanquished feudalism, into a 
governing and an opposing party usually represented by the banks 
on the one hand and the manufacturers on the other. The oppos­
ing, progressive section of the big and middle bourgeoisie then has, 
against the ruling section, common interests with the petty bour­
geoisie and unites with it for a joint struggle. In Germany, where 
the armed counter-revolution has restored the almost exclusive 
rule of the army, the bureaucracy and the feudal nobility and where 
the bourgeoisie, in spite of the continued existence of constitutional 
forms,  only plays a very subordinate and modest role, there are 
many more motives for this alliance. For all that, however, the 
German bourgeoisie is also infinitely more irresolute than its English 
and French counterparts and as soon as there is the slightest chance 
of a return to anarchy,  i. e. of the real, decisive struggle, it retreats 
from the scene in fear and trembling. So also this time. 
a In the German original a paraphrase of "mit Gut und Blut für des 
Reichsgrundgesetz einzustehen" in the proclamation issued by the Bavarian 
petty-bourgeois deputies in reply to the Bavarian King's refusal to recognise the 
Imperial Constitution; the proclamation was published in the Kölnische Zeitung 
No. 109, May 8, 1849.— Ed. 
b In the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue the words Kasten des 
Feudalismus (feudal castes) were replaced by Resten des Feudalismus (remnants of 
feudalism).— Ed. 
7* 

=====第175页=====
152 Frederick Engels 
Incidentally, the moment was not at all unfavourable for battle. In 
France elections were at hand; whether they gave the majority to the 
monarchists or the reds, they were bound to oust the centre parties 
of the Constituent Assembly, strengthen the extreme parties and 
bring about through a popular movement a speedy resolution of the 
intensified parliamentary struggle: in a word, they were bound to 
bring about a "journée".* In Italy fighting was going on under the 
walls of Rome, and the Roman Republic was holding out against the 
French army of invasion. In Hungary the Magyars were pushing on 
irresistibly; the imperial troops had been chased over the Waag and 
the Leitha; in Vienna, where every day people imagined they could 
hear the roar of cannon, the Hungarian revolutionary army was 
expected at any moment; in Galicia the arrival of Dembinski with a 
Polish-Magyar army was imminent and the Russian intervention, far 
from becoming dangerous to the Magyars, seemed much more likely 
to transform the Hungarian struggle into a European one. Finally, 
Germany was in a state of extreme ferment; the advances of the 
counter-revolution, the growing insolence of the soldiery, the 
bureaucracy and the nobility, the continually renewed betrayals by 
the old liberals in the ministries and the rapid succession of broken 
promises on the part of the princes 5 precipitated into the arms of 
the active party whole sections of former supporters of order. 
In these circumstances the struggle broke out which we are about 
to describe in the following passages. 
The incompleteness and confusion that still prevails in the 
material, the total unreliability of almost all the oral information that 
can be collected and the purely personal designs that underlie every 
piece of writing so far published about this struggle make it 
impossible to give a critical picture of the whole course of events. In 
these circumstances we have no choice but to restrict ourselves 
purely to recounting what we ourselves have seen and heard. 
Fortunately this is quite enough to allow the character of the whole 
campaign to emerge; and if, besides the movement in Saxony, we 
also lack personal observation of Mieroslawski's campaign on the 
Neckar, perhaps the Neue Rheinische Zeitung will soon find an 
opportunity of giving us the necessary information at least as regards 
the latter. 138 
Many of the participants in the campaign for the Imperial 
Constitution are still in prison. Some have managed to return home, 
a An "historic day".— Ed 
In the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue the word "princes" 
was omitted because of the censorship.— Ed. 

=====第176页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 153 
others, still abroad, are daily awaiting such an opportunity—and 
among them are by no means the worst. The reader will understand 
the consideration we owe our comrades-in-arms and find it natural if 
we remain silent about certain things; and many a one who is now 
safely back home will not take it amiss if we also do not wish to 
compromise him by narrating events in which he displayed truly 
magnificent courage. 

=====第177页=====
154 
I. RHENISH PRUSSIA 
It will be remembered how the armed uprising for the Imperial 
Constitution first broke out in Dresden139 at the beginning of May. It 
is well known how the Dresden barricade-fighters, supported by the 
rural population and betrayed by the Leipzig philistines, were 
defeated by superior forces after six days' fighting. They at no time 
had more than 2,500 combatants with a motley collection of 
weapons and for their whole artillery two or three small mortars. 
The royal troops consisted, apart from the Saxon battalions, of two 
regiments of Prussians. They had cavalry, artillery, riflemen and a 
battalion equipped with needle-guns. The royal troops appear to 
have conducted themselves in an even more cowardly3 way in 
Dresden than elsewhere; at the same time, however, it is clear that 
the men of Dresden fought more courageously against these 
superior forces than was probably the case elsewhere in the 
campaign for the Imperial Constitution. It must be added, however, 
that street-fighting is something quite different from an engagement 
in the field. 
Berlin, disarmed and in a state of siege, remained quiet. Not even 
the railway was torn up to hold up the Prussian reinforcements as 
early as Berlin. Breslau b attempted a feeble barricade-fight 140 for 
which the government had long been prepared, and as a result the 
city only ended up the more certainly under the dictatorship of the 
sabre. The rest of North Germany, having no revolutionary centres, 
was paralysed. Only Rhenish Prussia and South Germany could still 
In the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue the word feig 
(cowardly) was replaced by the word kläglich (pitiful) because of censorship.— Ed. 
The Polish name is Wroclaw.— Ed. 

=====第178页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 155 
be reckoned on, and in South Germany the Palatinate already started 
to move just at that moment. 
Since 1815 Rhenish Prussia has been considered one of the most 
progressive provinces in Germany, and rightly so. It combines two 
advantages which are not to be found in combination in any other 
part of Germany. 
Rhenish Prussia shares with Luxembourg, Rhenish Hesse and the 
Palatinate the advantage of having experienced since 1795 the 
French Revolution and the social, administrative and legislative 
consolidation of its results under Napoleon. When the revolutionary 
party in Paris succumbed, the armies carried the revolution across 
the frontiers. Before these so recently liberated sons of peasants not 
only the armies of the Holy Roman Empire141 but also the feud­
al rule of the nobility and the priests fell to pieces. For two 
generations the left bank of the Rhine has no longer known 
feudalism; the nobleman has been deprived of his privileges and the 
landed property has passed from his hands and those of the church 
into the hands of the peasants; the land has been divided up and the 
peasant is a free landed proprietor as in France. In the towns, the 
guilds and the patriarchal rule of the patricians disappeared ten 
years earlier than anywhere else in Germany in the face of free 
competition, and the Napoleonic Code142 finally sanctioned the 
whole changed situation by summing up all the revolutionary insti­
tutions. 
Secondly, however, Rhenish Prussia possesses—and herein lies its 
main advantage over the rest of the states on the left bank of the 
Rhine—the most developed and diversified industry in the whole of 
Germany. In the three administrative districts of Aachen, Cologne 
and Düsseldorf, almost all branches of industry are represented: 
cotton, wool and silk industries of all kinds, together with those 
branches dependent upon them such as bleaching, textile printing 
and dyeing, iron-founding and engineering, are to be found 
concentrated here, alongside mining, armaments manufacture and 
other metal industries, within an area of a few square miles and 
employ a population of a density unheard of in Germany. Directly 
adjoining the Rhine Province is the iron and coal district of the Mark 
which provides it with a part of its raw materials and from the 
industrial point of view belongs to it. The best waterway in Germany, 
the proximity of the sea and the mineral wealth of the region favour 
industry, which has also built numerous railways and is even now 
daily further integrating its railway network. There is a mutual 
interaction between this industry and an import and export trade, 
for Germany very extensive, with all parts of the world, a 

=====第179页=====
156 Frederick Engels 
considerable direct traffic with all the great trading centres of the 
world market and a commensurate degree of speculation in raw 
materials and railway shares. To sum up, the level of industrial and 
commercial development in the Rhine Province is for Germany 
unique, even if in world terms it is fairly insignificant. 
The consequence of this industry—which also burgeoned under 
the revolutionary rule of the French—and the trade connected with 
it is the creation in Rhenish Prussia of a mighty industrial and 
commercial big bourgeoisie and, in opposition to it, of a large 
industrial proletariat, two classes which in the rest of Germany only 
exist in isolated areas and in embryonic form but which almost 
exclusively dominate the distinct political development of the Rhine 
Province. 
Over the rest of the German states revolutionised by the French 
Rhenish Prussia has the advantage of industry and over the rest of 
the German industrial areas (Saxony and Silesia) the advantage of 
the French Revolution. It is the only part of Germany whose social 
development has almost reached the level of modern bourgeois 
society: developed industry, extensive trade, accumulation of capital 
and free ownership of land; the predominance in the towns of a 
strong bourgeoisie and a numerous proletariat and in the coun­
tryside of a multitude of debt-ridden allotment peasants; rule of the 
bourgeoisie over the proletariat by means of the wages system, over 
the peasantry by means of the mortgage and over the petty 
bourgeoisie by means of competition, and finally the sanctioning of 
bourgeois rule through the courts of trade, the factory courts, the 
bourgeois jury and the entire body of material legislation. 
Is it easier now to understand the Rhirielander's hatred for 
everything that is Prussian? Along with the Rhine Province Prussia 
incorporated the French Revolution into its states and treated the 
Rhinelanders not only as a subjugated and alien people but even as 
vanquished rebels. Far from developing the Rhenish legislation in 
the spirit of the ever growing modern bourgeois society, Prussia 
intended saddling the Rhinelanders with the pedantic, feudal, 
philistine hotchpotch of Prussian Law,143 which was barely suitable 
any longer even for Further Pomerania. 
The revolutionary change after February 1848 clearly showed the 
exceptional position of the Rhine Province. It provided not only the 
Prussian but the whole of the German bourgeoisie with its classical 
representatives, Camphausen and Hansemann, and provided the 
German proletariat with the sole organ in which it was championed 
not only in terms of fine words or good will, but according to its true 
interests: the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 

=====第180页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 157 
How is it, then, that Rhenish Prussia for all that took so little part 
in Germany's revolutionary movements? 
It must not be forgotten that the 1830 movement in favour of a 
hollow pettifogger's constitutionalism could not hope to interest 
Germany's Rhenish bourgeoisie, who were busily engaged in much 
more real, industrial enterprises; that, whereas people in the petty 
German states were still dreaming of a German Empire, in Rhenish 
Prussia the proletariat was already beginning to come out openly 
against the bourgeoisie; that from 1840 to 1847, at the time of the 
bourgeois, truly constitutional movement, the Rhenish bourgeoisie 
stood in the forefront and decisively tipped the balance in Berlin in 
March 1848. The reason, however, why Rhenish Prussia could never 
achieve anything in an open insurrection or even bring about a 
general insurrection of the whole province is best explained by a 
straightforward account of the campaign for the Imperial Constitu­
tion in the Rhineland. 
The struggle had just broken out in Dresden; it might break out at 
any moment in the Palatinate. In Baden, in Württemberg and in 
Franconia mass rallies were launched and people barely concealed 
their determination to settle the question by force of arms. In the 
whole of South Germany the troops were wavering. Prussia was no 
less roused. The proletariat was only waiting for an opportunity of 
revenging itself for having been tricked of the gains it believed it had 
won for itself in March 1848. Everywhere the petty bourgeois were 
busy welding together all the discontented elements into a great 
Imperial Constitution party whose leadership they hoped to secure 
for themselves. Their sworn promises to stand or fall with the 
Frankfurt Assembly and stake property and life for the Imperial 
Constitufion filled all the newspapers and rang out in every 
club-room and every beer-house. 
It was at this point that the Prussian Government opened 
hostilities by calling up a large part of the army reserve,144 
particularly in Westphalia and on the Rhine. To order a call-up 
during a period of peace was illegal and not only the petty 
bourgeoisie but also the bigger bourgeoisie rose up against it. 
The Cologne municipal council proclaimed a congress of deputies 
of the Rhenish municipal councils. The government banned it; 
conventions were disregarded and the congress held in spite of the 
ban. The municipal councils, representing the big and middle 
bourgeoisie, declared their recognition of the Imperial Constitution, 
demanded its acceptance by the Prussian Government and the 
dismissal of the ministry as well as the repeal of the order calling up 
the army reserve, and threatened unambiguously enough that the 

=====第181页=====
158 Frederick Engels 
Rhine Provinces would secede from Prussia if these demands were 
not met.145 
"Since the Prussian Government has dissolved the Second Chamber following on 
the latter's pronouncement in favour of unconditional acceptance of the German 
Constitution of March 28 of this year and has thereby deprived the people of its 
representation and voice in the present critical moment, the undersigned delegates of 
the towns and municipalities of the Rhine Province have assembled to discuss the need 
of the fatherland. 
"The meeting, chaired by Councillors Zell of Trier and Werner of Coblenz and 
assisted by the clerks of the minutes, Councillors Boecker of Cologne and Bloem II of 
Düsseldorf, 
has resolved as follows: 
"I. This meeting declares that it recognises the Constitution of the German 
Empire, as promulgated by the Reich Assembly on March 28 of this year, as a 
definitive law and that in the conflict brought about by the Prussian Government it 
stands on the side of the German Reich Assembly. 
"2. The meeting calls upon the entire people of the Rhinelands, and in particular 
all men capable of bearing arms, to make collective declarations in smaller or larger 
gatherings of its commitment and steadfast intent to uphold the German Imperial 
Constitution and comply with the ordinances of the Imperial Constitution. 
"3. The meeting calls on the German Reich Assembly henceforth and with the 
utmost dispatch to make greater efforts to give to the resistance of the people in the 
separate German states and in particular in the Rhine Province that unity and strength 
which alone is capable of thwarting the well-organised counter-revolution. 
"4. It calls on the imperial authorities to take steps as soon as possible to tender to 
the imperial troops an oath of loyalty to the Constitution and to decree a concentration 
of these troops. 
"5. The undersigned pledge themselves to secure recognition of the Imperial 
Constitution by all means at their disposal in the area of their municipalities. 
"6. The meeting considers the dismissal of the Brandenburg-Manteuffel Ministry 
and the summoning of the Chambers, without change in the existing system of voting, 
to be absolutely necessary. 
"7. In particular it considers the recent partial call-up of the army reserve to be an 
unnecessary measure which highly endangers the internal peace, and expects its 
immediate repeal. 
"8. Lastly the undersigned express their conviction that if the content of this 
declaration is disregarded the fatherland is threatened by the greatest dangers which 
could even jeopardise the continued existence of Prussia as at present constituted. 
"Resolved on May 8, 1849,at Cologne." 
(Signatures follow.)3 
We would only add that the same Herr Zell who presided over this 
meeting went a few weeks later as imperial commissioner of the 
Frankfurt imperial ministry 146 to Baden, not only for the purpose of 
appeasement, but also to plot with the local reactionaries those 
counter-revolutionary coups which later broke out in Mannheim and 
Karlsruhe. It is at least probable that at the same time he served 
imperial General Peucker as a military spy. 
a Published in the Kölnische ZeitungNo. 110, May 9, 1849, second edition.— Ed. 

=====第182页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 159 
We insist on firmly establishing this fact. The big bourgeoisie, the 
flower of the pre-March liberalism of the Rhineland, sought from 
the very beginning to place themselves at the head of the movement 
for the Imperial Constitution in Rhenish Prussia. Their speeches, 
their resolutions, their whole demeanour demonstrated their 
solidarity for the subsequent events. There were plenty of people 
who took the words of the municipal councillors seriously, especially 
the threat that the Rhine Province would secede. If the big 
bourgeoisie went along with the movement, then the cause was as 
good as won from the beginning; it would mean that every class of 
the population was taking part, and that one could afford to take a 
risk. The petty bourgeois calculated along these lines and hastened 
to strike a heroic pose. It goes without saying that his supposed 
associé,  the big bourgeois, did not let this in any way deter him from 
betraying the petty bourgeois at the first opportunity and after­
wards, when the whole affair had come to a truly miserable end, 
from ridiculing him for his stupidity to boot. 
In the meantime the excitement continually mounted; the news 
from all areas of Germany sounded extremely warlike. At last steps 
were to be taken to fit out the army reserve. The battalions met and 
declared categorically that they would not let themselves be fitted 
out. The majors, in the absence of sufficient military support, could 
do nothing and were happy if they escaped without threats or actual 
attacks. They dismissed their men and set a new date for fitting-out. 
The government, which could easily have given the officers of the 
army reserve the necessary backing, was purposely allowing things to 
go so far. It now immediately used force. 
The refractory army reserve units came in particular from the 
industrial region of Berg and the Mark. Elberfeld and Iserlohn, 
Solingen and the Ennepe valley were the centres of resistance. 
Troops were ordered at once to the first two towns. 147 
A battalion of the 16th Regiment, a squadron of lancers and two 
pieces of artillery moved to Elberfeld. The town was in a state of 
great confusion. The army reserve had found on mature reflection 
that they were after all playing a risky game. Many peasants and 
workers were politically apathetic and had merely been unwilling to 
absent themselves from their homes for an indefinite period to 
comply with some chance whim of the government. The conse­
quences of insubordination weighed heavily upon them: species facti* 
martial law, confinement in irons and perhaps even the firing-squad! 
Suffice it to say, the number of army reserve men up in arms (they 
a The facts of the case.— Ed. 

=====第183页=====
160 Frederick Engels 
had their weapons) dwindled and dwindled, and in the end there 
were only about forty left. They had set up their headquarters in an 
inn outside the town and were awaiting the Prussians there. Around 
the town hall stood the civic militia and two citizens' rifle corps, 
vacillating and negotiating with the army reserve but at all events 
determined to protect their property. The people were thronging 
the streets: petty bourgeois who had sworn loyalty to the Imperial 
Constitution in the political club and proletarians of all levels, from 
the resolute, revolutionary worker to the gin-swilling drayman. 
Nobody knew what to do or what would happen. 
The town council wanted to negotiate with the troops. The 
commander rejected all overtures and marched into the town. The 
troops paraded through the streets and drew up in front of the town 
hall, opposite the civic militia. There were negotiations. Stones were 
thrown at the troops from the crowd. The army reserve, about forty 
strong as earlier indicated, after lengthy discussions also marched 
over from the other side of the town towards the troops. 
Suddenly a cry was raised among the people for the freeing of the 
prisoners. In the prison close to the town hall, sixty-nine Solingen 
workers had been in custody for a year for demolishing the cast-steel 
works near the castle. They were to be tried in a few days' time. 
Intent on freeing these men, the people made a rush for the prison. 
The doors gave way, the people broke in.and the prisoners were 
free.  At the same time, however, the troops advanced, a volley rang 
out and the last prisoner, hurrying through the door, dropped to the 
ground with a shattered skull. 
The people fell back, but with the cry: "To the barricades!" In a 
trice the approaches to the inner city were secured. Unarmed 
workers were there in plenty, but there were at most only fifty men 
with arms behind the barricades. 
The artillery advanced. Like the infantry before it, it fired too 
high, probably on purpose. Both bodies of troops were made up of 
Rhinelanders or Westphalians, and were good. Eventually Captain 
von Uttenhoven advanced at the head of the 8th Company of the 
16th Regiment. 
Three armed men were behind the first barricade. "Don't shoot at 
us," they cried, "we only shoot at officers!" The captain ordered 
halt. "Just order ready and there you'll lie," one of the riflemen 
behind the barricade shouted at him. "Ready! Present! Fire!" A salvo 
rang out, but at the very same moment the captain slumped to the 
ground. The bullet had hit him through the heart. 
The platoon retreated in all haste, not even taking back the 
captain's body. A few more shots rang out, a few soldiers were 

=====第184页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 161 
wounded and the commanding officer, who did not relish staying 
overnight in the rebellious town, pulled out again and bivouacked 
with his troops an hour's march outside the town. As the soldiers 
withdrew, barricades were at once raised on all sides. 
The same evening the news of the retreat of the Prussians reached 
Düsseldorf. Numerous groups formed in the streets; the petty 
bourgeois and the workers were in a state of extreme excitement. 
Then the rumour that fresh troops were to be sent to Elberfeld gave 
the signal for action. Without giving a thought to the lack of weapons 
(the civic militia had been disarmed since November 1848), the 
relatively strong garrison and the disadvantage posed by the broad, 
straight streets of the little ex-capital, some workers raised a call to 
the barricades. In Neustrasse and Bolkerstrasse a few fortifications 
were thrown up; the other parts of the town were kept free partly by 
the troops who had already been consigned there beforehand and 
partly by the fear of the big and petty bourgeoisie. 
Towards evening the fighting began. Here, as elsewhere, there 
were only a few fighters on the barricades. And where were they to 
get weapons and ammunition? Suffice it to say that they fought back 
bravely for a long time against superior odds and only after extensive 
use of artillery, towards morning, were the half-dozen barricades 
that could be defended in the hands of the Prussians. As we know, on 
the following day these cautious heroes took their bloody revenge on 
servant girls, old folk and other peaceful people. 
On the same day that the Prussians were beaten back from 
Elberfeld, another battalion, from the 13th Regiment if I am not 
mistaken, was to enter Iserlohn and bring the army reserve there to 
reason. But here too the plan was frustrated; as soon as the news of 
the advance of the troops became known, the army reserve and the 
people fortified all the approaches to the town and awaited the 
enemy with rifles at the ready. The battalion did not dare to make an 
attack and withdrew again. 
The fighting in Elberfeld and Düsseldorf and the barricading of 
Iserlohn gave the signal for the uprising of the greater part of the 
industrial region of Berg and the Mark. The people of Solingen 
stormed the Graf rath arsenal and armed themselves with the rifles 
and cartridges they took from it; the people of Hagen joined the 
movement en masse, armed themselves, occupied the approaches to 
the Ruhr and sent out reconnaissance patrols; Solingen,  Ronsdorf, 
Remscheid, Barmen, etc., sent their contingents to Elberfeld. In 
the other localities of the region the army reserve declared itself for 
the movement and placed itself at the disposal of the Frankfurt 
Assembly. Elberfeld, Solingen, Hagen and Iserlohn replaced the 

=====第185页=====
162 Frederick Engels 
district and the local authorities, who had been driven out, with 
committees of public safety. 
Needless to say the news of these events was monstrously 
exaggerated. The whole of the Wupper and Ruhr area was pictured 
as one huge, organised camp of insurrection. There were said to be 
15,000 armed men in Elberfeld and as many in Iserlohn and Hagen. 
The panic which suddenly seized the government and at one blow 
paralysed all its measures to deal with this uprising in the most 
loyal districts played no small part in making these exaggera­
tions credible. 
After making all reasonable allowances for probable exaggera­
tions,  the undeniable fact remained that the main centres of the 
industrial region of Berg and the Mark were engaged in an open and 
so far victorious uprising. That was a fact. There was further the 
news that Dresden was still holding out, that Silesia was in a state of 
ferment, that the movement in the Palatinate was consolidating, that 
in Baden a victorious military revolt had broken out and the Grand 
Dukea had fled and that the Magyars stood on the banks of the 
Jablunka and the Leitha. To sum up, of all the revolutionary 
opportunities that had presented themselves to the democratic and 
workers' party since March 1848 this was by far the most favourable, 
and of course it had to be seized. The left bank of the Rhine could 
not leave the right bank in the lurch. 
What should be done now? 
All the larger towns of the Rhine Province are either fortress towns 
like Cologne and Coblenz, dominated by strong citadels and 
forts,  or they have numerous garrisons like Aachen, Düsseldorf and 
Trier. In addition to this the province is further kept in check by the 
Wesel, Jülich, Luxembourg, Saarlouis and even the Mainz and 
Minden fortresses. In these fortresses and garrisons there were 
altogether at least 30,000 men. Finally, Cologne, Düsseldorf, Aachen 
and Trier had been disarmed for some time. So the revolutionary 
centres of the province were paralysed. Here every attempt at an 
uprising, as had already been demonstrated in Düsseldorf, would 
inevitably end in a victory for the military; another such victory, e. g. 
in Cologne, would mean the moral crushing of the uprising in Berg 
and the Mark, in spite of the otherwise favourable news. On the left 
bank of the Rhine a movement was possible on the Moselle, in the 
Eifel and the Krefeld industrial district; but this region was encircled 
by six fortresses and three garrison towns. On the other hand, those 
districts on the right bank of the Rhine which were already in 
Leopold.— Ed 

=====第186页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 163 
insurrection offered a densely populated, extensive terrain which 
with its woods and mountains seemed to be made for an 
insurrectionary war. 
If the intention was to support the insurgent districts, then there 
was only one course open: 
above all things avoid unnecessary disorders in the fortresses and 
garrison towns; 
make a diversion on the left bank of the Rhine in the smaller 
towns, in the factory areas and in the countryside in order to hold the 
Rhine garrisons in check; 
finally, throw all available forces into the insurgent district on the 
right bank of the Rhine, spread the insurrection further and attempt 
to organise here the nucleus of a revolutionary army around the 
army reserve. 
Prussia's new heroes, who specialise in revelations, should not 
rejoice too soon over the treasonable conspiracy here revealed. 
Unfortunately no conspiracy existed. The above three measures are 
no conspiratorial plan but a simple suggestion put forward by the 
writer of these lines when he himself left for Elberfeld to see to the 
execution of the third point.148  Thanks to the dilapidated organisa­
tion of the democratic and workers' party, thanks to the indecision 
and shrewd cautiousness of most of the local leaders who had come 
from the petty bourgeoisie, and finally thanks to the lack of time, it 
never came to a conspiracy. Therefore if the beginnings of a 
diversion did indeed materialise on the left bank of the Rhine and if 
in Kempen, Neuss and the surrounding country disorders did break 
out and the arsenal in Prüm was stormed, 149 these incidents were by 
no means the outcome of a common plan but were merely a 
manifestation of the revolutionary instinct of the people. 
In the insurgent districts in the meantime things looked complete­
ly different from what the rest of the province would lead one to 
suppose. It must be admitted that Elberfeld with its barricades 
(which were, however, extremely unplanned and thrown together in 
a hurry), with its many sentinels, patrols and other armed men, with 
its whole population in the streets, only the big bourgeoisie 
apparently missing, and with its red flags and tricolours150 did not 
look at all bad, but otherwise the greatest confusion reigned in the 
town. Through the Committee of Public Safety formed in the first 
moments, the petty bourgeoisie had taken the direction of affairs 
into its hands. It had scarcely got thus far when it took fright at its 
power, limited as it was. The first thing it did was to get legitimation 
from the town council, i. e. from the big bourgeoisie, and out of 
gratitude for the town council's kindness to take five of its members 

=====第187页=====
164 Frederick Engels 
into the Committee of Public Safety. Reinforced in this way, the 
Committee forthwith washed its hands of all dangerous activity by 
transferring the responsibility for external security to a military 
commission, over which, however, it reserved for itself a moderating 
and restraining control. Secured in this fashion from all contact with 
the uprising and transplanted by the fathers of the town onto the 
ground of legality, the trembling petty bourgeois on the Committee 
of Public Safety were able to confine themselves to calming tempers, 
looking after day-to-day business, clearing up "misunderstandings", 
quietening people down, procrastinating and paralysing every form 
of energetic activity under the pretext that it was first necessary to 
await the answers given to the deputations sent to Berlin and 
Frankfurt. The rest of the petty bourgeoisie naturally went hand in 
hand with the Committee of Public Safety, quietened things down 
everywhere, did all they could to hinder the continuation of defence 
measures and distribution of arms and constantly wavered as to how 
far they would go with the uprising. Only a small part of this class 
was determined to defend itself weapons in hand in the event of an 
attack on the town. The great majority sought to persuade 
themselves that their threats alone and aversion to the almost 
inevitable bombardment of Elberfeld would move the government to 
make concessions; nevertheless they covered themselves against all 
eventualities. 
The big bourgeoisie, in the first moments after the battle, was as if 
thunderstruck. In its terror it saw fantastic visions of arson, murder, 
looting and God knows what abominations rising up out of the 
ground. Therefore the setting up of the Committee of Public Safety 
whose majority (town councillors, lawyers, public prosecutors, sober 
people) suddenly offered it a guarantee for life and property, filled it 
with more than fanatical delight. The selfsame big merchants, dyers 
and manufacturers who up to now had decried Messrs.Karl Hecker, 
Riotte, Höchster,  etc., as bloodthirsty terrorists, now hurried en masse 
to the town hall, embraced the same alleged butchers with the most 
feverish passion and deposited thousands of talers on the table of the 
Committee of Public Safety. It goes without saying that when the 
movement was ended these same enthusiastic admirers and support­
ers of the Committee of Public Safety spread abroad the most 
extravagant and basest lies not only about the movement itself but 
also about the Committee of Public Safety and its members, and 
thanked the Prussians with a similar intensity of feeling for liberation 
from a terror which had never existed. Innocent constitutional 
bourgeois, like Messrs. Hecker, Höchster and Public Prosecutor 
Heintzmann, were once more depicted as bugbears and man-eaters 

=====第188页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 165 
whose affinity to Robespierre and Danton stood written all over their 
faces.  For our part we consider it our duty completely to exonerate 
these honourable gentlemen from any such accusation. For the rest, 
the greater portion of the big bourgeoisie placed themselves, their 
wives and their children with the utmost dispatch under the 
protection of the Düsseldorf state of siege and only the smaller, more 
courageous portion stayed behind to protect their property against 
any eventuality. The Chief Burgomaster 3 stayed hidden in an 
overturned, manure-covered cab for the duration of the uprising. 
The proletariat, united in the heat of the struggle, split as soon as the 
Committee of Public Safety and the petty bourgeoisie began to 
waver. The artisans, the actual factory workers and a section of the 
silk-weavers backed the movement up to the hilt; but they, who 
formed the core of the proletariat, were almost entirely without 
weapons. The dye-workers, a robust, well-paid working class, coarse 
and consequently reactionary like all sections of workers whose 
occupation demands more physical strength than skill, had lost all 
interest even during the first days. They alone of all the industrial 
workers stayed at work while the barricades were up and did not 
allow themselves to be disturbed. Finally the lumpenproletariat was 
here as elsewhere corruptible from the second day of the movement 
onwards, demanding weapons and pay from the Committee of 
Public Safety in the morning and selling itself to the big bourgeois in 
the afternoon to protect their buildings or rip down the barricades 
when evening fell. On the whole it stood on the side of the 
bourgeoisie, which paid it most and with whose money it led a gay 
life as long as the movement lasted. 
The negligence and cowardice of the Committee of Public Safety 
and the discord in the military commission, in which the party of 
inaction initially had the majority, prevented any decisive action 
from the very beginning. From the second day onwards reaction set 
in. From the outset it became evident that in Elberfeld the only 
chance of success was under the banner of the Imperial Constitution 
and in agreement with the petty bourgeoisie. On the one hand, the 
proletariat had, here in particular, only too recently freed itself from 
the slough of gin and pietism for even the slightest notion of the 
conditions of its liberation to penetrate the masses, and on the other 
hand it had a too instinctive hatred for the bourgeoisie and was much 
too indifferent towards the bourgeois question of the Imperial 
Constitution to work up any enthusiasm for such tricolour interests. 
This put the resolute party, the only one to consider the question of 
Johann Adolph Carnap. — Ed. 

=====第189页=====
166 Frederick Engels 
defence seriously, in a false position. It declared itself for the 
Imperial Constitution. The petty bourgeoisie, however, did not trust 
it, maligned it in every way to the people and impeded all the 
measures it took to distribute arms and erect fortifications. Every 
order that could really serve to put the town in a state of defence was 
immediately countermanded by the first member of the Committee 
of Public Safety to come along. Every philistine in front of whose 
house a barricade was set up at once hurried to the town hall and 
procured a reversal of the order. The funds for the payment of the 
barricade-workers (and they asked for the very minimum to avoid 
starvation) could only be squeezed out of the Committee of Public 
Safety with great effort and in paltry amounts. Wages and rations 
for those bearing arms were provided irregularly and were often 
insufficient. For five to six days there was neither roll-call nor muster 
of armed men, with the result that nobody knew how many fighters 
could be reckoned on if an emergency arose. Not until the fifth day 
was an attempt made to detail the armed men, but the attempt was 
never carried into effect and was based on a total ignorance of the 
number of the fighting forces. Every member of the Committee of 
Public Safety acted on his own. There was a clash of the most 
contradictory orders and the only thing most of them had in 
common was to add to the easy-going confusion and prevent any 
energetic steps being taken. As a result of this the proletariat became 
heartily sick of the whole movement and after a few days the big 
bourgeoisie and the petty bourgeoisie succeeded in their aim of 
making the workers as apathetic as possible. 
When I reached Elberfeld on May 11, the armed men numbered 
at least 2,500 to 3,000. Of these, however, only the reinforcements 
from outside and the handful of armed Elberfeld workers were 
reliable. The army reserve was vacillating; most of them had a 
mighty dread of imprisonment in chains. At first there were not 
many of them, but they were reinforced by the admission of all the 
shilly-shallying and faint-hearted elements from the other detach­
ments. Finally the civic militia, reactionary here from the very first 
and set up specifically to suppress the workers, declared itself neutral 
and wanted nothing but merely to protect its property. All this only 
came to light in the course of the next few days; in the meantime, 
however, a section of the reinforcements from outside and the 
workers dispersed and the number of actual fighting forces 
dwindled as a result of the stagnation of the movement, while the 
civic militia held together more and more and with every day more 
openly expressed its reactionary desires. During the last few nights it 
was already tearing down a number of the barricades. The armed 

=====第190页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution j ß-j 
reinforcements, who certainly numbered at first more than a 
thousand men, were already reduced to half on the 12th or 13th, and 
when at length there was a general roll-call it became evident that the 
entire armed force upon which one could reckon by now numbered 
at the most 700 to 800 men. The army reserve and the civic militia 
refused to appear at this roll-call. 
That is not all. Insurgent Elberfeld was surrounded by places all of 
which were alleged to be "neutral". Barmen, Kronenberg, Lennep, 
Lüttringhausen, etc., had not joined the movement. The revolu­
tionary workers of these places, insofar as they had weapons, had 
marched to Elberfeld. The civic militia, which in all these places was 
purely an instrument in the hands of the manufacturers for holding 
down the workers, and was composed of the manufacturers, their 
factory overseers and the shopkeepers wholly dependent on the 
manufacturers, ruled here in the interests of "order" and the 
manufacturers. The workers themselves, who because of their 
dispersion in the more rural areas were rather out of touch with the 
political movement, had been partially brought over to the side of 
the manufacturers by the familiar means of coercion and by slanders 
about the character of the Elberfeld movement; among the peasants 
these slanders always worked unfailingly. In addition, the movement 
had come at a time when the manufacturers, after a business crisis of 
fifteen months, at last had full order books again; and it is common 
knowledge that no revolution can be made with regularly employed 
workers—a circumstance which also had a very significant effect in 
Elberfeld. It is obvious that under all these conditions the "neutral" 
neighbours were only so many covert enemies. 
And there was still more to it than that. No links were established 
with the other insurgent districts. From time to time odd individuals 
came over from Hagen; as good as nothing was known of Iserlohn. 
Some individuals offered their services as commissaries, 3 but none 
of them was to be trusted. Several couriers between Elberfeld and 
Hagen were said to have been arrested by the civic militia in Barmen 
and the surrounding area. The only place with which there was 
regular communication was Solingen, and the situation there looked 
no different from that in Elberfeld. That it looked no worse there 
was due only to the good organisation and determination of the 
Solingen workers, who had sent 400 to 500 armed men to Elberfeld 
and yet were still strong enough to keep their own bourgeoisie and 
civic militia in check. If the Elberfeld workers had been as developed 
The copy of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue corrected by 
Engels has Emissären instead of Kommissären. —Ed. 

=====第191页=====
168 Frederick Engels 
and as organised as the Solingen workers, the chances would have 
been completely different. 
Under these circumstances there was only one possibility left: to 
take swift, energetic measures to inject new life into the movement, 
provide it with new fighting forces, cripple its internal enemies and 
organise it as strongly as possible throughout the whole industrial 
area of Berg and the Mark. The first step was to disarm the Elber-
feld civic militia, distribute its weapons among the workers and 
impose a compulsory tax for the maintenance of the workers thus 
armed. This step would have broken decisively with all the slackness 
which had hitherto characterised the Committee of Public Safety, 
given the proletariat new life and crippled the "neutral" districts' 
capacity for resistance. How then to go about getting weapons from 
these districts too, spreading the insurrection and regularly organis­
ing the defence of the whole region depended on the success of this 
first step. With an order from the Committee of Public Safety and 
with no more than the 400 Solingen workers the Elberfeld civic 
militia would have been disarmed in no time. Courage was not their 
strong point. 
For the safety of those Elberfelders charged in May and still in 
prison, I owe the declaration that I alone was responsible for all these 
proposals. I began to call for the disarming of the civic militia 
immediately when the Committee of Public Safety's funds began to 
run out. 
But the commendable Committee of Public Safety did not at all 
consider that it was necessary to take such "terroristic measures". 
The only thing I managed to get carried out, or rather, directed on 
my own initiative together with a few corps leaders—who all got 
away safely and some of whom are already in America, was to fetch 
some eighty rifles belonging to the Kronenberg civic militia which 
were kept in the town hall there. And these rifles, distributed with 
extreme carelessness, ended up for the most part in the hands of 
gin-happy lumpenproletarians, who sold them that very evening to 
the bourgeoisie. These same bourgeois gentlemen were sending 
agents among the people to buy up as many rifles as possible and 
they paid quite a high price for them. In this way the Elberfeld 
lumpenproletarians delivered up to the bourgeoisie several 
hundred rifles, which had got into their hands through the 
negligence and lack of order of the improvised authorities. With 
these rifles the factory overseers, the most reliable dye-workers, etc., 
etc., were armed and the ranks of the "well-disposed" civic militia 
strengthened from day to day. 
The gentlemen of the Committee of Public Safety answered every 

=====第192页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 169 
proposal for improving the town's defences by saying that there was 
no point, the Prussians would take care not to come there, they 
would never venture into the mountains, and so on. They themselves 
were fully aware that in saying this they were spreading the most 
barefaced lies, that the town could be bombarded from all the 
heights even with field-guns, that no arrangements at all had been 
made for any at all serious defence and that, the insurrection having 
come to a halt and the Prussians possessing a colossal superiority, 
only really extraordinary events could now save the Elberfeld 
uprising. 
The Prussian generals, however, did not seem to be particularly 
anxious to venture into a terrain which was as good as totally 
unknown to them, at least not until they had assembled a truly 
overwhelming force. The four unfortified towns of Elberfeld, 
Hagen, Iserlohn and Solingen made such an impression on these 
cautious military heroes that they had an entire army of twenty 
thousand men and large numbers of cavalry and artillery brought 
up, partly by rail, from Wesel, Westphalia and the eastern provinces. 
Not daring to attack, they had a regular strategic formation drawn 
up the other side of the Ruhr. High command and general  staff, 
right flank, centre, everything was in the most beautiful order, just as 
if they were facing a colossal enemy army, as if it were a question of 
giving battle to a Bern or a Dembiriski and not of an unequal fight 
against a few hundred unorganised workers, badly armed, virtually 
leaderless and betrayed behind their backs by those who had put the 
weapons into their hands. 
We know how the insurrection ended.151  We know how the 
workers, disgusted with the petty bourgeoisie's constant procrastina­
tion, its faint-hearted shilly-shallying and its treacherous lulling into 
a false sense of security, finally moved out of Elberfeld to fight their 
way through to the first state they came to where the Imperial 
Constitution offered them the slightest refuge. We know how they 
were hunted by Prussian lancers and by incited peasants. We know 
how immediately after their departure the big bourgeoisie crawled 
out into the open again, had the barricades carried off and built 
triumphal arches for the approaching Prussian heroes. We know 
how Hagen and Solingen were played into the hands of the Prussians 
through direct betrayal by the bourgeoisie and how only Iserlohn 
put up a fight, unequal and lasting two hours, against the 24th 
Regiment, the conquerors of Dresden, who were already laden with 
booty. 
Some of the Elberfeld, Solingen and Mülheim workers got safely 
through to the Palatinate. Here they met with their fellow-

=====第193页=====
170 Frederick Engels 
countrymen, the fugitives from the storming of the Prüm arsenal. 
Together with these they formed a company consisting almost 
exclusively of Rhinelanders in Willich's volunteer corps. All their 
comrades will surely testify that whenever they came under fire, and 
especially in the last decisive battle on the Murg, they fought very 
bravely. 
The Elberfeld insurrection deserved this more detailed descrip­
tion because it was here that the position of the different classes in 
the Imperial Constitution movement was most sharply pronounced 
and furthest developed. In the other towns in Berg and the Mark the 
movement resembled that in Elberfeld in every way, except that 
there the participation or non-participation in the movement by the 
various classes was less clearly defined, the classes themselves not 
being so sharply differentiated as in the industrial centre of the area. 
In the Palatinate and in Baden, where concentrated large-scale 
industry and along with it a developed big bourgeoisie are almost 
non-existent, where the class relationships merge into each other in a 
much more easy-going and patriarchal way, the mixture of the 
classes that were the mainstay of the movement was even more 
confused. We shall see this later, but we shall also see at the same 
time how all these admixtures to the uprising likewise end up by 
grouping themselves around the petty bourgeoisie as the core for the 
crystallisation of the whole splendour of the Imperial Constitution. 
It is abundantly clear from «the attempted uprisings in Rhenish 
Prussia in May of last year what position this part of Germany is 
capable of occupying in a revolutionary movement. Surrounded by 
seven fortresses, three of them first-class for Germany, constantly 
manned by almost a third of the entire Prussian army, intersected in 
all directions by railways and with an entire fleet of transport 
steamers at the disposal of the military authorities, a Rhineland 
uprising has no prospect of succeeding except under quite 
exceptional circumstances. Only when the citadels are in the hands 
of the people can the Rhinelanders hope to achieve anything by 
force of arms. And such an eventuality can only arise either if the 
military authorities are terrorised by tremendous external events 
and lose their heads, or if the military declare themselves wholly or 
partly for the movement. In every other case an uprising in the 
Rhine Province is doomed in advance. A swift march on Frankfurt 
by the Badeners and on Trier by the Palatines would probably have 
led to the uprising immediately breaking out on the Moselle and in 
the Eifel, in Nassau and in both parts of Hesse, and the troops of the 
central Rhenish states, who at that time were still favourably 
disposed, joining the movement. There is no doubt that all the 

=====第194页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 171 
Rhenish troops, and especially the entire 7th and 8th artillery 
brigades, would have followed their example, that they would at least 
have given loud enough vent to their feelings to cause the Prussian 
generals to lose their heads. Probably several fortresses would have 
fallen into the hands of the people, and even if not Elberfeld, at least 
most of the left bank of the Rhine would have been saved. All that, 
and perhaps much more, was forfeited as a result of the shabby, 
cowardly and philistine policies of the wiseacres on the Baden 
Provincial Committee. 
With the defeat of the Rhenish workers died the only newspaper 
in which they saw their interests openly and resolutely championed: 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. The editor-in-chief, 3 though a native of 
Rhenish Prussia, was expelled from Prussia and the other editors 
had either direct arrest or immediate expulsion hanging over their 
heads. 152 The Cologne police explained this with extreme naïveté 
and went to great lengths to prove that they had enough against each 
one of them to take proceedings along one or the other of these lines. 
In this way the newspaper was forced to cease publication at the very 
moment when the unprecedentedly rapid increase in its circulation 
more than secured its existence. The editors scattered across the 
various German provinces where uprisings had taken place or were 
still to take place; several went to Paris, where yet again a critical 
moment was impending. 153 There is not one of them who during or 
as a result of the movements of this summer was not arrested or 
expelled, so experiencing the fate which the Cologne police were 
kind enough to prepare for him. A number of the compositors went 
to the Palatinate and joined the army. 
The Rhenish uprising too had to end tragically. After three-
quarters of the Rhine Province had been placed in a state of siege, 
after hundreds had been thrown into prison, it closed with the 
shooting on the eve of  Frederick  William IV of Hohenzollern's birthday of 
three of the men who had stormed the Prüm  arsenal!*  Vae victis! c 
a Karl Marx.— Ed. 
b Johann Manstein, Anton Seiler and Nikolaus Alken. — Ed. 
c Woe to the vanquished! — Ed. 

=====第195页=====
172 
II. KARLSRUHE 
The uprising in Baden took place under the most favourable 
circumstances that an insurrection could possibly hope for. The 
entire people were united in their hatred for a government that 
broke its word, engaged in duplicity and cruelly persecuted its 
political adversaries. The reactionary classes, the nobility, the 
bureaucracy and the big bourgeoisie, were few in numbers. Anyhow 
a big bourgeoisie exists only embryonically in Baden. With the 
exception of this handful of nobles, civil servants and bourgeois, with 
the exception of the Karlsruhe and Baden-Baden shopkeepers who 
made their living from the Court and from rich foreigners, with the 
exception of a few Heidelberg professors and a half-dozen peasant 
villages around Karlsruhe, the whole state was unanimously for the 
movement. In other uprisings the army had first to be defeated. 
Here, however, it had been harassed more than anywhere else by its 
aristocratic officers, worked on for a year by the democratic party 
and recently permeated even more with rebellious elements by the 
introduction of a kind of compulsory military service, with the result 
that it placed itself at the head of the movement and even drove the 
movement further than the bourgeois leaders of the Offenburg 
Assembly 154 cared for. It was precisely the army which in Rastatt and 
Karlsruhe transformed the "movement" into an insurrection. 
The insurrectionary government therefore found on acceding 
to office a ready army, abundantly supplied arsenals, a fully 
organised state machine, a full exchequer and a virtually unanimous 
population. What is more, on the left bank of the Rhine, in the 
Palatinate, it found an insurrection already effectuated covering its 
left flank; in Rhenish Prussia an insurrection which was admittedly 
seriously threatened but not yet defeated; and in Württemberg, in 

=====第196页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 173 
Franconia, in both parts of Hesse and in Nassau a general mood of 
unrest, even among the army, which only needed a spark to repeat 
the Baden uprising in the whole of South and Central Germany and 
put at least 50,000 to 60,000 regular troops at the disposal of the 
revolt. 
It is so simple and so obvious what should have been done under 
these circumstances that everybody knows it now, after the 
suppression of the uprising, and everybody claims to have been 
saying it from the very start. It was a question of immediately and 
without a moment's hesitation spreading the uprising to Hesse, 
Darmstadt, Frankfurt, Nassau and Württemberg, immediately 
mustering  8,000  to 10,000 of the available regular troops—by rail 
that could have been done in two days—and sending them to 
Frankfurt "for the defence of the National Assembly". The alarmed 
Hessian government was as if rooted to the spot by the rapid 
succession of advances made by the uprising; its troops were 
notoriously well disposecLto the people of Baden; it was no more 
capable than the Frankfurt Senate 155 of offering the slightest 
resistance. The troops of the electorate of Hesse, Württemberg and 
Darmstadt stationed in Frankfurt were for the movement; the 
Prussians there (mostly Rhinelanders) were wavering; the Austrians 
were numerically few. The arrival of the Badeners, whether or not 
any attempt was made to stop them, would inevitably have carried 
the insurrection into the heart of both parts of Hesse and Nassau, 
compelled the Prussians and Austrians to retreat to Mainz, and 
placed the trembling German so-called National Assembly under the 
terrorising influence of an insurgent people and an insurgent army. 
If the insurrection had not then immediately broken out on the 
Moselle, in the Eifel, in Württemberg and in Franconia then there 
would have been means enough at hand to carry it into these 
provinces too. 
Further, the power of the insurrection should have been 
centralised, the necessary funds placed at its disposal and through 
the immediate abolition of all feudal burdens that great majority of 
the population which tills the soil should have been given a stake in 
the insurrection. The establishment of a common central authority 
for war and finance with full powers to issue paper money,* to begin 
with for Baden and the Palatinate, and the abolition of all feudal 
burdens in Baden and every area occupied by the insurgent army 
would for the moment have sufficed to give the uprising quite a 
different energetic character. 
* The Baden Chambers had earlier already approved the issue of two million in 
bank-notes, of which not a penny had been issued.— Note by Engels. 

=====第197页=====
174 Frederick Engels 
All that had, however, to happen in the first moment if it were to 
be carried out with the swiftness which alone could guarantee 
success. A week after the appointment of the provincial com­
mittee it was already too late. The Rhenish insurrection was sup­
pressed, Württemberg and Hesse did not stir, and those military 
units which at the beginning had been favourably disposed became 
unreliable and ended up by once more completely obeying their 
reactionary officers. The uprising had lost its all-German character 
and had become a purely local uprising restricted to Baden or to 
Baden and the Palatinate. 
As I learnt after the fighting, the former Baden Second Lieutenant 
F. Sigel, who during the uprising won more or less equivocal 
dwarf-laurels as "colonel" and later as "general-in-chief", had at the 
very outset laid before the provincial committee a plan according to 
which the offensive was to be assumed. This plan has the merit of 
containing the correct notion that under all circumstances it is 
necessary to go over to the attack; in other respects, it is the most 
adventurist plan that could possibly have been proposed. Sigel 
wanted first to advance on Hohenzollern with a Baden corps and 
proclaim the Hohenzollern Republic, then take Stuttgart and from 
there, after having incited Württemberg to revolt, march on 
Nuremberg and set up a large camp in the heart of a likewise 
insurgent Franconia. It is easy to see that this plan completely left out 
of account the moral importance of Frankfurt, without which the 
insurrection could have no all-German character, and the strategic 
importance of the Main line. It is also easy to see that it presupposed 
completely different military forces than were actually available and 
that in the end, after a completely Quixotic or Schill-like raid, 156 it 
fizzled out and immediately set the strongest of all the South German 
armies and the only definitely hostile one, the Bavarian army, in hot 
pursuit of the insurgents, even before they could procure reinforce­
ments through the defection of the troops of Hesse and Nassau. 
The new government undertook no offensive under the pretext 
that the soldiers had almost all dispersed and gone home. Apart 
from the fact that this was true only in respect of a few isolated units, 
in particular the Prince's own regiment, even the soldiers who had 
dispersed were almost all back with their colours within three days. 
Furthermore, the government had quite different reasons for 
opposing any offensive. 
At the head of the agitation for the Imperial Constitution 
throughout Baden stood Herr Brentano, a lawyer, who with the 
invariably rather mesquin ambition of a man of the people from 
some petty German state and the seeming political staunchness 

=====第198页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 175 
which in South Germany is the very first condition of all popularity, 
combined a dash of diplomatic cunning which sufficed to give him 
full mastery of all around him, with the possible exception of a single 
person. Herr Brentano (this sounds trivial now, but it is true), Herr 
Brentano and his party, the strongest in the province, demanded 
nothing more at the Offenburg Assembly than changes in the 
policies of the Grand Duke, a which were only possible with a 
Brentano Ministry. The Grand Duke's reply and the general agitation 
gave rise to the Rastatt military revolt—against the will and the 
intentions of Brentano. At the very moment that Herr Brentano was 
placed at the head of the provincial committee he had already been 
overtaken by the movement and was forced to try and hold it back. 
Then came the riot in Karlsruhe; the Grand Duke fled, and the same 
circumstance that had summoned Herr Brentano to the head of the 
administration, that had furnished him with dictatorial powers as it 
were, now thwarted all his designs and induced him to use this power 
against the very movement that had procured it for him. While the 
people were celebrating the departure of the Grand Duke, Herr 
Brentano and his faithful provincial committee were sitting upon 
thorns. 
The said committee, consisting almost exclusively of Baden 
worthies with the staunchest of convictions and the most muddled of 
heads,  of "pure republicans" who trembled with fear at the idea of 
proclaiming the republic or crossed themselves at the slightest 
energetic measure, this unadulterated philistine committee was 
needless to say wholly dependent on Brentano. The role which the 
lawyer Höchster assumed in Elberfeld was here assumed on a 
somewhat larger terrain by the lawyer Brentano. Of the three b 
outside elements, Blind, Fickler and Struve, who joined the 
provincial committee straight from prison, Blind was so ensnared by 
Brentano's intrigues that he had no other choice, isolated as he was, 
but to go into exile in Paris as a representative of Baden; Fickler had 
to'undertake a dangerous mission to Stuttgart157 ; and Struve seemed 
to Herr Brentano to be so harmless that he tolerated him in the 
provincial committee, kept an eye on him and did his best to make 
him unpopular, in which he was completely successful. It is well 
known how Struve with several others founded a "Club of Resolute 
(or rather, cautious) Progress", which was disbanded after an 
unsuccessful demonstration. 158 A few days later Struve was in the 
a Leopold.— Ed. 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue gives beiden 
(two).—  Ed. 

=====第199页=====
176 Frederick Engels 
Palatinate, more or less a "fugitive", and there attempted yet again 
to publish his Deutscher Zuschauer. The specimen number was 
scarcely off the press when the Prussians marched in. 
The provincial committee, from the very first nothing more than 
a tool of Brentano, elected an executive committee once again 
headed by Brentano. This executive committee very soon almost 
completely replaced the provincial committee, using it at the most to 
confirm credits and measures taken and getting rid of any of the 
larger committee's members who looked at all unreliable by sending 
them on all kinds of minor missions to the districts or the army. 
Finally it abolished the provincial committee altogether, replacing it 
with a "constituent assembly", elected completely under Brentano's 
influence, and transformed itself into a "provisional government", 
whose leader was needless to say once again Herr Brentano. It was 
he who appointed the ministers. And what ministers— Florian 
Mordes and Mayerhof er! 
Herr Brentano was the most consummate representative of the 
Baden petty bourgeoisie. He distinguished himself from the mass of 
the petty bourgeois and their other representatives only by being too 
discerning to share all their illusions. Herr Brentano betrayed the 
insurrection in Baden from the very first. He did so precisely 
because from the very first he grasped the state of affairs more 
correctly than any other official person in Baden and because hè 
took the only measures which would uphold the hegemony of the 
petty bourgeoisie and yet for that very reason meant the inevitable 
destruction of the insurrection. This is the key to Brentano's 
unbounded popularity at that time but also the key to the curses 
which have been heaped on him since July by his former admirers. 
The petty bourgeoisie of Baden were as a body just as much traitors 
as Brentano; but at the same time they were duped, which he was 
not. They betrayed out of cowardice and they allowed themselves to 
be duped out of stupidity. 
In Baden, as in the whole of South Germany, there is hardly any 
big bourgeoisie at all. The province's industry and trade are of no 
significance. It follows that the proletariat is not at all numerous, 
very fragmented and scarcely developed. The mass of the popula­
tion is divided into peasants (the majority), petty bourgeois and 
journeymen. These last, the urban workers, scattered in little towns 
without any big centre where an independent workers' party could 
develop, are or at least were until now under the dominant social and 
political influence of the petty bourgeoisie. The peasants, even more 
scattered over the province and lacking the means of instruction, 
have interests which partly coincide with and partly run parallel, so 

=====第200页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 177 
to speak, to those of the petty bourgeoisie and for that reason were 
likewise under the petty bourgeoisie's political tutelage. The petty 
bourgeoisie, represented by lawyers, doctors, schoolmasters, indi­
vidual merchants and book-sellers, thus held sway over the entire 
political movement in Baden, since March 1848, partly directly, 
partly through its representatives. 
It is owing to the absence of an antithesis of bourgeoisie and 
proletariat and the consequent political domination of the petty 
bourgeoisie that there has never really been in Baden a movement 
agitating for socialism. The elements of socialism which came in 
from outside, either through workers who had been to more 
developed countries or through the influence of French or German 
socialist and communist literature, never managed to make any 
headway in Baden. The red riband and the red flag meant nothing 
more in Baden than the bourgeois republic, compounded at the 
most with a little terrorism, and the "six scourges of humanity"159 
discovered by Herr Struve were, for all their bourgeois inoffensive-
ness,  the limit to which one could go without losing the sympathy of 
the masses. The highest ideal of the Baden petty bourgeois and 
peasant always remained the litde republic of burghers and peasants 
as it has existed in Switzerland since 1830. A small field of activity for 
small, modest people, where the state is a somewhat enlarged parish, 
a "canton"; a small, stable industry, based on handicrafts, which 
gives rise to an equally stable and sleepy social condition; no great 
wealth, no great poverty, nothing but middle class and mediocrity; 
no prince, no civil list, no standing army, next to no taxes; no active 
participation in history, no foreign policy, nothing but petty 
domestic gossip and petty squabbling en famille; no big industry, no 
railways, no world trade, no social collisions between millionaires and 
proletarians, but a quiet, cosy life in all godliness and respectability, in 
the humble unobtrusiveness without a history, of satisfied souls 
—this is the gentle Arcadia which exists in the greater part of 
Switzerland and which the Baden petty bourgeois and peasants have 
been longing for years to see established. And if in moments of more 
ardent enthusiasm the thoughts of the Baden and, let us say it, of the 
South German petty bourgeois in general are stretched as far as the 
notion of the whole of Germany, then the ideal of Germany's future 
which flickers before their eyes takes the shape of an enlarged 
Switzerland, a federal republic. Thus Herr Struve has already 
published a pamphlet 3 which divides Germany up into twenty-four 
cantons, each with its own landammanh and its big and little councils. 
a G. Struve, Die Grundrechte des deutschen Volkes, Birsfelden bei Basel, 1848.— Ed. 
b The highest official in some Swiss cantons.— Ed. 

=====第201页=====
178 Frederick Engels 
He even goes so far as to append a map which shows the ready-made 
boundary lines. If Germany were ever in a position to transform 
itself into such an Arcadia, then it would thereby have descended to a 
depth of degradation of which it hitherto had no inkling, even in the 
times of its greatest humiliations. 
The South German petty bourgeoisie had in the meantime more 
than once experienced that a revolution, even one under their own 
bourgeois republican banner, can quite easily carry away their 
beloved and peaceful Arcadia in the vortex of far more colossal 
conflicts, of real class struggles. Hence the petty-bourgeois fear not 
only of any sort of revolutionary convulsion but also of their own 
ideal of a federal tobacco-and-beer republic. Hence their enthusiasm 
for the Imperial Constitution, which at least satisfied their immediate 
interests and held out to them the hope, considering the purely 
suspensive nature of the Kaiser's veto, of ushering in the republic at 
some opportune moment by means within the bounds of the law. 
Hence their surprise when the Baden military without being asked 
handed over to them on a salver a ready-made insurrection, and 
hence their fear of spreading the insurrection over the frontiers of 
the future canton of Baden. The conflagration might well have taken 
hold of regions in which there was a big bourgeoisie and a numerous 
proletariat, regions in which it would have given power to the 
proletariat, and then woe to their property! 
What did Herr Brentano do in these circumstances? 
What the petty bourgeoisie in Rhenish Prussia had done 
consciously, he did for the petty bourgeoisie in Baden: he betrayed 
the insurrection, but he saved the petty bourgeoisie. 
Brentano did not betray the insurrection by his last actions, by his 
flight after the defeat on the Murg, 160 as the finally disillusioned 
petty bourgeoisie of Baden imagined; he had betrayed it from the 
very first. It was precisely those measures that the Baden philistines, 
and with them sections of the peasants and even the artisans, cheered 
most loudly, which betrayed the movement to Prussia. It was pre­
cisely by his betrayal that Brentano became so popular and shack­
led the fanatical enthusiasm of the philistines to his heels. The 
petty burgher was too taken up with the swift restoration of order 
and public safety and the immediate suppression of the movement 
itself to notice the betrayal of the movement; and when it was too 
late, when, compromised in the movement, he saw that the move­
ment was lost, and himself with it, he cried treason and with all the in­
dignation of cheated respectability fell upon his most faithful servant. 
Herr Brentano was cheated, too, of course. He hoped to emerge 
from the movement as the great man of the "moderate" party, i.e. of 

=====第202页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 179 
none other than the petty bourgeoisie, and instead was ignominious-
ly forced to bolt under cover of darkness from his own party and 
from his best friends, on whom the terrible truth had suddenly 
dawned. He even hoped to keep open for himself the possibility of a 
grand-ducal ministry and instead received by way of thanks for his 
wisdom a good kicking from all parties and the impossibility of ever 
again playing even the smallest of roles. But in truth one can be 
shrewder than the entire petty bourgeoisie of any German 
robber-state [Raubstaat] and still see one's finest hopes dashed and 
one's most noble intentions pelted with mud! 
From the first day of his government Herr Brentano did 
everything to keep the movement on the narrow, philistine course 
which it had scarcely attempted to overstep. Under the protection of 
the Karlsruhe civic militia, which was devoted to the Grand Duke 
and had fought against the movement only the day before, he moved 
into the Ständehaus 161 to curb the movement from there. The recall 
of the deserted soldiers could not have been carried out more 
sluggishly; the reorganisation of the battalions was pursued with just 
as little urgency. On the other hand, the Mannheim unarmed 
philistines, who everyone knew would not fight, and who after the 
battle of Waghäusel 162 even collaborated for the most part with a 
regiment of dragoons in the betrayal of Mannheim, were immediate­
ly armed. There was no question of a march on Frankfurt or 
Stuttgart or of spreading the insurrection to Nassau or Hesse. If a 
proposal were made to this effect, it was immediately brushed aside, 
like Sigel's. To speak of issuing bank-notes would have been 
considered a crime against the state, tantamount to communism. 
The Palatinate sent envoy after envoy to say that they were unarmed, 
that they had no rifles let alone artillery, that they had no 
ammunition and were without everything needed to carry out an 
insurrection and in particular to seize the Landau and Germersheim 
fortresses; but nothing was to be got out of Herr Brentano. The 
Palatinate proposed the immediate setting up of a joint military 
command, and even the unification of both provinces under a single 
joint government. Everything was delayed and deferred. I believe 
that a small financial contribution is all the Palatinate managed to 
get; later, when it was too late, eight cannon arrived with a little 
ammunition but no crew or draught-team, and finally, on a direct 
order from Mieroslawski, came a Baden battalion and two mortars, 
only one of which, if I remember rightly, fired a shot. 
Because of this policy of delaying and brushing aside those 
measures most necessary to spread the insurrection, the whole 
movement was already betrayed. The same nonchalance was 

=====第203页=====
180 Frederick Engels 
displayed in internal matters. There was not a word about abolishing 
feudal burdens; Herr Brentano knew full well that among the 
peasantry, especially in Upper Baden, there were elements more 
revolutionary than he cared for and that he must therefore hold 
them back rather than hurl them even more deeply into the 
movement. The new officials were mostly either creatures of 
Brentano or completely incompetent; the old officials, with the 
exception of those who had compromised themselves too directly in 
the reaction of the last twelve months and had hence deserted of 
themselves, all kept their positions, to the great delight of all the 
peaceful burghers. Even Herr Struve thought in the last days of May 
that the "revolution" should be commended for the fact that 
everything had passed off so very calmly and almost all the officials 
had been able to remain at their posts.—As to the rest, Herr 
Brentano and his agents worked for the restoration, wherever 
possible, of the old routine, for a minimum of unrest and agitation 
and for a speedy removal of the trappings of revolution from the 
province. 
In the military organisation the same routine prevailed. Only that 
was done which could not possibly remain undone. The troops were 
left without leaders, without anything to occupy them and without 
order; the incompetent "Minister of War" Eichfeld and his 
successor, the traitor Mayerhofer, did not even know how to deploy 
them properly. The convoys of troops crossed one another aimlessly 
and futilely on the railway. The battalions were led to one place one 
day and back the next, nobody could say why. In the garrisons the 
men went from one tavern to the next because they had nothing else 
to do. It seemed as if they were being demoralised on purpose, as if 
the government really wanted to drive out the last remnants of 
discipline. The organisation of the first call-up of the so-called 
people's militia, i.e. all men up to thirty years old capable of bearing 
arms,  was assigned to the well-known Joh. Ph. Becker, a naturalised 
Swiss and an officer of the confederate army. I do not know to what 
extent Becker was obstructed in the execution of his mission by 
Brentano. I do know, however, that after the retreat of the Palatinate 
army onto Baden territory, when the peremptory demands of the 
badly clothed and badly armed Palatinate forces could no longer be 
rejected, Brentano washed his hands in innocence and said: "As far 
as I'm concerned, give them whatever you want; but when the 
Grand Duke comes back he should at least know who squandered 
his stores in this manner!" So if the Baden people's militia was 
organised in part badly and in part not at all, there is no doubt 
that the main responsibility for this too lies with Brentano 

=====第204页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 181 
and the ill will or ineptitude of his commissaries in the various 
districts. 
When Marx and I first set foot on Baden territory after the 
suppression of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (it must have been May 
20 or 21, that is, more than a week after the flight of the Grand 
Duke) we were astonished to see how carelessly the border was 
guarded, or rather not guarded. From Frankfurt to Heppenheim 
the entire railway was in the hands of Württemberg and Hessian 
imperial troops; Frankfurt and Darmstadt themselves were full of 
soldiers; all the stations and all the villages were occupied by strong 
detachments; regular outposts were advanced right up to the border. 
From the border to Weinheim, by contrast, there was not a single 
man to be seen; the same was true of Weinheim. The one and only 
precaution was the demolition of a short stretch of railway between 
Heppenheim and Weinheim. Only while we were there did a weak 
detachment of the Prince's own regiment, at the most twenty-five 
men, arrive at Weinheim. From Weinheim to Mannheim the deepest 
peace prevailed; at the most there was here and there an odd, more 
than merry people's militiaman, who looked more like a straggler or 
a deserter than a soldier on duty. Needless to say, there was no 
question at all of border control. One went in or out, at will. 
Mannheim, however, gave more the impression of being on a 
war footing. Crowds of soldiers stood around in the streets or sat in 
the taverns. The people's militia and the civic militia were drilling in 
the park, although for the most part in a very clumsy fashion and 
with bad instructors. At the town hall were sitting any number of 
committees, old and new officers, uniforms and tunics. The people 
mingled with the soldiers and volunteers and there was a great deal 
of drinking, laughing and embracing. But it was at once apparent 
that the initial impetus was spent and that many were unpleasantly 
disillusioned. The soldiers were discontented; we carried through 
the insurrection, they said, and now that it is the turn of the civilians 
to take over the leadership they let everything come to a standstill 
and go to pieces! The soldiers were also far from satisfied with their 
new officers; the new officers were on bad terms with those who had 
previously served the Grand Duke—at that time there were still 
many of them, although every day some deserted; the old officers 
found themselves against their will in an awkward situation, from 
which they did not know how to extricate themselves. Finally, 
everyone was bemoaning the lack of energetic and competent 
leadership. 
On the other side of the Rhine, in Ludwigshafen, the movement 
seemed to us to be a much more cheerful affair. Whereas in 
S-1124 

=====第205页=====
182 Frederick Engels 
Mannheim a great many young men who should clearly have been in 
the first call-up were quietly going about their business as if nothing 
had happened, here everyone was armed. Admittedly it was not so 
everywhere in the Palatinate, as later became evident. In Ludwigsha­
fen the greatest unanimity prevailed between volunteers and 
military. In the taverns, which here too were, of course, over­
crowded, the Marseillaise and other such songs rang out. There 
was no complaining and no grumbling, people were laughing 
and were body and soul with the movement, and at that time, 
especially amongst the fusiliers and volunteers, very under­
standable and innocent illusions prevailed about their own invin­
cibility. 
In Karlsruhe things took on a more solemn tone. In the Pariser Hof 
table  d'hôte  had been announced for one o'clock. But it did not start 
until "the gentlemen of the provincial committee" had arrived. Little 
marks of respect of this sort were already giving the movement a 
reassuring bureaucratic veneer. 
In opposition to various gentlemen from the provincial committee 
we expressed the views developed above, namely, that at the outset a 
march should have been made on Frankfurt and the insurrection 
thus extended, that it was most probably by now too late and that 
unless there were decisive blows in Hungary or a new revolution in 
Paris the whole movement was already irretrievably lost. It is 
impossible to imagine the outburst of indignation amongst these 
burghers of the provincial committee at such heresies. Only Blind 
and Goegg were on our side. Now that we have been proved right by 
events these same gentlemen naturally claim that they had all along 
been pressing for the offensive. 
In Karlsruhe at that time there were already the first beginnings of 
that pretentious place-hunting which, under the equally pretentious 
title of "concentration of all the democratic forces of Germany", 
masqueraded as coming to the aid of the fatherland. Anyone who 
had ever held forth, however confusedly, in some club or other or 
had once called for hatred of tyrants in some democratic local paper 
hurried to Karlsruhe or Kaiserslautern, there to become at once a 
great man. As there is hardly need to emphasise, the performances 
were fully in keeping with the forces here concentrated.—Thus 
there was in Karlsruhe a certain well-known, allegedly philosophical 
Atta Troll, 3 ex-member of the Frankfurt Assembly and ex-editor of 
an allegedly democratic paper, b suppressed by Manteuffel despite 
a An ironical allusion to Arnold Ruge.— Ed. 
Die Reform.— Ed. 

=====第206页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 183 
the tenders of our Atta Troll. Atta Troll was angling most 
assiduously for the little post of Baden envoy to Paris, for which he 
felt he had a special vocation because he had spent two years there at 
one time and learnt no French. Having been lucky enough actually 
to wheedle the credentials out of Herr Brentano, he was just packing 
his bags when Brentano unexpectedly summoned him and removed 
the accreditation papers from his pocket. It goes without saying that 
Atta Troll now made a point of going to Paris in order to spite Herr 
Brentano. —Another staunch burgher who had been threatening 
Germany for years with revolution and the republic, Herr Heinzen, 3 
was also in Karlsruhe. This honourable gentleman was notorious 
before the February Revolution for calling on people everywhere 
and at all times to "go at them tooth and nail", and yet, after this 
revolution, he considered it more discreet to watch the various 
German insurrections from the neutral mountains of Switzerland. 
Now, at long last, he appeared to have got the urge to go tooth and 
nail himself at the "oppressors". After his earlier declared opinion 
that "Kossuth is a great man, but Kossuth has forgotten about 
fulminating silver" ,b  it was to be expected that he would immediately 
organise the most colossal and hitherto unsuspected forces of 
destruction against the Prussians. He did no such thing. Since more 
ambitious plans did not appear to be appropriate, our hater of 
tyrants, as the saying goes, contented himself with setting up a 
republican élite corps, in the meantime writing articles in favour of 
Brentano in the Karlsruher Zeitung and frequenting the Club of 
Resolute Progress. The club was wound up, the republican élite did 
not put in an appearance and Herr Heinzen finally realised that 
not even he could defend Brentano's policies any longer. Misun­
derstood, exhausted and peeved, he first went to Upper Baden and 
from there to Switzerland, without having struck dead a single 
"oppressor". He is now taking his revenge on them from London, 
guillotining them in effigy in their millions. 
We left Karlsruhe the next morning to visit the Palatinate. 
As far as the conduct of general political matters and civil 
administration is concerned, there is little that remains to be said 
about the further course of the Baden insurrection. When Brentano 
felt strong enough he wiped out in one fell blow the tame opposition 
presented by the Club of Resolute Progress. The "Constituent 
3 An apparent allusion to a pamphlet by G. Struve and K. Heinzen, Plan zur 
Revolutionirung und Republikanisirung Deutschlands. —Ed. 
K. Heinzen, Der Mord,  in Die Evolution, Biel (Switzerland), No. 4, January 26, 
1849.—Ed. 
8* 

=====第207页=====
184 Frederick Engels 
Assembly", elected under the influence of the immense popularity 
of Brentano and the all-ruling petty bourgeoisie, gave its assent and 
blessing to every measure he took. The "Provisional Government 
with dictatorial power" 3 (a dictatorship under an alleged conven­
tion!) was wholly under his control. Thus he continued to rule, 
obstructed the revolutionary and military development of the 
insurrection, had the day-to-day affairs discharged tant bien que mai 0 
and jealously looked after the stores and private property of the 
Grand Duke, whom he continued to treat as his legitimate sovereign 
by the grace of God. In the Karlsruher Zeitung he declared that the 
Grand Duke could return at any time, and indeed the castle 
remained closed during this whole period, as if its occupant were 
merely away on a journey. He put off the emissaries from the 
Palatinate from day to day with vague answers; the most that could 
be achieved was the joint military command under Mieroslawski 
and—a treaty abolishing the Mannheim-Ludwigshafen bridge-toll, 
which still did not prevent Herr Brentano from continuing to levy 
this toll on the Mannheim side. 
When Mieroslawski was finally forced after the battle of 
Waghäusel and Ubstadt to withdraw the remnants of his army 
through the mountains to the other side of the Murg, when 
Karlsruhe had to be abandoned with a mass of provisions, and when 
the defeat on the Murg settled the fate of the movement, the illusions 
of the Baden burghers, peasants and soldiers were dispelled and a 
universal cry went up accusing Brentano of treason. With one fell 
blow the whole edifice of Brentano's popularity, based on the 
cowardice of the petty bourgeois, the helplessness of the peasants 
and the lack of a concentrated working class, was demolished. 
Brentano fled to Switzerland under cover of darkness, pursued by 
the accusation of national betrayal with which his own "Constituent 
Assembly" stigmatised him, and went to ground in Feuerthalen in 
the canton of Zurich. 
One could draw comfort from the thought that Herr Brentano has 
been punished enough by the total ruin of his political position and 
the universal contempt of all parties for his betrayal. The collapse of 
the Baden movement is of little consequence. The 13th June in 
Paris L and Görgey's refusal to march on Vienna 163 put an end to any 
hopes that Baden and the Palatinate still had, even if the movement 
A name the Baden Provisional Government took in the decree on its formation 
published in the Karlsruher Zeitung No. 34, June 21, 1849.— Ed. 
After a fashion.— Ed. 
See this volume, pp. 105-07.— Ed. 

=====第208页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 185 
had been successfully transplanted to Hesse, Württemberg and 
Franconia. One would have fallen more honourably, but one would 
still have fallen. But what the revolutionary party will never forgive 
Herr Brentano, what it will always remember against the cowardly 
Baden petty bourgeoisie which supported him, is their direct 
responsibility for the death of those shot in Karlsruhe, in Freiburg 
and in Rastatt and of the countless and nameless victims silently 
executed by the Prussians with the help of typhus in the Rastatt 
casemates. 
In the second issue of this Revue I will describe the conditions in 
the Palatinate and, to conclude, the Baden-Palatinate campaign. 

=====第209页=====
186 
III. THE PALATINATE 
From Karlsruhe we went to the Palatinate? first stopping at 
Speyer where d'Ester and the Provisional Government were said to 
be. They had, however, already left for Kaiserslautern, where the 
government finally took up its seat at what it considered to be the 
"strategically best located point in the Palatinate". In its stead we 
found Willich and his volunteers in Speyer. With a corps of a few 
hundred men he was holding in check the garrisons of Landau and 
Germersheim, altogether over 4,000 men, cutting their lines of 
supply and harassing them in every possible way. That very day he 
had attacked two companies of the Germersheim garrison with about 
eighty riflemen and driven them back into the fortress without firing 
a single shot. The next day we accompanied Willich to Kaiserslautern 
where we met d'Ester, the Provisional Government, and the very 
flower of German democracy. Here also there could, of course, be no 
question of official participation in the movement, which was quite 
alien to our party. So after a few days we went back to Bingen, were 
arrested on the way, in the company of several friends, by Hessian 
troops, on suspicion of being implicated in the uprising, transported 
to Darmstadt and from there to Frankfurt, where we were finally set 
free. 
Shortly after this we left Bingen and Marx went with a mandate 
from the Democratic Central Committee to Paris, where a crucial 
event was about to take place, as representative of the German 
revolutionary party to the French social-democrats. 164 I returned to 
Kaiserslautern to live there for the time being as a simple political 
refugee and perhaps later, should a suitable opportunity offer  itself, 
a Marx and Engels left Karlsruhe for the Palatinate on May 24, 1849.— Ed. 

=====第210页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 187 
take up at the outbreak of fighting the only position that the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung could take up in this movement: that of 
soldier. 
Anyone who has seen the Palatinate even once will understand 
that in this wine-producing and wine-loving province any movement 
inevitably assumes a most cheerful character. The ponderous, 
pedantic, Old-Bavarian beer-souls had at long last been shaken off 
and merry Palatinate wine-bibbers appointed in their place. One had 
finally seen the last of that pompous pettifoggery practised by the 
Bavarian police which was so delightfully parodied in the otherwise 
dull pages of the Fliegende Blätter and which lay more heavily than 
anything else on the hearts of the gay people of the Palatinate. The 
first revolutionary act of the people of the Palatinate was to restore 
the freedom of the taverns; the entire Palatinate was transformed 
into one enormous pot-house and the quantities of strong drink 
which were consumed "in the name of the people of the Palatinate" 
during those six weeks were beyond all calculation. Even though 
active participation in the movement in the Palatinate was nowhere 
near as widespread as in Baden, and even though there were many 
reactionary districts here, the entire population was as one in this 
general wine-bibbing and even the most reactionary philistine and 
peasant was carried along on the general wave of merriment. 
One did not need an especially penetrating glance to recognise 
how bitterly the Prussian army was to disillusion these cheerful 
Palatinate souls in a few weeks' time. And yet the number of people 
in the Palatinate who did not revel in the most carefree manner 
could be counted on one's fingers. Scarcely anyone believed that the 
Prussians would come, but everyone was quite sure that if they did 
come they would be thrown out again with the greatest of ease. 
There was no trace here of that staunch gloominess whose motto 
"Ernst ist der Mann"* is engraved on the brow of every Baden 
people's militia officer and which still did not prevent all those 
wonderful things happening which I shall have to relate present­
ly—that respectable solemnity which the philistine character of the 
movement in Baden had impressed on the majority of its 
participants. In the Palatinate people were only "serious" by the way. 
Here "enthusiasm" and "seriousness" only served to gloss over the 
universal jollity. But people were always "serious" and "enthusias­
tic" enough to believe themselves invincible before any power in the 
world, and especially the Prussian army; and if in the quiet hours of 
reflection a faint doubt raised its head, it was brushed aside with the 
a Seriousness above all things.— Ed. 

=====第211页=====
188 Frederick Engels 
irrefutable argument that even if it were true, one still should not say 
it. The longer the movement dragged on and the more undeniable 
and massive the concentration of Prussian battalions between 
Saarbrücken and Kreuznach, the more frequent became these 
doubts, and the more vehement the bluster, precisely among the 
doubters and the timid, about the invincibility of a "people 
enraptured with its freedom", as the people of the Palatinate were 
called. This bluster soon grew into a regular soporific system which, 
encouraged only too readily by the government, had the effect of 
relaxing all work on defence measures and exposing everyone who 
opposed it to the danger of arrest as a reactionary. 
This carefree attitude, this bluster about "enthusiasm" carrying all 
before it, in view of its minute material resources and the tiny corner 
of land where it asserted  itself,  provided the comic side of the 
Palatinate "uprising", and gave the handful of people whose 
advanced views and independent position permitted a detached 
judgment more than enough cause for hilarity. 
The whole outward appearance of the movement in the Palatinate 
was cheerful, carefree and spontaneous. Whereas in Baden every 
newly appointed second lieutenant, in the regular army or the 
people's militia, laced himself into a heavy uniform and paraded with 
silver epaulettes which later, on the day of the battle, immediately 
found their way into his pockets, people in the Palatinate were much 
more sensible. As soon as the great heat of the first days of June 
made itself felt all the worsted coats, waistcoats and cravats 
disappeared to make way for a light tunic. It seemed as if all the old 
unsociable constraints had been thrown off along with the old 
bureaucracy. People dressed in a completely free-and-easy fashion, 
dictated solely by comfort and the season of the year; and together 
with differentiation in clothing disappeared in a moment every other 
differentiation in social intercourse. All social classes came together 
in the same public places and in this unrestrained intercourse a 
socialist dreamer would have glimpsed the dawn of universal 
brotherhood. 
As the Palatinate, so its Provisional Government. It consisted 
almost exclusively of genial wine-bibbers, who were never so 
astonished as when they suddenly found themselves having to be the 
Provisional Government of their Bacchus-beloved fatherland. And 
yet there is no denying that these laughing regents conducted 
themselves better and accomplished relatively more than their 
Baden neighbours under the leadership of the "staunch-minded" 
Brentano. They were at least well-intentioned and in spite of their 
carousing had a more sober understanding than the philistine-

=====第212页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 139 
serious gentlemen in Karlsruhe; and hardly any of them became 
angry if one laughed at their easy-going fashion of making 
revolution and their impotent little decrees. 
The Provisional Government of the Palatinate could not get 
anything done as long as it was left in the lurch by the Baden 
government. And it completely fulfilled its obligations towards 
Baden. It sent envoy after envoy and made one concession after 
another solely in order to come to an understanding, but all in vain. 
Herr Brentano was obdurate. 
While the Baden government found everything ready at hand, the 
Palatinate government found nothing. It had no money, no 
weapons, a number of reactionary districts and two enemy fortresses 
on its territory. France at once banned the export of arms to Baden 
and the Palatinate, and all arms dispatched thither were impounded 
by Prussia and Hesse. The government of the Palatinate sent agents 
forthwith to France and Belgium to buy up arms and send them 
back; the arms were purchased but they never arrived. The 
government can be reproached with not proceeding with sufficient 
energy in the matter and in particular with failing to organise the 
smuggling in of rifles through the large number of contrabandists 
along the frontier; the greater blame, however, lies with its agents, 
who acted very negligently and in part allowed themselves to be 
fobbed off with empty promises instead of getting the French arms 
at least as far as Saargemünd and Lauterburg. 
As far as funds were concerned, not much could be done with 
bank-notes in the little Palatinate. When the government found itself 
in pecuniary embarrassment it at least had the courage to take refuge 
in a forced loan on a progressive, albeit gently graduated, scale. 
The only reproaches which can be made against the Palatinate 
government are that in its feeling of impotence it allowed itself to be 
too much infected by the universal light-heartedness and the related 
illusions about its own security; and that therefore, instead of 
energetically setting in motion the admittedly limited means of 
defending the state, it preferred to rely on the victory of the 
Montagne in Paris, the taking of Vienna by the Hungarians or even 
on actual miracles which were to happen somewhere or other to save 
the Palatinate—uprisings in the Prussian army, etc. Hence the 
remissness in procuring arms in a country where even a thousand 
serviceable muskets more or less would have made an infinite 
amount of difference and where finally, on the day the Prussians 
marched in, the first and last consignment of forty rifles arrived 
from abroad, namely from Switzerland. Hence the frivolous 
selection of civil and military commissaries, who consisted mainly of 

=====第213页=====
190 Frederick Engels 
the most incompetent and confused dreamers, and the retention of 
so many old officials and of all the judges. Hence finally the neglect 
of all the means, even those immediately at hand, of harassing and 
perhaps taking Landau. To this question I shall return later. 
Behind the Provisional Government stood d'Ester, like a sort of 
secret General Secretary or, as Herr Brentano put it, like a "red 
camarilla which surrounded the moderate government of Kaisersla­
utern". 3 Moreover, this "red camarilla" included other German 
democrats too, in particular Dresden refugees. In d'Ester the 
Palatinate regents found that broad administrative vision which they 
lacked, together with a revolutionary understanding which im^ 
pressed them because it always confined itself to what was 
immediately at hand, to that which was unquestionably practicable, 
and was therefore never at a loss for detailed measures. Because of 
this d'Ester acquired a significant influence and the unconditional 
confidence of the government. If even he at times took the 
movement too seriously and thought for example that he could 
achieve something worthwhile through the introduction of his for 
the moment totally unsuitable municipal regulations, it is none the 
less certain that d'Ester impelled the Provisional Government to 
each comparatively vigorous step and in particular always had ap­
propriate solutions at hand when it came to conflicts over details. 
If in Rhenish Prussia reactionary and revolutionary classes stood 
facing each other from the very outset and if in Baden a class which 
was initially in raptures about the movement, the petty bourgeoisie, 
gradually allowed itself at the approach of danger to be won over 
first into indifference and later into hostility towards the movement 
it itself had provoked, in the Palatinate it was not so much particular 
classes of the population as particular districts which, governed by 
local interests, declared themselves against the movement, some 
from the first and others little by little. Certainly the townspeople of 
Speyer were reactionary from the start; in Kaiserslautern, Neustadt, 
Zweibrücken,  etc., they became so with the passage of time; but the 
main strength of the reactionary party was to be found in 
agricultural districts spread over the whole of the Palatinate. This 
confused configuration of the parties could only have been 
eliminated by one measure: a direct attack on the private property 
invested in mortgages and mortgage-usury, in favour of the 
debt-ridden peasants who had been sucked dry by the usurers. But 
this single measure, which would immediately have given the whole 
a From Brentano's justificatory memorandum: Die Lage und das Verhalten der 
Mitglieder der Ministerien während der Revolution vom 13.5 bis 25.6, 1849.— Ed. 

=====第214页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 191 
of the rural population a stake in the uprising, presupposes a much 
larger territory and much more developed social conditions in the 
towns than is the case in the Palatinate. It was only feasible at the 
beginning of the insurrection, simultaneously with an extension of 
the uprising to the Moselle and the Eifel, where the same conditions 
obtain on the land and find their complement in the industrial 
development of the Rhenish towns. And the movement was directed 
outwards just as little in the Palatinate as it was in Baden. 
Under these conditions the government had only limited means of 
combating the reactionary districts: isolated military expeditions into 
the refractory villages, arrests, especially of the Catholic priests, who 
placed themselves at the head of the resistance, and so on; 
appointment of energetic civil and military commissaries, and last of 
all propaganda. The expeditions, mostly of a very comical nature, 
only had a momentary effect, the propaganda none at all, and the 
commissaries mostly committed blunder upon blunder in their 
pompous ineptitude or confined themselves to the consumption of 
vast quantities of Palatinate wine and the inevitable bluster in the 
taverns. 
Amongst the propagandists, the commissaries and the officials of 
the central administration, the democrats, of whom even more had 
gathered in the Palatinate than in Baden, played a very considerable 
role.  Here, in addition to the refugees from Dresden and from 
Rhenish Prussia, a number of more or less enthusiastic "men of the 
people" had turned up to consecrate themselves to the service of the 
fatherland. The government of the Palatinate, which unlike its 
Karlsruhe counterpart understood instinctively that the resources of 
the Palatinate alone were not equal to the demands even of this 
movement, received them gladly. It was impossible to spend more 
than two hours in the Palatinate without being offered a dozen of the 
most varied and on the whole very honourable posts. The democrats, 
who saw in the Palatinate-Baden movement not a local uprising 
which was becoming daily more local and more insignificant, but the 
glorious dawn of the glorious uprising of all Germany's democrats, 
and who everywhere in the movement saw their more or less petty-
bourgeois tendency prevailing, fell over themselves to accept these 
offers.  At the same time, however, each felt he owed it to himself 
only to accept a post which satisfied his naturally very lofty 
pretensions of the part he should play in an all-German movement. 
At first this was possible. Whoever came along was at once put in 
charge of an office or made a government commissary, a major or a 
lieutenant-colonel. Little by little, however, the number of rivals 
increased, the positions became fewer and there started a petty, 

=====第215页=====
192 Frederick Engels 
philistine place-hunting which presented the disinterested spectator 
with a highly diverting spectacle. I imagine I do not have to 
underline the fact that in this strange hotchpotch of industry and 
confusion, importunacy and incompetence which the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung has so often had occasion to wonder at among the German 
democrats, the officials and propagandists of the Palatinate faithfully 
mirrored the whole unpleasant medley. 
As a matter of course I also was offered any number of civil and 
military positions, positions which in a proletarian movement I 
would not have hesitated for a moment to accept. As things were, I 
turned them all down. The only thing I agreed to was to write some 
agitational articles for a small paper3  of which the Provisional 
Government had large quantities distributed in the Palatinate. I 
knew that this too would come to nothing, but I finally accepted the 
offer upon the urgent request of d'Ester and several members of the 
government in order at least to demonstrate my good will. Since I 
naturally felt few constraints, exception was taken to the very second 
article I wrote because it was too "inflammatory"; I wasted no words, 
took the article back, tore it up in d'Ester's presence and that was the 
end of the matter. 
The best of the foreign democrats in the Palatinate were, 
incidentally, those who had come fresh from the struggle in their 
home provinces: the Saxons and the Rhenish Prussians. The handful 
of Saxons were mostly employed in the central offices, where they 
worked hard and distinguished themselves by their administrative 
knowledge, their calm, clear understanding and their lack of any 
pretensions or illusions. The Rhinelanders, mostly workers, joined 
the army en masse; the few who initially worked in the offices later 
also took up the musket. 
In the offices of the central administration in the Fruchthalle 165 at 
Kaiserslautern there was a very easy-going atmosphere. What with 
the general laisser aller, the complete lack of any form of active 
intervention in the movement and the uncommonly large number of 
officials, there was on the whole little to do. It was a matter of hardly 
more than the day-to-day business of administration, and this was 
disposed of tant bien que mal. Unless a courier arrived, some patriotic 
citizen came with a profound proposal concerning the salvation of 
the fatherland, some peasant brought a complaint or some village 
sent a deputation, most of the offices had nothing to do. 
People yawned and chatted, told anecdotes and made bad jokes 
Der Bote für Stadt und Land which carried Engels' article "The Revolutionary 
Uprising in the Palatinate and Baden". See present edition, Vol. 9.— Ed. 

=====第216页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 193 
and strategic plans and went from one office to another trying 
as well as they could to kill time. The main topics of conversation 
were naturally the political events of the day, about which the most 
contradictory rumours were circulating. The intelligence service was 
greatly neglected. The old post-office officials had almost without 
exception stayed at their posts and were needless to say very 
unreliable. Alongside them a "field-post" was set up, superintended 
by the Palatinate Chevaulegers166  who had come over to our side. 
The commandants and the commissaries of the border areas paid 
not the slightest heed to what was happening on the other side of the 
border. The government took only the Frankfurter Journal and the 
Karlsruher Zeitung and I still remember with delight the astonishment 
it gave rise to when I discovered in the officers' club, in an issue of 
the Kölnische Zeitung which had arrived several days before, the news 
of the concentration of 27 Prussian battalions, 9 batteries and 9 
regiments of cavalry, together with their exact location between 
Saarbrücken and Kreuznach. 3 
At last I come to the main point, the military organisation. About 
three thousand Palatinate soldiers from the Bavarian army had 
defected with bag and baggage. At the same time a number of 
volunteers, from the Palatinate and elsewhere, had placed them­
selves under arms. In addition to that the Provisional Government 
issued a decree calling up the first age group, in the first instance all 
unmarried men between the ages of eighteen and thirty. This 
call-up, however, only took place on paper, owing partly to the 
incompetence and negligence of the military commissaries, partly to 
the lack of arms and partly to the indolence of the government  itself. 
Wherever the lack of arms was the main obstacle to the whole 
defence, as it was in the Palatinate, every means had to be used to 
muster arms. If none were forthcoming from abroad, then it was 
necessary to fetch out every musket, every rifle and every 
sporting-gun which could be unearthed in the Palatinate and place 
them in the hands of the active fighters. However, there were not 
only large numbers of private weapons at hand, but on top of that at 
least another 1,500 to 2,000 rifles, not counting carbines, in the 
hands of the various civic militia units. One could at least have 
demanded the handing over of private arms and rifles in the hands 
of those civic militiamen who were not obliged to join the first 
call-up and did not intend to volunteer. But nothing of the sort 
happened. After much insistence a resolution along these lines was 
finally adopted regarding the arms held by the civic militia, but never 
a "Köln, 30. Mai", Kölnische ZeitungNo. 129, May 31, 1849.— Ed. 

=====第217页=====
194 Frederick Engels 
put into effect; the Kaiserslautern civic militia, over three hundred 
philistines strong, paraded at the Fruchthalle every day in uniform, 
shouldering their arms, and the Prussians, when they marched in, 
had the pleasure of disarming these gentlemen. And thus it was 
everywhere. 
In the official newspaper an appeal was issued to the forestry 
officials and the keepers of the woods, asking them to report to 
Kaiserslautern in order to form a rifle corps 3; of these it was the 
forestry officials who did not turn up. 
Throughout the whole land scythes were forged, or at least a call 
went out to that effect; a few scythes were actually produced. In the 
Rhenish Hessian corps at Kirchheimbolanden I saw several casks of 
scythe-blades being loaded and sent to Kaiserslautern. The journey 
takes roughly seven to eight hours; four days later the government 
was forced to abandon Kaiserslautern to the Prussians and the 
scythes had still not arrived. If the scythes had been given to those 
civic militiamen not yet mobilised, the so-called second age group, as 
compensation for giving up their guns, then the affair would have 
made sense; instead of this the lazy philistines kept their percussion-
guns and the young recruits were expected to march against the 
Prussian cannon and needle-muskets with scythes. 
While there was a general lack of fire-arms, there was by contrast a 
just as remarkable profusion of cavalry sabres; those who could not 
lay hands on a gun strapped on all the more eagerly a clattering 
broadsword, believing that by merely so doing they stamped 
themselves as officers. Precisely in Kaiserslautern these self-stamped 
officers were too numerous to count and the streets rang day and 
night to the clatter of their fearful weapons. It was the students in 
particular who by this new manner of intimidating the enemy and by 
their pretension of forming an academic legion entirely of cavalry on 
foot rendered great service for the saving of the fatherland. 
In addition there was half a squadron of defected Chevaulegers at 
hand; however, they were so scattered due to their work for the 
field-post, etc., that they never came to form a special combat corps. 
The artillery, under the command of "Lieutenant-Colonel" Anneke, 
consisted of a few threç-pounders whose horses I do not recall 
having ever seen, and a number of mortars. Lying in front of the 
Fruchthalle at Kaiserslautern was the most beautiful collection of old 
iron cannon-barrels one could ever wish to see. Needless to say, most 
of them remained lying there unused. The two biggest were laid on 
colossal home-made gun-carriages and carried off. The Baden 
Der Bote für Stadt und Land No. 118, June 14,  1849.—  Ed. 

=====第218页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 195 
government finally sold the Palatinate a shot-out six-pound battery 
together with some ammunition; but without a team of horses, a 
crew or sufficient ammunition. The ammunition was as far as 
possible manufactured; the team of horses and riders was made up 
tant bien que mal with requisitioned peasants and horses; for the crew 
a few old Bavarian artillerymen were gathered together to train men 
in the ponderous and complicated Bavarian drill. 
The top leadership of military affairs was in the worst hands. Herr 
Reichardt, who had taken over the military department in the 
Provisional Government, was active, but lacked vigour and profes­
sional knowledge. The first commander-in-chief of the military 
forces of the Palatinate, the enterprising Fenner von Fenneberg, was 
soon dismissed on account of his ambiguous conduct; he was 
temporarily replaced by Raquilliet, a Polish officer. At last it was 
learnt that Mieroslawski was to take over the supreme command of 
Baden and the Palatinate and that the command of the troops of the 
Palatinate was to be entrusted to "General" Sznayde, also a Pole. 
General Sznayde arrived. He was a small, fat man, who looked 
more like an elderly bon vivant than a "Menelaus, caller to battle". 3 
General Sznayde took over the command with a great deal of gravity. 
He had a report made on the state of affairs and at once issued a 
whole series of orders of the day. Most of these orders related to 
uniform (tunics and marks of rank for officers—tricolour armbands 
or sashes), or appeals to veteran cavalrymen and riflemen to come 
forward as volunteers (appeals which had already been made ten 
times without success) and things of a similar nature. He himself set a 
good example by immediately procuring a hussar tunic with 
tricolour braid, in order to inspire the army with respect. The really 
practical and important things in his orders of the day were merely 
repetitions of orders long since issued and proposals already made 
earlier by the handful of good officers present, but never carried 
out, and which only now, through the authority of a commanding 
general, could b be put into effect. As for the rest, "General" Sznayde 
placed his trust in God and Mieroslawski and dedicated himself to 
the pleasures of the table, the only reasonable thing that a so totally 
incompetent individual could do. 
Amongst the other officers in Kaiserslautern was the uniquely 
capable Techow, the same Techow who as a Prussian first lieutenant 
a Homer,  Iliad,  Song II. (In the original Engels used the translation by Johann 
Heinrich Voss.) — Ed. 
The copy of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue corrected by 
Engels has sollten (should) instead of konnten (could).— Ed. 

=====第219页=====
196 Frederick Engels 
with Natzmer gave the Berlin arsenal over to the people after having 
taken it by storm167  and, sentenced to fifteen years detention in a 
fortress, escaped from Magdeburg. Techow, chief of the Palatinate 
general  staff,  proved in all things to be knowledgeable, circumspect 
and calm, perhaps a little too calm to be trusted to make the rapid 
decisions on which everything often depends on the battlefield. 
"Lieutenant-Colonel" Anneke proved to be incompetent and 
indolent in organising the artillery, though he rendered good 
services in the ordnance shops. At Ubstadt he won no laurels as 
commander-in-chief and from Rastatt, where Mieroslawski had put 
him in charge of the materials for the siege, he escaped across the 
Rhine under strange circumstances already before the investment, 
leaving his horses behind. 
There was not much to be said for the officers in the various 
districts either. A number of Poles had appeared, some in advance of 
Sznayde and some with him. As the best of the Polish émigrés were 
already in Hungary, one may suspect that these Polish officers were a 
pretty mixed bunch. Most of them made haste to obtain an 
appropriate number of saddle-horses and give out a few orders, 
paying only scanty attention to their execution. They tended to lord 
it over people and wanted to treat the peasants of the Palatinate like 
cringing Polish serfs. They were not familiar with the country, the 
language or the command, and hence accomplished little or nothing 
at all as military commissaries, i.e. organisers of battalions. In the 
course of the campaign they soon strayed into Sznayde's head­
quarters and shortly afterwards, when Sznayde was assailed and 
roughly handled by his soldiers, disappeared altogether. The 
better ones among them arrived too late to be able to organise 
anything. 
There was not much talent of any use among the German officers 
either. The Rhenish Hessian corps, though it included elements who 
could have developed militarily, was under the leadership of a 
certain Häusner, a completely useless man, and under the even more 
lamentable moral and political influence of the two heroes Zitz and 
Bamberger, who later in Karlsruhe extricated themselves so 
successfully from the situation. In the Palatinate hinterland a former 
Prussian officer, Schimmelpfennig, organised a corps. 
The only two officers who had already distinguished themselves 
in active service before the Prussian invasion were Willich and 
Blenker. 
With a small corps of volunteers Willich took over the observation 
and later the siege of Landau and Germersheim. A company of 
students, a company of workers who had lived with him in Besançon, 

=====第220页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 197 
three weak companies of gymnasts (from Landau, Neustadt and 
Kaiserslautern), two companies formed from volunteers from the 
surrounding villages and lastly a company of Rhenish Prussians 
armed with scythes, most of them fugitives from the Prüm and 
Elberfeld uprisings, gradually mustered under his command. In the 
end they amounted to between 700 and 800 men, certainly the most 
reliable soldiers in the whole Palatinate; most of the N.C.O.s had seen 
service and some of them had been familiarised in Algeria with 
guerrilla warfare. 168 With this scanty force Willich took up a position 
halfway between Landau and Germersheim, organised the civic 
militia in the villages, using them to guard the roads and do outpost 
duty, beat back all the sorties from the two fortresses in spite of the 
superior forces, in particular of the Germersheim garrison, blockad­
ed Landau so effectively that almost all its supplies were intercept­
ed, cut off its water-supplies, dammed up the Queich so that all the 
fortress cellars were flooded, and yet there was a lack of 
drinking-water, and harassed the garrison every night with patrols 
which not only cleared out the abandoned outworks and auctioned 
the guardroom stoves they found there for five guilders each, but 
also pushed forward even into the fortress trenches and frequently 
caused the garrison to open fire on a corporal and two men with a 
cannonade of twenty-four-pounders which was as intense as it was 
harmless. This was by far the most brilliant period during the 
existence of Willich's volunteer corps. If only a few howitzers had 
been at his disposal at that time, or even only field-guns, according to 
the reports of the spies who daily went in and out of Landau, the 
fortress, with its demoralised, weak garrison and its rebellious 
inhabitants, would have been taken in a few days. Even without 
artillery a continuation of the siege would have compelled capitula­
tion in a week. In Kaiserslautern were two seven-pound howitzers, 
good enough to set fire to a few houses in Landau during the night. 
Had they been on the spot, then the unheard of, the taking of a 
fortress like Landau with a few field-guns, would have become a 
probability. Every day I preached to the general staff in Kaisersla­
utern the necessity of at least making the attempt. To no avail. One 
of the howitzers stayed in Kaiserslautern and the other found its way 
to Homburg, where it almost fell into the hands of the Prussians. 
Both came over the Rhine without having fired a shot. 
"Colonel" Blenker, however, distinguished himself even more 
than Willich. "Colonel" Blenker, a former travelling salesman for a 
wine-firm, who had been in Greece as a philhellenist and later set 
himself up as a wine-merchant in Worms, can in any case be 
numbered among the most outstanding military personalities of the 

=====第221页=====
198 Frederick Engels 
whole glorious campaign. Always on horseback, surrounded by a 
numerous  staff,  big,- strong, with a defiant face, an impressive 
Hecker-type beard, a stentorian voice and all the other characteris­
tics that go to make up a South German "man of the people", and 
among which, as everybody knows, intelligence does not exactly 
feature, "Colonel" Blenker gave the impression of a man at the mere 
sight of whom Napoleon would have to sneak away, a man worthy to 
figure in that refrain with which we opened these accounts.3 
"Colonel" Blenker felt he had it in himself to overthrow the German 
princes even without "Hecker, Struve, Zitz and Blum" and 
immediately set about the task. It was his intention to fight the war 
not as a soldier but as a travelling wine-salesman, and to this end he 
resolved to conquer Landau. Willich was not yet there at that time. 
Blenker got together everything at hand in the Palatinate, both 
regular troops and people's militia, organised foot-soldiers, cavalry 
and artillery that had all been jumbled up together, and moved off in 
the direction of Landau. A council of war was held in front of the 
fortress, the assault columns formed up and the position of the 
artillery fixed. The artillery, however, consisted of a few mortars 
whose calibre varied from  l/2lb. to l3/8lb., and was brought up on a 
hay-cart which at the same time served to carry the ammunition. The 
ammunition for these various mortars consisted of one, I repeat one, 
24 lb. cannon-ball; there was no question of any gunpowder. After 
everything had been organised, everyone moved forward full of 
contempt for death. The glacis was reached without meeting any 
resistance; the march continued, right up to the gate. At the head 
were the soldiers who had defected from Landau. A few soldiers 
appeared on the ramparts to parley. They were called upon to open 
the gate. There began already a quite good-natured exchange and 
everything appeared to be going according to wish. All at once a 
cannon-shot rang out from the ramparts, case-shot whistled over the 
heads of the assailants and in no time the whole heroic army broke 
into wild flight together with their Palatinate Prince Eugene.b 
Everyone was running, running, running, with such irresistible 
momentum that the couple of cannon-balls loosed off soon 
afterwards from the ramparts were already no longer whistling over 
the heads of the fleeing men, but only over their discarded guns, 
cartridge-pouches and knapsacks. A few hours away from Landau a 
halt was finally made and the army was gathered together again and 
led home by Herr "Colonel" Blenker, without the keys of Landau 
a See this volume, p. 149.— Ed. 
An ironical comparison of Blenker with Prince Eugene of Savoy.— Ed. 

=====第222页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 199 
but none the less proud for that. Such is the story of the conquest of 
Landau with three mortars and a 241b. cannon-ball that never 
happened. 
The case-shot was fired off in all haste by some Bavarian officers, 
when they saw that their soldiers wanted to open the gate. The gun 
was brought off the target by soldiers themselves, and it was because 
of this that nobody was hit. But when the Landau garrison saw what 
an effect this random shot had, there was naturally no more talk of 
surrender. 
Hero Blenker, however, was not the sort of man to take such a 
piece of bad luck lying down. He now resolved to conquer Worms. 
He moved up from Frankenthal, where he commanded a battalion. 
The handful of Hessian soldiers stationed in Worms made 
themselves scarce and hero Blenker marched into his home town 
with drums beating and trumpets sounding. After the liberation of 
Worms had been celebrated with a solemn luncheon, the main 
ceremony began, that is, the tendering of an oath of allegiance to the 
Imperial Constitution to twenty Hessian soldiers who had stayed 
behind sick. During the night after this prodigious success, however, 
the imperial troops under Peucker brought up artillery on the right 
bank of the Rhine and gave the victorious conquerors a most violent 
awakening with the early thunder of cannon. There was no mistake 
about it: the imperial troops were sending over round shot and 
shells.  Without uttering a word hero Blenker gathered together his 
brave men, and stole away from Worms back to Frankenthal. The 
muse will report further particulars of his later heroic deeds in the 
appropriate place. 
While in the districts the motliest collection of characters were each 
in their own way giving themselves vent and the soldiers and people's 
militiamen, instead of drilling, sat in the taverns and sang, the 
gallant officers were in Kaiserslautern busy thinking up the most 
profound strategic plans. It was a question of nothing less than the 
possibility of holding a small province like the Palatinate, accessible 
from several sides, with almost wholly imaginary forces against an 
extremely real army of over 30,000 men and 60 cannon. Precisely 
because in such a situation every project was equally useless and 
equally absurd, and precisely because all the conditions for any 
strategic plan were absent, precisely for those reasons these 
profound military men, these thinking heads of the Palatinate army, 
were all the more resolved to concoct some strategic miracle which 
would bar to the Prussians the way into the Palatinate. Every freshly 
baked lieutenant, every sabre-trailer from the academic legion finally 
established under the auspices of Herr Sznayde, with the rank of 

=====第223页=====
200 Frederick Engels 
lieutenant for every member, every administrative pen-pusher, 
stared pensively at the map of the Palatinate in the hope of finding 
the strategic philosophers' stone. It is easy to imagine the amusing 
results this had. The Hungarian method of warfare was especially 
popular. From "General" Sznayde down to the as yet least 
recognised Napoleon in the army one could constantly hear the 
phrase: "We must do as Kossuth did, we must give up a piece of our 
territory and retreat, here or there, into the mountains or onto the 
plain according to the situation." "We must do as Kossuth did," the 
cry went up in every tavern. "We must do as Kossuth did," echoed 
every corporal, every soldier and every street-urchin. "We must do 
as Kossuth did," echoed the Provisional Government good-
naturedly, for they knew better than anyone else that it was best not 
to meddle in these things, and in the long run it was all the same to 
them how it was done. "We must do as Kossuth did, or we are 
lost."—The Palatinate and Kossuth! 
Before I go on to describe the campaign  itself,  I must briefly 
mention a matter which has been touched on in various newspapers: 
my momentary arrest in Kirchheim. A few days before the Prussians 
marched in I accompanied my friend Moll on a mission he had 
undertaken to Kirchheimbolanden, on the border. Here was 
stationed a part of the Rhenish Hessian corps, in which we had 
acquaintances. We were sitting in the evening with these and several 
other volunteers from the corps in an inn. Among the volunteers 
were a number of those serious, enthusiastic "men of action" of 
whom mention has been made on more than one occasion and who 
foresaw no difficulties in beating any army in the world, with few 
arms and much enthusiasm. These are men whose experience of the 
military does not extend beyond the changing of the guards, who 
never pay the slightest heed to the material means of attaining a 
given purpose and who for this reason mostly experience such a 
shattering disillusion in their first battle, as I was later to observe on 
more than one occasion, that they make off as fast as their legs can 
carry them. I asked one such hero if he really intended to defeat the 
Prussians with the thirty thousand cavalry sabres and three and a 
half thousand fire-arms, including several rusty carbines, available in 
the Palatinate, and I was in proper train to enjoy the holy 
indignation of a man of action wounded in his noblest enthusiasm 
when in stepped the guard and declared me under arrest. At the 
same time I saw two men rush upon me from behind foaming with 
rage.  One of them announced that he was Civil Commissary Müller 
and the other was Herr Greiner, the only member of the 
government with whom I had never entered into more intimate 

=====第224页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 201 
contact, on account of his frequent absence from Kaiserslautern (he 
had been turning his wealth into movable property on the quiet) and 
his suspicious-looking, snivellingly sullen appearance. 169 At the same 
time an old acquaintance of mine,3 a captain in the Rhenish Hessian 
corps,  stood up and declared that if I were to be arrested, he, 
together with a considerable number of the best men in the corps, 
would leave it at once. Moll and others were for defending me there 
and then with force. Those present split into two parties, the scene 
promised to become interesting and I declared I would naturally 
allow myself to be arrested with pleasure: it would finally be clear for 
all to see what the colour of the Palatinate movement was. I went with 
the guard. 
The next morning, after a comical interrogation which Herr Zitz 
put me through, I was handed over to the civil commissary and by 
him to a gendarme. The gendarme, on whom it had been impressed 
to treat me as a spy, handcuffed me and led me on foot to 
Kaiserslautern, accused of disparaging the uprising of the Palatinate 
people and inciting against the government, which, by the way, I had 
not mentioned. On the way I succeeded in getting a carriage. In 
Kaiserslautern, where Moll had hurried on ahead of me, I found the 
government highly bewildered at the valiant Greiner's bévue and 
even more bewildered at the treatment meted out to me. Needless to 
say I carried on quite a bit at the gentlemen in the presence of the 
gendarme. Since no report from Herr Greiner had yet arrived, I was 
offered freedom on parole. I refused to give my parole and went 
into the cantonal gaol—without an escort, which condition was 
agreed to at d'Ester's request. D'Ester declared that he could stay no 
longer after such treatment had been meted out to a party comrade. 
Tzschirner, who arrived just at that time, also took a very resolute 
stand. The same evening the news spread throughout the town and 
everyone who belonged to the resolute trend immediately sided with 
me. On top of that, news arrived that disturbances had broken out in 
the Rhenish Hessian corps on account of this affair and that a large 
part of the corps intended to disband. It would have taken less than 
that to demonstrate to the provisional regents, in whose company I 
had been daily, the necessity of giving me satisfaction. After I had 
spent 24 quite amusing hours in gaol, d'Ester and Schmitt came to 
see me; Schmitt explained to me that I was unconditionally free and 
that the government hoped that I would not be deterred from 
continuing to take part in the movement. Besides this, I was told, the 
order had been given that in future no political prisoner was to be 
a Victor Schily.— Ed. 

=====第225页=====
202 Frederick Engels 
brought in handcuffed, and the investigation against the instigator 
of this infamous treatment as well as of the arrest and its cause was 
proceeding. After the government had taken these steps to give me 
all the satisfaction that it could for the moment, since Herr Greiner 
had still not sent in a report, the solemn faces on both sides were 
discarded and the company had a few drinks together in the 
Donnersberg. The next day Tzschirner departed for the Rhenish 
Hessian corps in order to appease it and I gave him a short note to 
take with him. When Herr Greiner returned he made such a 
snivelling exhibition of himself that his colleagues gave him a 
doubly severe dressing-down. 
At the same time the Prussians marched in from Homburg. Since 
things thus took an interesting turn, since I had no intention of 
letting slip the opportunity of gaining some military education, and 
lastly since the Neue Rheinische Zeitung also had to be represented 
honoris causa in the army of Baden and the Palatinate, I too buckled 
on a broadsword and went off to join Willich. 

=====第226页=====
203 
IV. TO DIE FOR THE REPUBLIC! 
Nur im Sturz von sechsunddreissig Thronen 
Kann die deutsche Republik gedeihn; 
Darum, Brüder, stürzt sie ohne Schonen, 
Setzet Gut und Blut und Leben ein. 
Für Republik zu sterben, 
Ist ein Los, hehr und gross, ist das Ziel unsres Muts!a 
Thus sang the volunteers on the train when I was on my way to 
Neustadt to seek out Willich's temporary headquarters. 
So from now on to die for the republic was the aim of my courage 
or at least was supposed to be. It seemed strange to me to have this 
new aim. I looked at the volunteers, young, handsome, lively lads. 
They did not at all look as if death for the republic was just now the 
aim of their courage. 
From Neustadt I travelled on a requisitioned peasant's cart to 
Offenbach, between Landau and Germersheim, where Willich was 
still to be found. Just the other side of Edenkoben I came across the 
first sentries, posted by the peasants on his orders, who were from 
now on to be found at the entrance and exit of every village and at 
every cross-road and who allowed nobody through without a 
written authorisation of the insurgent authorities. It was clear 
a Only through the overthrow of thirty-six thrones 
Can the German republic prosper; 
Therefore, brothers, overthrow them without mercy, 
And stake property, life and limb. 
To die for the Republic 
Is a lofty and great destiny, the aim of our courage. 
A stanza from a song popular during the 1848-49 Revolution in Germany which 
began with the words: "Wenn die Fürsten ihre Söldnerscharen...." — Ed. 

=====第227页=====
204 Frederick Engels 
that one was getting a little nearer to war conditions. Late in 
the night I arrived at Offenbach and at once took up duties as Wil-
lich's adjutant. 
In the course of that day (it was June 13) a small part of Willich's 
corps had fought a brilliant engagement. A few days previously 
Willich had got reinforcements for his volunteer corps in the shape 
of a Baden people's militia battalion, the Dreher-Obermüller 
Battalion, and had moved up some fifty men of this battalion to 
Bellheim against Germersheim. To their rear, in Knittelsheim, there 
was still a company of volunteers together with a few scythe-men. A 
battalion of Bavarians with two cannon and a squadron of 
Chevaulegers made a sortie. The Badeners fled without putting up 
any resistance; only one of them, overtaken by three mounted 
gendarmes, defended himself furiously until finally, hacked to 
pieces by sabre blows, he fell and was finished off by his assailants. 
When the fugitives arrived at Knittelsheim the captain 3 stationed 
there set out against the Bavarians with a little less than fifty men, 
some of whom were still armed with scythes. He expertly divided up 
his men into several detachments and advanced in extended order 
with such determination that after two hours' fighting the Bavarians, 
who were over ten times more numerous, were driven back into the 
village abandoned by the Badeners and finally, when some 
reinforcements arrived from Willich's corps, thrown out of the 
village again. They retreated with a loss of some twenty dead and 
wounded to Germersheim. I am sorry to say that I cannot give the 
name of this bold and talented young officer, since he is probably not 
yet in safety. His men had only five wounded, none seriously. One of 
these five, a French volunteer, had been shot in the upper arm 
before he himself had fired a shot. Nevertheless he fired all his 
sixteen cartridges and when his wound prevented him from loading 
his gun he got one of the scythe-men to load it for him so that he 
could just fire. The next day we went to Bellheim to look at the 
battlefield and make new arrangements. The Bavarians had fired at 
our skirmishers with round shot and case-shot but hit nothing except 
the twigs on the trees, with which the whole road was strewn, and the 
tree behind which the captain was standing. 
The Dreher-Obermüller Battalion was now present in full 
strength with the intention of establishing itself firmly in Bellheim 
and the surrounding area. It was a splendid, well-armed battalion 
and the officers especially, with their turned-up moustaches and 
their tanned faces full of seriousness and enthusiasm, really did look 
a Loreck.— Ed. 

=====第228页=====
The Campaign  for the  German Imperial Constitution  205 
like man-eaters endowed with reason. Fortunately, they were  not so 
dangerous,  as we  were  to become more  and  more aware. 
To my  amazement  I discovered that there  was  almost  no 
ammunition whatever available, that most  men  only  had  five  or six 
cartridges,  and in a few  cases twenty,  and  that  the  stock  in hand 
would  not be  enough even  to replenish  the now  completely empty 
cartridge-pouches  of the men who had  been under fire  the day 
before.  I at  once volunteered  to go to  Kaiserslautern  and fetch 
ammunition,  and set out the  same evening. 
The peasants' carts were slow;  the necessity  of requisitioning  new 
carts  at regular stages, unfamiliarity with  the roads,  etc.,  also helped 
to slow things down.  It was  daybreak when  I arrived  at Maikammer, 
about halfway  to Neustadt. Here  I came across  a detachment  of 
Pirmasens people's militia with  the  four cannon sent  to Homburg, 
which  in Kaiserslautern were already believed lost.  By way of 
Zweibrücken  and Pirmasens,  and then  by the  most wretched 
mountain tracks, they  had  succeeded  in getting  as far as  here, where 
they at last came  out  into  the  plain.  The  gentlemen from Prussia 
were  in no  great hurry  to pursue them, even though  our men  from 
Pirmasens, excited  by exertions, night marches  and  wine, believed 
they were right  on their heels. 
A few  hours later  (it was on  June  15) I  arrived  at Neustadt.  The 
whole population  was on the  streets, among them soldiers  and 
volunteers,  as all  people's militiamen  in tunics were indiscriminately 
called  in the  Palatinate. Carts, cannon  and  horses blocked every 
approach.  In short,  I had  landed  up in the  middle  of the  retreat  of 
the entire Palatinate army'.  The  Provisional Government, General 
Sznayde,  the  general  staff, the  office  staff,  everyone  was  there. 
Kaiserslautern  had been abandoned,  the Fruchthalle,  the "Donners­
berg",  the beerhouses,  the  "strategically best located point  in the 
Palatinate",  and for the  moment Neustadt  had become  the centre  of 
the Palatinate's confusion, which reached  its climax only  now  that it 
came  to fighting. Suffice  it to say, I  made myself acquainted with  the 
facts,  took  as many kegs  of gunpowder, lead-shot  and  ready-made 
cartridges  as I  could (what further  use was  this ammuni­
tion to an  army which  had  gone  to pieces without even  a battle?), 
after countless vain attempts finally  got  hold  of a  wain  in a  neigh­
bouring village  and  left in the  evening with  my booty  and a  small 
escort. 
But before doing  so I  went  to Herr Sznayde  and  asked  if he did 
not have  any  message  for Willich.  The old  gourmand gave  me a few 
meaningless instructions  and  added with  an air of  importance:  "You 
see, we are now  doing just  as Kossuth  did." 

=====第229页=====
206 Frederick Engels 
How the Palatinate came to do just as Kossuth did, however, was to 
be explained as follows. In the heyday of the "rebellion", that is to 
say, on the day before the Prussians marched in, the Palatinate had 
roughly  5,000  to 6,000 men armed with weapons of all sorts and 
about 1,000 to 1,500 scythe-men. These  5,000  to 6,000 possible 
combatants consisted firstly of Willich's and the Rhenish Hessian 
volunteer corps and secondly of the so-called people's militia. In the 
area covered by each provincial commissariat was a military 
commissary whose task was to organise a battalion. The defected 
soldiers belonging to each district were to serve as nucleus and as 
instructors. This system of mixing regular troops with raw recruits, 
though it could have had excellent results during an active campaign 
with strict discipline and continual military exercise, ruined every­
thing under the circumstances. The battalions did not materialise 
owing to lack of arms; the soldiers, having nothing to do, neglected 
all discipline and military bearing and for the most part melted away. 
Eventually a battalion of sorts came together in some districts but in 
the others only armed crowds existed. There was absolutely nothing 
to be done with the scythe-men; everywhere in the way and never 
really of any use, they were partly left with their respective battalions 
as a provisional appendage until such a time as guns could be 
acquired for them, and partly concentrated in a special corps under 
the half-crazy Captain Zinn. Citizen Zinn, the most perfect 
Shakespearean Pistol one could ever meet, who on bolting from 
Landau under hero Blenker stumbled over his scabbard and broke it 
and afterwards swore blind that a "fiery 24 lb. cannon-ball" had rent 
it asunder, this same invincible Pistol had hitherto been employed to 
requisition supplies from reactionary villages. He had applied 
himself with great zeal to this office, so that the peasants held him 
and his corps in very great respect, but they gave him a sound 
thrashing every time they caught him by  himself.  On their way back 
from such trips the men had to beat their scythes to smithereens and 
when he arrived in Kaiserslautern he would relate murderous 
Falstaffiads about his fights with the peasants. 
Since it was obvious that little could be accomplished with such 
forces, Mieroslawski, who only arrived at the Baden headquarters on 
the 10th, ordered the Palatinate troops to make a fighting 
withdrawal to the Rhine and if possible win the Rhine crossing at 
Mannheim; otherwise they were to go over to the right bank of the 
Rhine at Speyer or Knielingen and then defend the Rhine crossings 
from Baden. At the same time as this order, the news came in that 
the Prussians had penetrated the Palatinate from Saarbrücken and 
after a few musket-shots driven back towards Kaiserslautern the 

=====第230页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 207 
meagre forces we had drawn up at the border. At the same time all 
the more or less organised units were concentrating in the direction 
of Kaiserslautern and Neustadt; an unbounded confusion ensued 
and a large number of the recruits melted away. A young officer, 
Rakow, from the 1848 Schleswig-Holstein volunteer corps, went out 
with thirty men to round up the deserters and in the space of two 
days had rallied 1,400 of them. He formed them into a "Kaisers­
lautern Battalion" and led them until the end of the campaign. 
The Palatinate, strategically speaking, is such a straightforward 
terrain that not even the Prussians could make any blunders here. 
Along the Rhine lies a valley four to five hours' journey across and 
completely free from any natural obstacles. In a comfortable three 
days'  march the Prussians came from Kreuznach and Worms as far 
as Landau and Germersheim. The "Kaiserstrasse" leads over the 
mountainous hinterland of the Palatinate from Saargemünd to 
Mainz, mostly on the mountain ridge or through a broad gully. Here 
too there are as good as no natural obstacles behind which a 
numerically weak and tactically unschooled army could hold out to 
any extent. Close by the Prussian border, near Homburg, there is at 
last an excellent road which leads from the "Kaiserstrasse" to 
Landau via Zweibrücken and Pirmasens, running partly through 
river valleys and partly over the ridge of the Vosges. It is true that 
this route presents greater difficulties, but it cannot be blocked with 
few troops and no artillery, especially when an enemy corps 
manoeuvres on the plain and can cut off the retreat via Landau and 
Bergzabern. 
In the light of this, the Prussians' offensive was a very straightfor­
ward matter. The first thrust was from Saarbrücken against 
Homburg; from here one column marched directly on Kaisers­
lautern and the other on Landau via Pirmasens. Thereupon a second 
corps immediately attacked in the Rhine valley. In Kirchheimbolan-
den this corps met its first violent resistance from the Rhenish 
Hessians stationed there. The Mainz riflemen defended the castle 
garden with great doggedness and in spite of considerable losses. 
They were eventually outflanked and retreated. Seventeen of them 
fell into the hands of the Prussians. They were forthwith put up 
against trees and shot without further ado by these heroes of the 
"glorious army", 170 who were drunk on schnaps. With this piece of 
villainy the Prussians began their "short but glorious campaign" 3 in 
the Palatinate, 
a From the order issued by Frederick William IV on July 28, 1849, on the 
occasion of the end of the Baden-Palatinate campaign (Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger, 
Berlin, No. 215, August 8, 1849).—Ed. 

=====第231页=====
208 Frederick Engels 
This meant that the whole northern half of the Palatinate was won 
and the link-up effected between the two main columns. Now they 
only needed to advance in the plain and relieve Landau and 
Germersheim to secure the rest of the Palatinate and capture all 
those corps that might still be holding out in the mountains. 
There were some 30,000 Prussians in the Palatinate, equipped 
with numerous cavalry and artillery. On the plain, where the Prince 
of Prussia and Hirschfeld were pressing forward with the strongest 
corps,  nothing stood between them and Neustadt except a few 
people's militia detachments, incapable of resistance and already half 
disbanded, and a section of the Rhenish Hessians. A swift march on 
Speyer and Germersheim, and all the 4,000 to  5,000  troops of the 
Palatinate concentrated or rather chaotically entangled at Neustadt 
and Landau would have been doomed, routed, scattered and 
captured. But the Prussian gentlemen, who were so active when it 
came to shooting unarmed prisoners, were extremely cautious about 
fighting and extremely somnolent in pursuit. 
If throughout the campaign I am frequently forced to return to 
this decidedly strange lukewarmness which the Prussians and the 
other imperial troops displayed in attack as well as in pursuit, against 
an army mostly six times and never less than three times smaller, 
badly organised and in parts pitifully commanded, it should be 
understood that I am not blaming it on some singular cowardice on 
the part of the Prussian soldiers, all the less so since I had absolutely 
no illusions, as will already have become clear, that our troops were 
especially brave. Neither do I ascribe it, as reactionaries would do, to 
some sort of magnanimity or the desire to avoid the inconvenience of 
too many prisoners. The Prussian civil and military bureaucracy has 
from time immemorial gloried in gaining striking victories over weak 
enemies and taking its revenge on defenceless men in a frenzy of 
blood-lust. It did this also in Baden and the Palatinate.  Proof:  the 
executions by firing squad in Kirchheim, the night-time shootings in 
the Karlsruhe pheasantry, the countless instances on all the 
battlefields of the wounded and those who had surrendered being 
butchered, the ill-treatment of the few who were taken prisoner, the 
murders by summary justice in Freiburg and Rastatt and lastly the 
slow, secret and therefore all the more inhuman killing of the Rastatt 
prisoners through ill-treatment, hunger, overcrowding in damp, 
suffocating dungeons and the typhus that resulted. The Prussians' 
lukewarm prosecution of the war was certainly rooted in cowardice, 
and indeed in that of the commanders. Quite apart from the slow, 
faint-hearted precision of our Prussian martinets and manoeuvre 
heroes, which is enough in itself to inhibit any bold move or quick 

=====第232页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 209 
decision, quite apart from the complicated service regulations 
intended to prevent in a roundabout way a recurrence of so many 
ignominious defeats—would the Prussians ever have conducted a 
war in a manner so insufferably boring for us and so downright 
disgraceful for them if they had been sure of their own men? 
Therein lay the key. Messrs the Generals knew that a third of their 
army consisted of recalcitrant army reserve regiments who after the 
first victory of the insurgent army would go over to it and very soon 
bring after them half the regular troops and in particular all the 
artillery. And it is not very difficult to see what the prospects would 
then have been for the House of Hohenzollern and the unimpaired 
crown.171 
In Maikammer, where I was forced to wait until the morning of 
the 16th for a new cart and escort, the army, which had set out from 
Neustadt very early in the morning, caught up with me again. The 
previous day there had still been talk of a march on Speyer, but this 
plan had evidently been abandoned and they were making directly 
for the Knielingen bridge. With fifteen Pirmasensers, half-wild 
peasant lads from the virgin forests of the Palatinate hinterland, I 
marched off. It was not until I reached the vicinity of Offenbach that 
I learned that Willich had marched off with all his troops to 
Frankweiler, a place situated to the north-west of Landau. I 
therefore turned round and arrived towards noon at Frankweiler. 
Here I found not only Willich, but once again the entire advanced 
guard of the Palatinate, which had taken the route to the west of 
Landau in order not to have to march between Landau and 
Germersheim. In the tavern sat the Provisional Government with its 
officials, the general staff and the large numbers of democratic 
hangers-on who had attached themselves to both of these. General 
Sznayde was having breakfast. Everyone was rushing around in great 
confusion—in the inn the regents, the commandants and the 
hangers-on and in the street the soldiers. Gradually the main body of 
the army moved in: Herr Blenker, Herr Trocinski, Herr Strasser 
and whatever their names were, all mounted on horseback at the 
head of their valiant troops. The confusion grew and grew. Little by 
little it became possible to send individual corps further on in the 
direction of Impflingen and Kandel. 
One would not guess from looking at it that this army was on the 
retreat. Disorder was from the very beginning as if at home in it, and 
even if the young warriors were already starting to grumble about 
the unaccustomed marching, that still did not stop them from 
carousing in the taverns to their hearts' content, talking big and 
threatening the Prussians with imminent extinction. Despite their 

=====第233页=====
210 Frederick Engels 
certainty of victory, one regiment of cavalry with some horse-artillery 
would have sufficed to blow the whole merry company to the four 
winds and totally disperse the "liberation army of the Rhenish 
Palatinate". It needed only a quick decision and a dash of boldness; 
but in the Prussian camp there was no question of either. 
The next morning we set out. While the main body of the fleeing 
troops moved off towards the Knielingen bridge, Willich marched 
with his corps and the Dreher Battalion into the mountains against 
the Prussians. One of our companies, some fifty Landau gymnasts, 
had advanced right up into the highest mountains, to Johanniskreuz. 
Schimmelpfennig and his corps were likewise still on the road from 
Pirmasens to Landau. The idea was to hold the Prussians up and bar 
the roads to them in Hinterweidenthal to Bergzabern and the Lauter 
valley. 
Schimmelpfennig, however, had already abandoned Hinter-
weidenthal and was in Rinnthal and Annweiler. The road makes a 
curve here, and it is precisely here that the mountains enclosing the 
Queich valley form a sort of defile beyond which lies the village of 
Rinnthal. This defile was manned by a sort of picket. In the night his 
patrols had reported that they had been shot at; early in the morning 
ex-Civil Commissary Weiss from Zweibrücken and a young Rhine-
lander, M.J.Becker, brought the news that the Prussians were 
advancing and demanded that reconnaissance patrols be sent out. 
However, no reconnaissance was undertaken nor were the heights 
on either side of the defile manned, so that Weiss and Becker 
decided to go reconnoitring on their own initiative. As further 
reports came of the approach of the enemy, Schimmelpfennig's 
men began to barricade the defile; Willich arrived, reconnoitred the 
position, issued some orders to man the heights and had the 
completely useless barricade removed. He then rode quickly back to 
Annweiler and fetched his troops. 
As we were marching through Rinnthal we heard the first shots. 
We hurried through the village and saw Schimmelpfennig's troops 
drawn up on the highway, many scythe^men and few flintlocks, some 
already advancing into action. The Prussians were pushing forward 
on the heights, shooting as they went; Schimmelpfennig had calmly 
allowed them to get into the position that he was supposed to occupy 
himself.  No bullets fell into our columns yet; they all went flying high 
over our heads. Whenever a bullet went whistling over the heads of 
the scythe-men the whole line swayed and everyone started shouting 
at the same time. 
Only with difficulty did we get past these troops, who blocked 
almost the whole of the road, brought everything into disorder and 

=====第234页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 211 
anyway were quite useless with their scythes. The company 
commanders and lieutenants were just as helpless and confused as 
the soldiers themselves. Our riflemen were ordered to the front, 
where they were to advance on the heights, some to the right, some 
to the left; on the left were two additional companies to reinforce the 
riflemen and outflank the Prussians. The main column stayed where 
it was in the valley. Some riflemen posted themselves behind the 
remains of the barricade in the curve of the road and shot at the 
Prussian column, which was positioned a few hundred paces back. I 
went with a few men up the mountain to the left. 
We had scarcely climbed the bushy slope when we came to an open 
field from the opposite wooded edge of which Prussian riflemen 
were loosing off their elongated bullets at us. I fetched up a few 
more of the volunteers, who were scrambling around the slope 
helpless and rather nervous, posted them with as much cover as 
possible and took a closer look at the terrain. I could not advance 
with these few men over a completely exposed field 200 to 250 paces 
across, as long as the outflanking detachment sent ahead further to 
the left had not reached the Prussians' flank; at the very most we 
could hold out, since we were badly covered in any case. In spite 
of their elongated-bullet guns, incidentally, the Prussians shot 
extremely badly; we stood for over half an hour with next to no 
cover in the fiercest possible skirmish fire, and the enemy sharp­
shooters hit only one shotgun barrel and the lappet of one tunic. 
At last I had to go and see where Willich was. My men promised to 
hold their ground and I climbed back down the slope. Down below 
everything was fine. The Prussian main column, shot at by our 
riflemen on the road and to the right of it, was forced to retreat a 
little further. All of a sudden our volunteers came leaping down the 
slope to the left, where I had been positioned, and abandoned their 
ground. The companies which had advanced on the extreme left 
flank, weakened by having left behind numerous skirmishers, 
considered that the route through a coppice lying further on would 
take too long; with the captain 3 who had won the battle of Bellheim 
at their head, they advanced across the fields. They were met with a 
hail of fire; the captain and several others fell; the rest, leaderless, 
yielded to the superior forces. The Prussians now advanced, attacked 
our skirmishers in the flank, shot down on them from above and 
thus forced them to retreat. The whole mountain was soon in the 
hands of the Prussians. They shot into our columns from above; 
there was nothing more to be done, and we started to retreat. The 
a Lor eck.— Ed. 

=====第235页=====
212 Frederick Engels 
road was blocked by Schimmelpfennig's troops and the Dreher-
Obermüller Battalion, which in accordance with the laudable Ba­
den custom marched not in sections of four to six but in half-pla­
toons of twelve to fifteen abreast and took up the whole breadth 
of the highway. Our men had to march through swampy mead­
ows to get to the village. I stayed with the riflemen to cover the 
retreat. 
The battle was lost partly because Schimmelpfennig had 
disobeyed Willich's order and not manned the heights, which we 
could not retake from the Prussians with the few troops at our 
disposal; partly because of the utter uselessness of Schimmelpfen­
nig's troops and the Dreher Battalion; and last of all partly because 
of the impatience of the captain who had been ordered to outflank 
the enemy, and that impatience almost cost him his life and exposed 
our left flank. It was, incidentally, lucky for us that we were beaten; a 
Prussian column was already on the way to Bergzabern, Landau was 
relieved, and thus we would have been surrounded on all sides in 
Hinterweidenthal. 
We lost more men during the retreat than in the battle. From time 
to time Prussian musket bullets hit the dense column, which was 
progressing, for the most part a model of disorder, shrieking and 
bawling. We had about fifteen wounded, among them Schimmel­
pfennig, who had received a shot in the knee soon after the 
beginning of the battle. Once again the Prussians showed no great 
eagerness to pursue us and soon stopped shooting. Only a few-
skirmishers on the mountain slopes came after us. In Annweiler, half 
an hour away from the battlefield, we were able to take some food 
quite undisturbed and then marched to Albersweiler. We had the 
most important thing: 3,000 guilders payment towards the forced 
loan which had been waiting for us in Annweiler. Afterwards the 
Prussians called it robbery. They also maintained in the elation of 
victory that at Rinnthal they had killed Captain Manteuffel, a 
member of our corps, cousin of Ehren-Manteuffel a in Berlin and a 
Prussian N.C.O. who had come over to us. Herr Manteuffel is so far 
from being dead that he has since even won a prize for gymnastics in 
Zurich. 
In Albersweiler two Baden guns joined up with us, part of the 
reinforcements sent by Mieroslawski. We wanted to use them to 
make one more stand in the vicinity; but then we were brought the 
news that the Prussians were already in Landau, so we were left with 
no choice but to march straight to Langenkandel. 
a A pun on Ehrenmann (man of honour) and Teufel (devil).— Ed. 

=====第236页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 213 
In Albersweiler we were safely rid of the ineffectual troops that 
had been marching with us. The Schimmelpfennig corps had 
already partially disbanded following the loss of its leader and on its 
own initiative was branching off to Kandel. At every step it left 
behind in the taverns exhausted soldiers and other stragglers. 
In Albersweiler the Dreher Battalion started to become rebellious. 
Willich and I went there to ask what they wanted. They all remained 
silent. At last a volunteer, already pretty advanced in years, cried out: 
"They want to lead us to the slaughter!" This exclamation was highly 
comical coming from a corps that had not even once seen battle and 
had sustained two or at the most three light casualties during the 
retreat. Willich bade the man step forward and surrender his rifle. 
The greybeard, rather the worse for drink, did so, staged a 
tragi-comic scene and snivelled his way through a long speech, the 
gist of which was that no such thing had ever happened to him 
before. This gave rise to general indignation among these very 
good-natured but badly disciplined warriors, so that Willich ordered 
the whole company to march off at once, saying he was sick of chatter 
and grumbling and did not intend to lead such soldiers one moment 
longer. The company, which needed no second bidding, wheeled to 
the right and started marching. The rest of the battalion, to which 
Willich had further allocated two cannon, followed suit five minutes 
later. It was more than they could bear that they should be "led to 
the slaughter" and expected to keep discipline! We let them go with 
pleasure. 
We turned right into the mountains in the direction of Impflin­
gen. Soon we arrived in the proximity of the Prussians; our riflemen 
exchanged a few shots with them. Throughout the evening shots 
were fired from time to time. I stayed behind in the first village we 
came to in order to send news by messenger to our company of 
gymnasts from Landau; whether or not they received it, I do not 
know, but they got safely to France and from there went over to 
Baden. Because of this I lost the corps and had to make my own way 
to Kandel. The roads were crowded with army stragglers; all the 
taverns were full; the whole splendour seemed to have faded into 
complacency. Officers without soldiers here, soldiers without officers 
there, and volunteers from all corps hurrying in colourful confusion 
on foot and by wagon in the direction of Kandel. And yet the 
Prussians never gave a thought to serious pursuit! Impflingen is only 
an hour away from Landau, and Worth (which is just before the 
Knielingen bridge) only four to five hours from Germersheim; yet 
the Prussians made no hurry to dispatch troops to either of the two 
positions, here to cut off the stragglers, there to cut off the 
9-1124 

=====第237页=====
214 Frederick Engels 
entire army. The Prince of Prussia certainly won his laurels in an 
odd way! 
In Kandel I found Willich but not the corps, which was billeted 
further back. Instead, I once more found the Provisional Govern­
ment, the general staff and the large retinue of hangers-on. The 
same cram of troops, only a much greater disorder and confusion 
than yesterday in Frankweiler. There was a continuous stream of 
officers making enquiries about their corps and soldiers making 
enquiries about their leaders. Nobody could tell them anything. The 
disintegration was complete. 
The next morning, June 18, the entire gathering defiled through 
Worth and over the Knielingen bridge. In spite of the large number 
of troops who had been cut off from the main body or gone home, 
the army, with the reinforcements arrived from Baden, still 
numbered some  5,000  to 6,000 men. They marched as proudly 
through Worth as if they had just conquered the village and were 
pushing on to fresh triumphs. They were still doing as Kossuth did. 
A Baden battalion of regulars was the only one to display any 
military bearing and march past a tavern without some of its number 
diving in. At last our corps came. We stayed behind as cover until the 
bridge could be carted off; when everything was in order we 
marched over to Baden and helped carry out the piles. 
The government of Baden, in order to spare the valiant Karlsruhe 
philistines who had made such a courageous stand against the 
republicans on June 6,172  billeted everyone from the Palatinate in the 
surrounding districts. We had explicitly insisted on coming to 
Karlsruhe with our corps; we needed a lot of repairs and articles of 
clothing, and we also considered the presence of a reliable, 
revolutionary corps in Karlsruhe very desirable. But Herr Brentano 
had taken care of us. He directed us to Daxlanden, a village an hour 
and a half away from Karlsruhe, which was pictured to us as a 
veritable Eldorado. We marched there and discovered the most 
reactionary den in the whole area. Nothing to eat, nothing to drink, 
scarcely any straw; half the corps had to sleep on the bare floor. 
Added to that, scowling faces at all the doors and windows. We acted 
quickly. Herr Brentano was warned: unless he had by then assigned 
us other and better quarters, we would be in Karlsruhe the next 
morning, June 19. We kept our word. We marched off at nine 
o'clock in the morning. Not a rifle-shot away from the village Herr 
Brentano came up to us with a staff officer and summoned up all his 
powers of flattery and eloquence to keep us away from Karlsruhe. 
The town was already putting up  5,000  men, he said, the wealthier 
class had departed and the middle-class was overburdened with 

=====第238页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 215 
billeted soldiers; he would not tolerate bad accommodation for the 
valiant Willich corps, he continued, whose praises were on every­
body's lips, etc. But nothing helped. Willich demanded a few empty 
palaces belonging to the departed aristocrats, and when Brentano 
refused we went to Karlsruhe for our billets. 
In Karlsruhe we acquired rifles for our company of scythe-men 
and some cloth for topcoats. We had our shoes and clothes mended 
as quickly as possible. Fresh forces came to us too, several workers 
whom I knew from the Elberfeld uprising, then Kinkel, who joined 
the Besançon workers' company as a musketeer, and Zychlinski, 
adjutant to the supreme command in the Dresden uprising and 
leader of the rearguard during the retreat of the insurgents. He 
joined the students' company as a rifleman. 
While we were replenishing our equipment, we did not neglect 
tactical instruction. Drill was assiduously carried out and on our 
second day there we undertook a mock storm of Karlsruhe from the 
castle yard. The philistines demonstrated by their universal and 
deeply-felt indignation at the manoeuvre that they had fully 
understood the threat. 
Eventually the bold decision was taken to requisition the Grand 
•Duke's3  arms collection, which had up to now remained inviolable 
like something holy. We were just on the point of having twenty of 
the guns thus obtained fitted with pistons when the news arrived that 
the Prussians had crossed the Rhine near Germersheim and were in 
Graben and Bruchsal. 
We marched off at once (on the evening of June 20) with two 
Palatinate cannon. When we arrived at Blankenloch, an hour and a 
half from Karlsruhe in the direction of Bruchsal, we found Herr 
Clement and his battalion there and learned that the Prussian 
advanced posts had pushed forward to about an hour's march from 
Blankenloch. While our men were taking their evening meal under 
arms,  we held a council of war. Willich was for attacking the 
Prussians at once. Herr Clement declared that with his untrained 
troops he could not make a night-attack. It was therefore decided 
that we should immediately go ahead to  Karlsdorf,  attack shortly 
before daybreak and try to break through the Prussian line. If we 
were successful, then we intended to march on Bruchsal and throw 
in our forces wherever we could. Herr Clement was to attack at 
daybreak by way of Friedrichsthal and support our left flank. 
It was about midnight when we set out. Our venture was fairly 
risky. We had not quite 700 men with two cannon; our troops were 
a Leopold.— Ed. 
9* 

=====第239页=====
216 Frederick Engels 
better drilled and more reliable than the rest of the Palatinate troops, 
and also pretty accustomed to fire. With them we intended to attack 
an enemy corps which was at all events much better experienced and 
staffed with more experienced subalterns than ours, among whom 
were some captains who had scarcely even been in the civic militia; a 
corps whose exact strength we did not know, but which numbered 
not less than 4,000 men. Our corps had already fought more 
unequal battles, however, and there was certainly no hope of less 
unfavourable odds in this campaign. 
We sent ten students a hundred paces ahead as an advance guard; 
then followed the first column, at the head of which were half a 
dozen Baden dragoons allocated to us for courier service, and 
behind them three companies. The artillery, along with the three 
other companies, were a little further back and the riflemen brought 
up the rear. The order was given not to shoot under any 
circumstances, to march as quietly as possible and, as soon as the 
enemy showed  himself,  to attack him with the bayonet, 
Soon we saw in the distance the glow of the Prussian watch-fires. 
We got as far as Spöck without being challenged. The main body 
halted; only the advance guard pushed forward. All at once there 
were shots; on the road at the entrance to the village a blazing 
straw-fire flared up and the tocsin rang. To the right and to the left 
our skirmishers circumvented the village and the column marched 
in. Large fires were also burning inside; at every corner we expected 
a volley. But everything was quiet and only a sort of guard of 
peasants was encamped in front of the town hall. The Prussian 
guard had already made off. 
In spite of their colossal numerical superiority, the Prussian 
gentlemen did not consider themselves safe, as we saw on this 
occasion, unless they had carried out the pedantic service regulations 
covering outpost duties to the last boring detail. This outermost post 
was a whole hour away from their camp. If we had wanted to tire our 
own men, unaccustomed to the exertions of war, with outpost duties, 
just as the Prussians did, numbers of them would have been unfit to 
march. We relied on the Prussian nervousness and were of the 
opinion that they would hold us in more respect than we did them. 
And rightly so. Our outposts were never attacked the whole way to 
the Swiss frontier and our quarters never raided. 
At all events the Prussians had now been warned. Ought we to 
turn back? We decided not, and marched on. 
At Neuthard once more the tocsin; this time, however, neither 
beacons nor shots. Here too we marched in fairly closed order 
through the village and the heights up to  Karlsdorf.  Our advance 

=====第240页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 217 
guard, now only thirty paces ahead, had scarcely reached the high 
ground when it saw the Prussian outpost close in front of it and was 
challenged by it. I heard the "Who goes there?" and leapt forward. 
One of my comrades said: "He's a goner, we won't see him again." 
But it was precisely my going forward that saved me. 
For at the same moment the enemy outpost loosed off a volley and 
our advance guard, instead of despatching them with the bayonet, 
fired back. The dragoons, alongside whom I had been marching, did 
an immediate about-turn in keeping with their customary cowardice, 
charged at a gallop into the column, rode down a number of men, 
totally dispersed the first four to six sections and galloped off. At the 
same time the enemy's mounted guards posted in the fields to right 
and left fired at us and to put the finishing touch to the confusion 
some blockheads in the middle of our column started firing on our 
own men at the head, whereupon other blockheads followed suit. In 
next to no time the first half of the column was routed, some 
scattered across the fields, some put to flight, and some caught up in a 
confused tangle on the road. Wounded men, knapsacks, hats and 
flintlocks lay in motley confusion amidst the young corn. All this was 
interspersed with wild, distraught cries, shots and the whistle of 
bullets in all possible directions. And as the noise subsided a little, far 
to the rear I heard our cannon trundling off in headlong flight. 
They had performed the same service for the second half of the 
column as the dragoons for the first. 
Though at that moment I was seized with rage at the childish 
terror that had gripped our soldiers, I felt equal contempt for the 
behaviour of the Prussians who, notified as they had been of our 
arrival, stopped firing after a few shots and likewise bolted off at top 
speed. Our advance guard was still in its old position and had not 
been attacked once. A cavalry squadron or a tolerably sustained 
skirmish fire would have put us to headlong flight. 
Willich came rushing up to us from the advance guard. The 
Besançon company was the first to be formed up again. The others, 
more or less ashamed, closed ranks. Day was just breaking. Our 
losses amounted to six wounded, among whom was one of our 
staff officers: he had been trampled underfoot on the same spot that 
I had left the moment before to hurry to the advance guard. Several 
others had clearly been hit by the bullets of our own men. We 
carefully collected up all the discarded accoutrements so that not 
even the slightest trophy would fall into the hands of the Prussians, 
and then retreated slowly to Neuthard. The riflemen took up a 
position behind the first houses as cover. But there was no sign of the 
Prussians; and when Zychlinski went reconnoitring again he found 

=====第241页=====
218 Frederick Engels 
them still on the other side of the heights, whence they fired a few 
shots without hitting anything. 
The Palatinate peasants who had been conveying our artillery had 
taken the one cannon right through to the other side of the village; 
the other had overturned and the men in charge had ridden off with 
five horses, whose traces they had removed. We had to get the 
cannon upright and shift it with just the one wheel-horse. 
When we arrived at Spöck we heard rifle fire to our right, in the 
direction of Friedrichsthal. It was gradually getting more intense. 
Herr Clement had at last attacked, an hour later than arranged. I 
proposed supporting him with an attack on the flank, in order to 
make up for his mistake. Willich was of the same opinion and gave 
the order to take the first path to the right. A part of our corps had 
already taken the turning when one of Clement's orderly officers 
reported that Clement was retreating. We therefore went to 
Blankenloch. Soon Herr Beust of the general staff met us and was 
most surprised to see us alive and the corps in such fine trim. The 
blackguardly dragoons had spread the word everywhere on their 
flight, which took them as far as Karlsruhe, that Willich was dead, 
the officers all dead, and the corps scattered* to the four winds and 
annihilated. We were said to have been shot at with case-shot and 
"fiery cannon-balls". 
Outside Blankenloch we were met by troops of the Palatinate and 
Baden and finally Herr Sznayde and his  staff.  The old codger, who 
had probably spent a very comfortable night in bed, had the 
impudence to call over to us: "Gentlemen, where are you going? The 
enemy is that way!" Needless to say we gave him a fitting reply, 
marched on past him and saw about getting some rest and 
refreshment in Blankenloch. After two hours Herr Sznayde 
returned with his troops, naturally without having seen the enemy, 
and had breakfast. 
Counting the reinforcements received from Karlsruhe and the 
surrounding area, Herr Sznayde now had approximately  8,000  to 
9,000 troops under his command, including three Baden regular 
battalions and two Baden batteries. All in all there were probably 
some twently-five pieces of ordnance. As a consequence of Miero-
slawski's rather vague orders and even more of the total incompe­
tence of Herr Sznayde, the entire army of the Palatinate stayed put 
in the region of Karlsruhe until the Prussians had made their way 
across the Rhine under the cover of the Germersheim bridge-head. 
Mieroslawski (vid. his reports on the campaign in Baden a) had issued 
Rapports du General Mieroslawski sur la campagne de Bade, Berne, 1849.— Ed. 

=====第242页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 219 
the general order to defend the Rhine crossings from Speyer to 
Knielingen after the withdrawal from the Palatinate and the special 
order to cover Karlsruhe and to make the Knielingen bridge the 
assembly point of the entire army corps. Herr Sznayde interpreted 
this as meaning that he should stay at Karlsruhe and Knielingen until 
further notice. If, as Mieroslawski's general orders implied, he had 
sent a strong corps with artillery against the Germersheim bridge­
head, then the absurdity would never have occurred of sending 
Major Mniewski, with 450 recruits and no artillery, to capture the 
bridge-head, 30,000 Prussians would never have got over the Rhine 
unchallenged, communications with Mieroslawski would never 
have been broken and the Palatinate army could have appeared 
in good time on the battlefield of Waghäusel. Instead of this, 
on the day of the battle of Waghäusel, June 21, it wandered 
around aimlessly between Friedrichsthal, Weingarten and Bruch­
sal, lost sight of the enemy and wasted its time marching in all 
directions. 
We received the order to set out for the right flank and skirt the 
mountains via Weingarten. We started out at noon on the same day, 
June 21, from Blankenloch and about five in the afternoon from 
Weingarten. The Palatinate troops at last began to get uneasy; they 
noticed that the odds were heavy against them and they lost that 
boastful certainty which up to now they had at least had before battle. 
From now on the people's militia of the Palatinate and Baden, and 
gradually the regular infantry and artillery too, began to smell 
Prussians everywhere, and false alarms, which now became a regular 
daily occurrence, threw everything into disorder and gave rise to the 
most amusing scenes. At the very first piece of high ground beyond 
Weingarten patrols and peasants came rushing up to us with the cry: 
"The Prussians are here!" Our corps formed up in battle order 
and advanced. I went back to the little town to have the alarm 
sounded and in doing so lost the corps. The whole fuss was 
without foundation, needless to say. The Prussians had withdrawn 
towards Waghäusel and the same evening Willich marched into 
Bruchsal. 
I spent the night in Obergrombach with Herr Oswald and his 
Palatinate battalion and marched with him the next morning to 
Bruchsal. Outside the town we met wagons full of stragglers coming 
in our direction: "The Prussians are here!" At once the whole 
battalion started to waver and could only with difficulty be made to 
advance. Of course it was another false alarm; Willich and the rest of 
the Palatinate advance guard were in Bruchsal; the others came 
marching in one after the other and there was no trace of the 

=====第243页=====
220 Frederick Engels 
Prussians. Besides the army and its leaders, d'Ester, the ex-govern­
ment of the Palatinate and Goegg were there. Since Brentano's 
dictatorship had become indisputable, Goegg had stayed almost 
exclusively with the army and helped to look after the day-to-day 
civil affairs. The victualling was bad and the confusion was great. As 
usual, only the headquarters lived well. 
Once again we obtained a considerable number of cartridges from 
the Karlsruhe supplies and marched off in the evening, the entire 
advance guard with us. The latter took up quarters in Ubstadt, while 
we marched off to the right to Unteröwisheim to cover the flank in 
the mountains. 
To all appearances we were now quite a respectable force. Our 
corps had been reinforced with two new units. The first of these was 
the Langenkandel Battalion, which had dispersed on the way from 
its home town to the Knielingen bridge and whose beaux  restes*  had 
joined up with us; they consisted of a captain, a lieutenant, a 
standard-bearer, a sergeant, an N.C.O. and two men. The other was 
the "Robert Blum Column" with a red flag, a body of approximately 
sixty men who looked like cannibals and had performed heroic 
deeds in requisitioning. Besides that we were allocated four Baden 
cannon and a Baden people's militia battalion, the Kniery, Knüry or 
Knierim Battalion (it was impossible to discover the correct reading 
of the name). The Knierim Battalion was worthy of its leader and 
Herr Knierim worthy of his battalion. Both were staunch-minded, 
both were braggarts and roisterers and both constantly drunk. The 
famous "enthusiasm" kindled their hearts to deeds of the most 
prodigious heroism, as we shall have occasion to see. 
On the morning of the 23rd Willich received a note from Anneke, 
who commanded the advance guard of the Palatinate in Ubstadt. It 
announced that the enemy was advancing, a council of war had been 
held and the decision made to withdraw. Willich, flabbergasted at 
this strange piece of news, rode over at once and managed to 
persuade Anneke and his officers to give battle at Ubstadt. He 
reconnoitred the position himself and specified the deployment of 
the artillery. He then returned and had his troops stand to their 
arms.  While our troops were forming up we received the following 
order from the Bruchsal headquarters, signed by Techow: the main 
body of the army was to proceed along the road to Heidelberg and 
should expect to get as far as Mingolsheim the same day; at the same 
time we were to march via Odenheim to Waldangelloch and spend 
the night there. Further news as to the successes of the main corps 
a Beautiful remains.— Ed 

=====第244页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 221 
and instructions as to our subsequent course of action were to be sent 
there. 
In his fanciful Geschichte der drei Volkserhebungen in Baden, pp. 
311-17,  Herr Struve published a report on the operations of the 
Palatinate army from June 20 to 26 which is nothing more than an 
apologia for the incompetent Sznayde and teems with inaccuracies 
and misrepresentations. The following points emerge from what 
was said above: firstly, it is not true that Sznayde "received reliable 
news of the battle of Waghäusel and its outcome a few hours after 
marching into Bruchsal (on the 22nd)"; secondly, it is therefore not 
true that "because of this he changed his plan and, instead of 
marching to Mingolsheim, as at first had been the plan, decided" (as 
early as the 22nd),"to stay with the main body of his division in 
Bruchsal" (the note from Techow which is referred to was written 
during the night of the 22nd to the 23rd); thirdly, it is not true that 
"on the morning of the 23rd a large-scale reconnaissance was to be 
carried out"—on the contrary, it was the march on Mingolsheim 
which was to take place; and to say that fourthly "all detachments 
received the order to march in the direction of the firing as soon as 
they heard that firing"; and fifthly that "the detachment on the right 
flank (Willich) excused its failure to turn up at the battle of Ubstadt 
by saying that it had heard nothing of the firing", is a gross lie, as will 
be seen. 
We marched off at once. We were to have breakfast in Odenheim. 
Some Bavarian Chevaulegers, who had been attached to us for 
dispatch duties, rode around the village to the left to reconnoitre 
possible enemy corps. Prussian hussars had been in the village 
requisitioning fodder, which they intended to collect later. While we 
were confiscating this fodder, and wine and food was being 
distributed to our men under arms, one of the Chevaulegers came 
dashing in and shouted: "The Prussians are here!" In next to no 
time the Knierim Battalion, which was nearest, broke ranks and 
stampeded in all directions in a wild tangle, screaming, cursing and 
lumbering, while the major was forced to leave his men in the lurch 
because his horse shied. Willich came riding up, restored order and 
we marched off. Needless to say there were no Prussians there. 
On the heights beyond Odenheim we heard the roar of cannon 
coming from the direction of Ubstadt. The gunfire soon became 
more intense. More experienced ears were already able to distin­
guish between the sound of bullets and the sound of case-shot. We 
deliberated whether to continue our march or to go in the direction 
of the firing. Since our order was positive and since the firing 
seemed to be moving in the direction of Mingolsheim, which 

=====第245页=====
222 Frederick Engels 
indicated an advance by our side, we resolved on the more 
dangerous march, the march on Waldangelloch. If the forces of the 
Palatinate were defeated at Ubstadt, we would be as good as cut off 
up there in the mountains and in a fairly critical position. 
Herr Struve maintains that the battle of Ubstadt "could have led 
to brilliant results if the flank detachments had attacked at the right 
moment" (p. 314). The gunfire did not last an hour and we would 
have needed two to two and a half hours to reach the battlefield 
between Stettfeld and Ubstadt, that is an hour and a half after it had 
been abandoned. That is the way Herr Struve writes "history". 
A halt was called near Tiefenbach. While our troops were 
refreshing themselves, Willich sent out some dispatches. The 
Knierim Battalion discovered a kind of municipal cellar in Tiefen­
bach, slapped a confiscation order on it, fetched out the barrels of 
wine and within an hour everyone was drunk. Annoyance at the 
Prussian scare of that morning, the cannon-roar from Ubstadt, the 
lack of confidence that these heroes had in one another and their 
officers—all this, aggravated by the wine, suddenly broke out in 
open rebellion. They demanded an immediate retreat; they said they 
did not care for eternally marching through the mountains in the 
face of the enemy. As this was of course out of the question, they 
faced about and marched off on their own. The man-eating "Robert 
Blum Column" joined them. We let them go and marched to 
Waldangelloch. 
Here, in a deep basin-shaped valley, it was impossible to pass the 
night in any safety. Therefore a halt was called and intelligence 
collected about the conditions of the terrain in the area and the 
position of the enemy. In the meantime a few vague rumours of the 
retreat of the army on the Neckar had been spread by peasants. It 
was claimed that considerable Baden corps had marched on Bretten 
via Sinsheim and Eppingen, that Mieroslawski himself had passed 
through in strictest incognito and that people in Sinsheim had 
wanted to arrest him. The artillerymen became uneasy and even our 
students started to murmur. So the artillery was sent back and we 
marched on Hilsbach. Here we learned further particulars about the 
retreat of the Neckar army 48 hours earlier and about the Bavarians 
stationed in Sinsheim, an hour and a half away from where we 
were. Their number was given as 7,000, but in fact, as we later 
discovered, it was about 10,000. We were at the most only 700 strong. 
Our men could not march any further. We therefore quartered 
them in barns, as we always did when we had to keep them together 
as much as possible, detailed strong outposts and lay down to sleep. 
As we marched out the next morning, the 24th, we could hear quite 

=====第246页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 223 
distincdy the sound of the Bavarians' marching step. A good quarter 
of an hour after we had marched off the Bavarians were in Hilsbach. 
Two days before, on the 22nd, Mieroslawski had spent the night in 
Sinsheim and was already in Bretten with his troops when we 
marched into Hilsbach. Becker, who was commanding the rear­
guard, was likewise already through. It follows that he cannot, as 
Herr Struve maintains on page 308, have passed the night of the 
23rd to the 24th in Sinsheim, for the Bavarians, who the evening 
before had fought a small engagement with Mieroslawski, were there 
at eight o'clock in the evening and probably even earlier. Mieroslaw-
ski's^retreat from Waghäusel via Heidelberg to Bretten is depicted by 
the men who took part in it as a highly dangerous manoeuvre. 
Mieroslawski's operations from June 20 to 24, the rapid concen­
tration of a corps at Heidelberg, with which he hurled himself 
against the Prussians, and his speedy retreat after losing the battle of 
Waghäusel certainly constituted the most brilliant episode of his 
entire activity in Baden; but the fact that this manoeuvre in the face 
of such a lethargic enemy was by no means so dangerous is proved by 
the fact that 24 hours later our little corps effected its retreat from 
Hilsbach without once being molested. We even passed through the 
Flehingen defile, where Mieroslawski had already expected an attack 
on the 23rd, without being attacked and marched on Büchig. Here 
we intended staying in order to cover against a first attack the camp 
Mieroslawski had set up at Bretten. 
Everywhere on our march, which led through Eppingen, Zaisen-
hausen and Flehingen, we were the object of amazement, since all 
the corps of the Neckar army, including the rearguard, had already 
marched through. When we marched into Büchig and our bugler 
started to play, we panicked people into thinking that the Prussians 
had arrived. A commando of the Bretten civic militia, requisitioning 
victuals for Mieroslawski's camp, took us for Prussians and were the 
very picture of confusion until we turned the corner and the sight of 
our tunics reassured them. We at once confiscated the victuals and 
had barely consumed them when the news that Mieroslawski had set 
out from Bretten with all the troops caused us to withdraw to 
Bretten. 
We stayed overnight in Bretten, the civic militia providing 
outposts. Wagons were requisitioned for the next morning to carry 
the whole corps to Ettlingen. Since Bruchsal had already been taken 
by the Prussians on the 24th and we could not afford to engage in a 
battle in case the road via Diedelsheim to Durlach was occupied by 
the enemy (it actually was, as we later discovered), this was the only 
route to the main army open to us. 

=====第247页=====
224 Frederick Engels 
In Bretten a deputation of students came to us with a declaration 
that they did not like constantly marching in the face of the enemy 
and they asked to be discharged. Needless to say they were told by 
way of reply that no one is discharged in the face of the enemy; but 
if they wished to desert, then they were free to do so. Thereupon 
about half the company marched off; the number of those 
remaining soon dwindled so much due to individual desertions that 
only the riflemen were left. During the course of the entire campaign 
the students generally showed themselves to be malcontent and timid 
young gentlemen; they always wanted to be let into all the plans of 
operation, complained about sore feet and grumbled when the 
campaign did not afford all the comforts of a holiday trip. Among 
these "representatives of intelligence" there were only a handful 
who through their truly revolutionary character and shining courage 
proved themselves exceptions. 
We were later informed that the enemy had marched into Bretten 
half an hour after we left. We arrived at Ettlingen, and there Herr 
Corvin-Wiersbitzki directed us to march to Durlach, where Becker 
was to hold up the enemy until Karlsruhe had been evacuated. 
Willich sent a Chevauleger with a note to Becker in order to find out 
whether he intended to stay for a while; the man returned in a 
quarter of an hour with the news that he had met Becker's troops 
already in full retreat. We therefore marched off to Rastatt, where 
everyone was concentrating. 
The road to Rastatt presented a picture of the most splendid 
disorder. Any number of the most varied corps were marching or 
camping in motley confusion, and we had difficulty in holding our 
troops together under the blazing sun and amidst the universal 
disarray. The Palatinate troops and a few Baden battalions were 
encamped on the Rastatt glacis. The Palatinate forces were severely 
depleted. The best corps, the Rhenish Hessian, had been assembled 
in Karlsruhe by Zitz and Bamberger before the battle of Ubstadt. 
These bold freedom-fighters had declared to the corps that all was 
lost, the odds were too great but there was still time to get home in 
safety; that they, the parliamentary windbag Zitz and the valiant 
Bamberger, did not want innocent blood or any other calamity on 
their hands and thereupon declared the corps disbanded. The 
Rhenish Hessians were naturally so indignant at this infamous 
presumption that they wanted to arrest the two traitors and shoot 
them; d'Ester and the government of the Palatinate were also after 
them to arrest them. But the honourable citizens had already fled 
and the valiant Zitz watched the further course of the campaign for 
an Imperial Constitution from the safety of Basle. As in September 

=====第248页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 225 
1848,  in his Frakturschrift, 113 so also in May 1849, Herr Zitz was 
among those parliamentary braggarts who did most to incite the 
people to rise up, but on both occasions he occupied a prominent 
place among those who during the uprising were the first to leave 
the people in the lurch. At Kirchheimbolanden too Herr Zitz 
was among the first to bolt, while his riflemen were fighting and 
being shot. 
The Rhenish Hessian corps, in any case seriously weakened by 
desertion, as all corps were, and disheartened by the retreat to 
Baden, at once lost its balance completely. Part of it disbanded and 
went home; the remainder constituted itself anew and fought on 
until the end of the campaign. The rest of the Palatinate troops were 
demoralised at Rastatt by the news that all those who returned home 
before July 5 were to be amnestied. More than half of them 
dispersed, battalions dwindled to company size, the subaltern 
officers were for the most part gone and the 1,200 or so troops still 
remaining were now hardly of any more value. Our corps, although 
not in the least disheartened, had also dwindled to little more than 
500 men through losses, illness and the desertion of the students. 
We went to Kuppenheim, where other troops were already 
present, for our billets. The next morning I accompanied Willich to 
Rastatt and there met Moll once again. 
There have been memorials from all sides in the press, in the 
democratic clubs, in verse and in prose to the more or less educated 
victims of the Baden uprising. But no voice is raised on behalf of the 
hundreds and thousands of workers who fought out the battles, who 
fell on the field, who rotted alive in the Rastatt casemates or who 
now, alone of all the refugees, must drain to the dregs the cup of 
exile. The exploitation of the workers is a traditional affair, too 
familiar for our official "democrats" to consider the workers as 
anything else than raw material for agitation, for exploiting, for 
causing trouble, as anything but cannon-fodder. Our "democrats" 
are far too ignorant and bourgeois to comprehend the revolutionary 
position of the proletariat, the future of the working class. That is 
why they hate those genuinely proletarian characters who, too proud 
to flatter them and too discerning to allow themselves to be used 
by them, are none the less always there, arms in hand, whenever it is 
a question of overthrowing an existing authority, and who in every 
revolutionary movement directly represent the party of the pro­
letariat. But if it is not in the interests of the so-called democrats to 
recognise such workers, it is the duty of the party of the proletariat to 
honour them as they deserve. And among the best of these workers 
was Joseph Moll of Cologne. 

=====第249页=====
226 Frederick Engels 
Moll was a watchmaker. He had left Germany years ago arid in 
France, Belgium and England played his part in all the public and 
secret revolutionary societies. He helped found the German 
Workers' Society in London in 1840.174 After the February 
Revolution he returned to Germany and with his friend Schapper 
soon took over the leadership of the Cologne Workers' Associa­
tion.175 A fugitive in London since the Cologne riots of September 
1848, 176 he soon returned to Germany under an assumed name, 
agitated in all sorts of districts and undertook missions so dangerous 
that everyone else shrank back from them. I met him again in 
Kaiserslautern. Here too he undertook missions to Prussia which, 
if he had been found out, would have incurred the summary 
grace of a firing squad. Returning from his second mission, he 
got safely through all the enemy armies to Rastatt, where he 
immediately joined the Besançon workers' company in our corps. 
Three days later he had fallen. I lost in him an old friend and 
the party one of its most unflagging, intrepid and reliable cham­
pions. 
The party of the proletariat was quite strongly represented in the 
army of Baden and the Palatinate, especially in the volunteer corps, 
as for example in our own, in the refugee legion, etc.,and it can safely 
challenge all the other parties to find even the slightest fault with any 
one of its members. The most resolute Communists made the most 
courageous soldiers. 
On the next day, the 27th, we were moved somewhat further into 
the mountains, to Rothenfels. The detailing of the army and the 
distribution of the various corps was gradually established. We 
belonged to the right-flank division, which was commanded by 
Colonel Thome, the same as had wanted to arrest Mieroslawski in 
Meckesheim177  and who had childishly been allowed to retain his 
command, and then from the 27th onwards by Mersy. Willich, who 
had refused the command of the Palatinate forces which Sigel had 
offered him, was acting as chief of divisional  staff.  The division was 
located in the area stretching from Gernsbach and the Württemberg 
frontier to the other side of Rothenfels and leaned on its left side 
against the Oborski division, which was concentrated around 
Kuppenheim. The advance guard was pushed forward to the 
frontier as well as to Sulzbach, Michelbach and Winkel. The 
victualling, at first irregular and bad, improved from the 27th on. 
Our division consisted of several Baden regular battalions, the 
remainder of the Palatinate forces under hero Blenker, our corps 
and one or one and a half batteries of artillery. The Palatinate forces 
were stationed in Gernsbach and the surrounding area and the 

=====第250页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 227 
regulars and ourselves in and around Rothenfels. The headquarters 
were in the hotel in Elisabethenquelle opposite Rothenfels. 
On the 28th we—the divisional staff and that of our own corps 
together with Moll, Kinkel and other volunteers—were just taking 
coffee after our meal in this hotel when the news arrived that our 
advance guard near Michelbach had been attacked by the Prussians. 
We at once set out, although we had every reason to suppose that the 
enemy had nothing more than a reconnaissance in mind. It indeed 
proved to be nothing more. The village of Michelbach situated down 
in the valley which had momentarily been captured by the Prussians 
had already been re-taken by the time we arrived. There was shooting 
across the valley from both mountain-sides and much ammunition 
was expended to no purpose. I saw only one dead and one wounded. 
While the regulars were pointlessly shooting off their cartridges at 
distances of 600 to 800 paces, Willich bade our troops quietly pile 
their rifles and take a rest close by the alleged fighters and in the 
thick of the alleged firing. Only the riflemen went down the wooded 
slope and, supported by a handful of regulars, drove the Prussians 
from the heights opposite. One of our riflemen shot a Prussian 
officer off his horse at about 900 paces with his colossal heavy rifle, a 
veritable portable cannon; the officer's entire company at once did a 
right-about turn and marched back into the wood. A number of 
Prussian dead and wounded as well as two prisoners fell into our 
hands. 
The next day the general attack on the whole line took place. This 
time the Prussian gentlemen disturbed us at our midday meal. The 
first attack of which we were notified was against Bischweier, that is, 
against the point at which the Oborski division linked up with ours. 
Willich urged that our troops should be held in the greatest possible 
readiness at Rothenfels, since the main attack was expected in any 
case in the opposite direction, at Gernsbach. But Mersy replied that 
we knew how things were, that if one of our battalions were attacked 
and the others did not come to its aid at once and in force, then the 
cry of treason would go up and everyone would take to their heels. 
We therefore marched towards Bischweier. 
Willich and I advanced with the rifle company along the road to 
Bischweier on the right bank of the Murg. Half an hour away from 
Rothenfels we came across the enemy. The riflemen spread out in 
extended order and Willich rode back to fetch the corps, which stood 
a little way in the rear, up into the fighting line. For a while our 
riflemen, taking cover behind fruit-trees and vineyards, stood up to 
some quite heavy fire, which they returned in good measure. But 
when a strong enemy column advanced along the road in support of 

=====第251页=====
228 Frederick Engels 
its skirmishers, the left flank of our riflemen gave way and no 
amount of talking to could persuade them to stand their ground. 
The right flank had advanced further towards the heights and was 
later taken into our corps. 
When I saw that nothing was to be done with the riflemen I 
abandoned them to their fate and went towards the heights, where I 
could see the flags of our corps. One company had stayed behind; its 
captain, a tailor, usually a brave fellow, was all of a dither. I took the 
company along to join the others and met Willich, just as he was 
pushing the Besançon company forward in extended order and 
drawing up the rest behind them in two battle lines, together with a 
company pushed forward on the right towards the mountains to 
cover the flank. 
Our skirmishers were met with a hail of fire. Facing them were 
Prussian riflemen, and against their elongated-bullet rifles our 
workers only had muskets. However, they advanced so resolutely, 
reinforced by the right flank of our riflemen who joined up with 
them, that the inferior quality of their arms was soon made up for by 
the closeness of the range, especially on the right flank, and the 
Prussians were dislodged. The two battle lines kept quite close on the 
heels of the skirmishers. In the meantime two Baden artillery pieces 
had also been brought up on our left, in the Murg valley, and they 
opened fire on the Prussian infantry and artillery occupying the 
road. 
The battle here had probably been going on for an hour or so with 
intense rifle and musket fire, the Prussians continually retreating 
(some of our riflemen had already penetrated as far as Bischweier), 
when the Prussians received reinforcements and pushed their 
battalions forward. Our skirmishers retreated; the first line gave 
platoon fire and the second moved to the left into a defile and also 
started firing. But the Prussians pressed forward in serried masses 
along the entire line; both the Baden artillery pieces covering our left 
flank had already retreated. On the right flank the Prussians came 
down from the mountains and we were forced to fall back. 
As soon as we were out of the enemy cross-fire we took up a fresh 
position on the mountain range. If up to now we had been facing the 
Rhine plain, and Bischweier and Niederweier, we were now facing 
the mountains which the Prussians had occupied from Oberweier. 
Now the regular battalions at last joined the fighting line and gave 
battle, together with two companies of our corps which were once 
more pushed forward in extended order. 
We had suffered heavy losses. About thirty men were missing, 
including Kinkel and Moll and not counting the dispersed riflemen. 

=====第252页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 229 
The two above-named had advanced too far with the right flank of 
their company and some riflemen. The riflemen's captain, head 
forester Emmermann from Thronecken in Rhenish Prussia, who 
marched against the Prussians as if he were hunting hares, had led 
them into a position from which they fired into a Prussian artillery 
section and forced it to beat a speedy retreat. However, a company of 
Prussians at once emerged from a defile and fired upon them. 
Kinkel fell to the ground, hit in the head, and he was dragged along 
until he could once more walk unaided; soon, however, they came 
under cross-fire and had to hurry to get out of it. Kinkel was unable 
to keep up and went into a farm-house, where he was taken prisoner 
by the Prussians and ill-treated; Moll received a shot in the abdomen, 
was also taken prisoner and died later of his wound. Zychlinski too 
had been hit in the neck by a ricochet, but this did not stop him 
staying with his corps. 
While the main body remained where it was and Willich rode to 
another part of the battlefield, I hastened to the Murg bridge lower 
down than Rothenfels, which formed a sort of assembly point. I 
wanted news of Gernsbach. But even before I reached there I saw 
the smoke rising from Gernsbach which was in flames, and on the 
bridge itself I learned that they had heard the cannon-roar from 
there. Later I returned to this bridge a few more times; each time the 
news about Gernsbach was worse and each time there were more 
Baden regular troops assembled behind the bridge, demoralised 
already even though they had scarcely been under fire. Eventually I 
learned that the enemy was already in Gaggenau. It was now high 
time to face up to him. Willich marched over the Murg with the corps 
in order to take up position opposite Rothenfels and took with him 
another four artillery pieces which had just happened to come his 
way. I went to fetch our two companies of skirmishers, who in the 
meantime had pushed far ahead. Everywhere I met regular troops, 
mostly without officers. One detachment was led by a doctor, who 
made use of the occasion to introduce himself to me with the 
following words: "You must know me, I am Neuhaus, chief of the 
Thuringian movement!" These good fellows had beaten the 
Prussians on all fronts and were now on their way back because they 
could no longer see any of the enemy. Our companies were nowhere 
to be found—they had made their way back through Rothenfels for 
the same reason—and I returned to the bridge. Here I met Mersy 
with his staff and troops. I begged him to give me at least a few 
companies with which to support Willich. "Take the whole division if 
you can still do something with them," was the reply. The same 
soldiers who had driven back the enemy at all points and who had 

=====第253页=====
230 Frederick Engels 
only been on their feet for five hours now lay around in the 
meadows, dispersed, demoralised and fit for nothing. The news that 
they had been outflanked in Gernsbach had done for them. I went 
my way. A company I came across on its way back from Michelbach 
was not to be moved either. When I found the corps again at our old 
headquarters, the fugitive forces of the Palatinate—Pistol Zinn and 
his gang, now with muskets, by the way—came pressing on from 
Gaggenau. While Willich had been looking for and had found a 
position for the artillery, a position that dominated the Murg valley 
and offered considerable advantages for simultaneous skirmishing, 
the artillerists had run away with the cannon and the captain had 
been unable to do anything to stop them. They were already back 
with Mersy at the bridge. At the same time Willich showed me a note 
from Mersy in which the latter informed him that everything was lost 
and that he was going to pull back to Oos. We had no other choice 
but to do the same and we marched into the mountains at once. It 
was about seven o'clock. 
At Gernsbach things had taken the following course. Peucker's 
imperial troops, whom our patrols had already sighted the day 
before at Herrenalb on Württemberg territory, had taken the 
Württemberg troops drawn up at the frontier with them and 
attacked Gernsbach on the afternoon of the 29th, after using 
treachery to make our advanced troops withdraw; they approached 
them with the call not to shoot, saying they were brothers, and then 
fired off a volley at eighty paces. They then shelled Gernsbach, 
setting it on fire, and when the flames got out of hand Herr Sigel, 
who had been sent by Mieroslawski to  hold  the position at any price, 
Herr Sigel himself gave the order that Herr Blenker should make a 
fighting retreat with his troops. Herr Sigel will no more deny this 
now than he did in Berne, when one of Herr Blenker's adjutants 
related the curious fact in his, Herr Sigel's, and Willich's presence. 
With this order to make a "fighting"(!) surrender of the key to the 
whole Murg position, the battle along the whole line, and with it the 
Baden army's last position, was needless to say lost. 
The Prussians incidentally did not particularly enhance their 
reputation by winning the battle of Rastatt. We had 13,000 troops, 
for the most part demoralised and with few exceptions abominably 
led; their army, together with the imperial troops that marched on 
Gernsbach, numbered at least 60,000 men. In spite of this colossal 
superiority they did not venture a serious frontal attack, but defeated 
us through cowardice and treachery by encroaching upon the 
neutral territory of Württemberg, which was closed to us. But even 
this piece of treachery would not have done them much good, at least 

=====第254页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 231 
to begin with, and in the long run would not have saved them the 
necessity of a decisive frontal attack, had not Gernsbach been so 
incredibly badly manned and had not Herr Sigel given the priceless 
order spoken of above. There cannot be any doubt that the by no 
means formidable position would have been snatched from us the 
next day; but victory would have cost the Prussians many more 
casualties and would have done endless harm to their military 
reputation. For this reason they preferred to violate Württemberg's 
neutrality, and Württemberg calmly let it happen. 
By now barely 450 men strong, we marched back through the 
mountains to Oos. The road was covered with troops in the wildest 
disarray, with wagons, artillery, etc.,all in the greatest confusion. We 
marched through and rested in Sinzheim. The next morning we 
assembled a number of fugitives the other side of Bühl and spent the 
night in Oberachern. That day the last battle took place; the 
German-Polish Legion, alongside some other troops from Becker's 
division, beat back the imperial troops at Oos and captured from 
them a (Mecklenburg) howitzer which they got safely into Switzer­
land. 
The army was completely disbanded; Mieroslawski and the other 
Poles laid down their commands; Colonel Oborski already on the 
evening of the 29th left his post on the battlefield. However, this 
momentary disbandment did not really mean much. The Palatinate 
forces had already been disbanded three or four times and each time 
had formed up anew tant bien que mal. A retreat spun out as long as 
possible, accompanied by the call-up of all the age groups in the 
territories to be ceded and a rapid concentration of the conscripts 
from Upper Baden at Freiburg and Donaueschingen, were two 
measures still to be tried. This would soon have restored order and 
discipline to a tolerable level and made possible a last hopeless but 
honourable battle on the Kaiserstuhl near Freiburg or at Donaue-
schingen. But the chiefs of the civil as well as the military 
administration were more demoralised than the soldiers. They 
abandoned the army and the entire movement to their fate and fell 
further and further back, dejected, distraught and shattered. 
Since the attack on Gernsbach, the fear of being outflanked 
through Württemberg territory had spread everywhere and contrib­
uted greatly to the general demoralisation. Willich's corps now went 
to cover the Württemberg frontier, taking two mountain howitzers 
through the Kappel valley into the mountains—several other 
artillery pieces assigned to us did not want to go any further than 
Kappel. Our march through the Black Forest, in which we did not 
sight the enemy, was a veritable pleasure tour. On July 1 we arrived 

=====第255页=====
232 Frederick Engels 
at Oppenau via Allerheiligen and on the 2nd at Wolfach via the 
Hundskopf. Here we learned on July 3 that the government was in 
Freiburg and that the abandonment of that town also was being 
considered. We therefore set out for there at once. We intended to 
force Messrs. the Regents and the high command, which hero Sigel 
now led, not to relinquish Freiburg without a fight. It was already late 
when we marched off from Wolfach, and so it was not until late that 
evening that we arrived at Waldkirch. Here we learned that Freiburg 
had already been relinquished and that government and headquar­
ters had been removed to Donaueschingen. At the same time we 
received the positive order to occupy and entrench ourselves in the 
Simonswald valley and set up our headquarters in Furtwangen. We 
therefore had to go back to Bleibach. 
Herr Sigel had now drawn up his troops behind the Black Forest 
mountain ridge. The defence line was supposed to stretch from 
Lörrach via Todtnau and Furtwangen to the Württemberg frontier, 
in the direction of Schramberg. The left flank was formed by Mersy 
and Blenker, who marched through the Rhine valley towards 
Lörrach; then followed Herr Doll, a former commis  voyageur,  who in 
his capacity as one of Hecker's generals had been appointed 
divisional commander and was posted in the region of the Höllental; 
then our corps in Furtwangen and the Simonswald valley and, lastly 
on the right flank, Becker at St. Georgen and Triberg. On the other 
side of the mountains at Donaueschingen was Herr Sigel with the 
reserve. The forces, considerably weakened by desertion and not 
reinforced by any contingents of conscripts, still amounted to 9,000 
men and 40 cannon. 
The orders which reached us one after the other from headquar­
ters in Freiburg, Neustadt on the Gutach and Donaueschingen 
breathed the most resolute defiance of death. Though the enemy 
was expected to come through Württemberg again and attack us in 
the rear via Rottweil and Villingen, there was a determination to 
defeat him and to hold the Black Forest ridge come what may, in fact 
to do so, as it said in one of these orders, "almost without any regard 
for the movements of the enemy", in other words, Herr Sigel had 
ensured for himself a glorious retreat in four hours from 
Donaueschingen onto Swiss territory; he could then sit back in 
Schaffhausen and wait in perfect calm for news of what had become 
of us, encircled in the mountains. We shall soon see what a merry 
end this defiance of death came to. 
On the 4th we arrived at Furtwangen with two companies (160 
men).  The rest was employed to occupy the Simonswald valley and 
the passes of Gütenbach and St. Märgen. Via the last-mentioned 

=====第256页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 233 
place we were in contact with Doll's corps, via Schönwald with 
Becker. All the passes were blocked.—We stayed in Furtwangen on 
the 5th. On the 6th news came from Becker that the Prussians were 
advancing on Villingen, 3 together with the request to attack them via 
Vöhrenbach and thus support Sigel's operation. At the same time he 
informed us that his main corps was duly entrenched in Triberg, 
whither he himself would go as soon as Villingen was occupied by 
Sigel. 
There could be no question of an attack from our side. With fewer 
than 450 men we had three square miles to occupy and therefore 
could not spare a single man. We had to stay where we were and 
informed Becker to this effect. Soon afterwards a dispatch arrived 
from headquarters: Willich was to go to Donaueschingen at once and 
assume command of the entire artillery. We were just getting ready 
to hurry over there when a column of the people's militia, followed 
by artillery and several other battalions of the people's militia, came 
marching into Furtwangen. It was Becker with his corps. His men 
had grown rebellious, it was said. I made enquiries of a staff officer 
who was a friend of mine, "Major" Nerlinger, and learned the 
following: He, Nerlinger, had the position at Triberg under his 
command and was having the trenches dug when the officer staff 
delivered him a written declaration, signed by them all. It said that 
the troops were rebellious and that unless the order to march off 
were given at once, they would leave with all the troops. I took a look 
at the signatures. It was the valiant Dreher-Obermüller Battalion 
again! Nerlinger had no choice but to inform Becker and march to 
Furtwangen. Becker set out at once to catch them up and so arrived 
with all his troops at Furtwangen, where the faint-hearted officers 
and soldiers were received with immense laughter by our volunteers. 
They were ashamed of themselves and in the evening Becker was 
able to lead them back to their positions again. 
In the meantime we went to Donaueschingen, followed by the 
Besançon company. There were already swarms of Prussians right 
up to the highway; Villingen was occupied by them. We nevertheless 
got through unchallenged and towards ten o'clock in the evening the 
Besançons arrived as well. In Donaueschingen I found d'Ester and 
learned from him that in the Constituent Assembly in Freiburg 178 
Herr Struve had demanded an immediate move to Switzerland, 
saying everything was lost, and that hero Blenker had followed this 
advice and had already crossed over onto Swiss territory that 
This and the following facts are mentioned by Joh. Ph. Becker and Chr. Essellen 
in their Geschichte der süddeutschen Mai-Revolution des Jahres 1849,  Genf,  1849.— Ed. 

=====第257页=====
234 Frederick Engels 
morning at Basle. Both of these reports were quite correct. Hero 
Blenker had gone to Basle on July 6, though it was he that was 
farthest from the enemy. He had paused only to make a final 
number of requisitions so odd that they put him in bad odour with 
Herr Sfgel and later with the Swiss authorities. And hero Struve, the 
same hero Struve who even on June 29 had declared that Herr 
Brentano and all those wanting to negotiate with the enemy were 
traitors to the fatherland, 3 was so shattered three days later, on July 
2, that he was not ashamed to put the following motion to a session in 
camera of the Baden Constituent Assembly: 
"In order that Upper Baden will not suffer the same horrors of war as Lower 
Baden and to prevent a great deal more precious blood being spilt, and since it is 
necessary to save what can be saved(!), therefore everyone participating in the 
revolution, together with the Provincial Assembly, should have his salary or wage paid 
up to July 10 with appropriate travelling expenses and all should withdraw to Swiss 
territory together with cash, provisions, arms, etc.!" 
The valiant Struve proposed this fine motion on July 2, when we 
were in Wolf ach up in the Black Forest, 10 hours away from 
Freiburg and 20 hours away from the Swiss frontier! Herr Struve is 
naive enough to relate this incident himself and even to boast of it in 
his Geschichte*  (p. 237 ff). The only consequence that the acceptance 
of such a motion could have was that the Prussians would press us as 
hard as possible in order to "save what could.be saved", that  is, to do 
us out of our cash, artillery and provisions, since this resolution 
assured them that there was no danger in vigorous pursuit, and that 
our troops would then immediately disband en masse, and whole 
corps make off on their own to Switzerland, as actually happened. 
Our corps would have come off worst; it was on Baden territory up 
to the 12th and was paid up to the 17th. 
Herr Sigel, instead of re-taking Villingen, at first resolved to take 
up position at Hüfingen the other side of Donaueschingen and await 
the enemy. The same evening, however, it was decided to march to 
Stühlingen, close by the Swiss frontier. We hastily sent dispatch-
riders to Furtwangen, to inform our own corps and that of Becker. 
Both were likewise to make their way to Stühlingen via Neustadt and 
Bonndorf.  Willich went to Neustadt to meet his corps and I stayed 
with the Besançon company. We spent the night in Riedböhringen 
and arrived at Stühlingen on the afternoon of the next day, July 7. 
On the 8th Herr Sigel held a review of his half-disbanded army, 
recommended it not to ride in future but to march (at the frontier!) 
a The reference is to a statement (in the form of a motion) made by Struve in the 
Constituent Assembly on June 28, 1849.— Ed. 
G. Struve, Geschichte der drei Volkserhebungen in Baden, Bern, 1849.— Ed. 

=====第258页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 235 
and departed. He left behind for us half a battery and an order for 
Willich. 
In the meantime news of the general retreat had been sent from 
Furtwangen first to Becker and then to our own companies stationed 
to the fore. Our corps gathered first in Furtwangen and met Willich 
in Neustadt. Becker, who was closer to Furtwangen than were our 
outlying troops, still did not arrive till later and took the same road. 
He ran into entrenchments which held up his march and which were 
later said in the Swiss press to have been dug by our corps. That is 
incorrect; our corps only blocked the roads on the other side of the 
Black Forest ridge, and not on the way from Triberg to Furtwangen, 
which it never occupied. Besides, our volunteers did not march off 
from Furtwangen until Becker's advance guard had arrived there. 
In Donaueschingen it was agreed that the remains of the entire 
army should gather on the other side of the Wutach, from Eggingen 
to Thiengen, and there await the approach of the enemy. Here, with 
our flanks abutting upon Swiss territory, we could attempt a last 
battle with our considerable artillery. We could even wait and see 
whether the Prussians would violate Swiss territory and thus bring 
the Swiss into the war. But how amazed we were when Willich 
arrived and we read in the valiant Sigel's order: 
"The main body of the army is to proceed to Thiengen and Waldshut and take up 
a firm position there(H). Endeavour to maintain the position (at Stühlingen and 
Eggingen) as long as possible." 
A "firm position" at Thiengen and Waldshut, the Rhine to the 
rear and heights accessible to the enemy in front! The only possible 
interpretation of this was: We intend to cross the Säckingen bridge 
into Switzerland. And this was the same hero Sigel who had said on 
the occasion of Struve's motion that if it were passed then he, Sigel, 
would be the first to rebel. 
We now occupied the position behind the Wutach itself and 
distributed our troops from Eggingen to Wutöschingen, where our 
headquarters were. Here we received the following even more 
priceless document from Herr Sigel: 
"Order. Thiengen headquarters, July 8, 1849.—To Colonel Willich in Eggingen. 
Since the canton of Schaffhausen is already taking up a hostile stance towards me, it is 
impossible for me to take up the position we discussed. You will order your 
movements accordingly and move in the direction of Griessen, Lauchringen and 
Thiengen. I am marching off from here tomorrow, either to Waldshut or beyond the 
Alb"  (i.e. to Säckingen). "General-in-Chief SigeL" 
That capped it all. That evening Willich and I went to Thiengen, 
where the "General Quartermaster" Schlinke admitted that they 
really were going to Säckingen and thence over the Rhine. At first 

=====第259页=====
236 Frederick Engels 
Sigel tried to come the "general-in-chief", but Willich did not fall for 
that and eventually prevailed upon him to give the order to turn 
round and march on Griessen. The pretext for the march to 
Säckingen was a junction with Doll, who had marched thither, and 
an allegedly strong position. The position, evidently the same one 
from which Moreau gave battle in 1800, 179 had only one drawback: it 
faced in quite another direction from that where our enemy was 
coming from; and as for the noble Doll, he did not hesitate to prove 
that he could go to Switzerland even without Herr Sigel. 
Between the cantons of Zurich and Schaffhausen lies a small strip 
of Baden territory, with the villages of Jestetten and Lottstetten, 
completely closed in by Switzerland apart from a narrow access at 
Baltersweil. Here the last stand was to be made. The heights on both 
sides of the road behind Baltersweil presented excellent positions for 
our artillery, and our infantry was still numerous enough to cover 
them if necessary until they had reached Swiss territory. It was 
agreed that we should wait here and see whether the Prussians would 
attack us or starve us out. The main body of the army, to which 
Becker had attached  himself,  went into camp here. Willich had 
selected the position for the artillery (we later found their park 
where their battle-position was to be). We ourselves formed the 
rearguard and slowly followed after the main body of the army. 
On the evening of the 9th we went to Erzingen, on the 10th to 
Riedern. On that day a general council of war was held in the camp. 
Willich alone spoke for continued defence, Sigel, Becker and others 
for a withdrawal onto Swiss territory. A Swiss commissioner, Colonel 
Kurz, I believe, was present and declared that Switzerland would not 
grant asylum if another battle were fought. When it came to the vote 
Willich was alone with two or three officers. Apart from him, no one 
from our corps was present. 
While Willich was still in the camp the half-battery posted with us 
received orders to move off; it departed without so much as a 
mention being made to us. All the other troops apart from us also 
received orders to go into the camp. During the night I went once 
more with Willich to the headquarters in Lottstetten; when we were 
on our way back, at daybreak, we met on the road all those who had 
struck camp and were trundling towards the frontier in the most 
frantic confusion. The same day, early on the morning of the 11th, 
Herr Sigel crossed onto Swiss territory with his troops near Rafz and 
Herr Becker with his near Rheinau. We concentrated our corps, 
followed into the camp and from there to Jestetten. While we were 
there, at about midday, an orderly officer brought us a letter Sigel 
had written from Eglisau. In it he said that he was already safely in 

=====第260页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 237 
Switzerland, that the officers had retained their sabres and that we 
should join them as soon as we could. They did not give us a thought 
until they were on neutral ground! 
We marched through Lottstetten to the frontier, bivouacked that 
night still on German soil, discharged our rifles on the morning of 
the 12th and then set foot on Swiss territory, the last of the army of 
Baden and the Palatinate to do so. On the same day and at the same 
time,  Constance was abandoned by the corps stationed there. A week 
later Rastatt fell through treachery and the counter-revolution had 
for the moment reconquered Germany down to the last corner. 
* * * 
The campaign for the Imperial Constitution foundered because of 
its own half-heartedness and its wretched internal state. Ever since 
the defeat of June 1848 the question for the civilised part of the 
European continent has stood thus: either the rule of the 
revolutionary proletariat or the rule of the classes who ruled before 
February. A middle road is no longer possible. In Germany in 
particular the bourgeoisie has shown itself incapable of ruling; it 
could only maintain its rule over the people by surrendering it once 
more to the aristocracy and the bureaucracy. In the Imperial 
Constitution the petty bourgeoisie, in alliance with the German 
ideology, attempted an impossible arrangement aimed at postponing 
the decisive struggle. The attempt was bound to fail: those who were 
serious about the movement were not serious about the Imperial 
Constitution, and those who were serious about the Imperial 
Constitution were not serious about the movement. 
This does not mean to say, however, that the consequences of the 
campaign for the Imperial Constitution were any the less significant. 
Above all the campaign simplified the situation. It cut short an 
endless series of attempts at reconciliation; now that it has been lost, 
only the somewhat constitutionalised feudal-bureaucratic monarchy 
or the true revolution can be victorious. And the revolution can no 
longer be brought to a conclusion in Germany except with the 
complete rule of the proletariat. 
The Imperial Constitution campaign in addition contributed 
considerably to the development of class antagonisms in those 
German provinces where they were not yet sharply developed. 
Especially in Baden. In Baden, as we have seen, there existed hardly 
any class antagonisms at all before the insurrection. Hence the ac­
knowledged supremacy of the petty bourgeois over all other class­
es in the opposition, hence the apparent unanimity of the popula-

=====第261页=====
238 Frederick Engels 
tion, hence the speed with which the Badeners, like the Viennese, 
pass from opposition to insurrection, attempt an uprising at every op­
portunity and do not even shy away from a battle in the field with 
a regular army. But as soon as the insurrection had broken out, 
the classes emerged in definite outline and the petty bourgeois sepa­
rated themselves from the workers and peasants. Through their 
representative Brentano they disgraced themselves for all time. 
They themselves have been driven to such despair by the Prussian 
dictatorship of the sabre that they now prefer any regime, even that 
of the workers, to the present oppression; they will take a much 
more active part in the next movement than in any previous one; but 
fortunately they never again will be able to play the independent, 
dominant role they played under Brentano's dictatorship. The work­
ers and peasants, who suffer just as much as the petty 
bourgeois under the present dictatorship of the sabre, did not go 
through the experience of the last uprising for nothing; they who 
besides having their fallen and murdered brothers to avenge will 
take care that when the next insurrection comes it is  they  and not the 
petty bourgeois who get the reins in their hands. And even though 
no experience of insurrection can substitute for the development of 
classes, which is only achieved by the operation of large-scale 
industry over a period of years, Baden has none the less through its 
latest uprising and its consequences joined the ranks of those German 
provinces which in the coming revolution will play one of the most 
important roles. 
Looked at from the political point of view, the campaign for the 
Imperial Constitution was a failure from the very start. The same is 
true from the military point of view. Its only prospect of succeeding 
lay outside of Germany, in the victory of the republicans in Paris on 
June 13, and June 13 came to nothing. After this event the campaign 
could be nothing but a more or less bloody farce. And that is all it 
was. Stupidity and treachery ruined it completely. With the 
exception of a small handful, the military chiefs were either traitors 
or intrusive, ignorant and cowardly place-hunters, and the few 
exceptions were everywhere left in the lurch both by the others and 
by the Brentano government. In the coming convulsion anyone who 
can produce no other title than that of one of Hecker's generals or an 
officer of the Imperial Constitution deserves to be shown the door at 
once.  As the chiefs, so the soldiers. The people of Baden possess the 
very finest fighting elements; during the insurrection these elements 
were from the start so demoralised and neglected that there arose 
the wretched situation which we have broadly described. The whole 
"revolution" was reduced to a veritable comedy and the sole 

=====第262页=====
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 239 
consolation was that the opponent, although six times as strong, had 
six times as little courage. 
But this comedy came to a tragic end, thanks to the blood-
thirstiness of the counter-revolution. The same warriors who on the 
march or on the battlefield were more than once seized by panic, 
died in the ditches of Rastatt like heroes. Not a single one of them 
pleaded, not a single one of them trembled. The German people will 
not forget the executions and the casemates of Rastatt, they will not 
forget the great gentlemen who ordered these infamies, but neither 
will they forget the traitors who through their cowardice were 
responsible for them: the Brentanos of Karlsruhe and of Frankfurt. 

=====第263页=====
240 
Frederick Engels 
TO THE HUNGARIAN REFUGEE COMMITTEE 
IN LONDON 
[Draft] 
[London, late February 1850] 
To the Hungarian Refugee Committee in London 
Citizens Kilinski arid Ryschka have applied for assistance to the 
German Refugee Committee.180 Asked for their papers, they 
produced two certificates from Mr. Fr. Pulszky, copies of which are 
enclosed herewith.181 According to these certificates they are not 
German, but Hungarian refugees since they were recruited by the 
competent authority here for Hungarian service and therefore come 
within the province not of the German, but of the Hungarian 
Committee. However, they maintain that they received 10 shillings 
from that Committee together with notification that it could give 
them no further assistance. Since, however, it will hardly do to leave 
these people destitute on the street, we hereby take the liberty of 
inquiring whether this is right, and whether the Hungarian 
Committee may, perhaps, have had some special reason for refusing 
assistance to the two citizens named above. 
(Copy of the certificates.) 
First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, Printed according to the manu-
Works, first Russ. ed., Vol. XXV, Moscow, script 
1934 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第264页=====
241 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
[REVIEWS FROM THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG. 
POLITISCH-ÖKONOMISCHE REVUE No. 2] 182 
I 
G. FR. DAUMER, DIE RELIGION DES NEUEN WELTALTERS. 
VERSUCH EINER COMBINATORISCH-APHORISTISCHEN GRUNDLEGUNG, 
2 BDE, HAMBURG, 1850 
"An otherwise free-thinking man in Nuremberg who was not at all insensitive to the 
new had a monstrous hatred of democratic intrigues. He was a devotee of Ronge, 
whose portrait he had in his room. But when he heard that Ronge had sided with the 
democrats he removed the portrait to the lavatory. He once said: 'Oh, if only we lived 
under the Russian knout, how happy I would feel!' He died during the disturbances 
and I presume that although he was already old, it was despondency and grief at the 
course of events that led him to the grave." (Vol. II, pp. 321-22.) 
If, instead of dying, this pitiable Nuremberg philistine had 
gleaned his scraps of thought from Correspondent von und für 
Deutschland, from Schiller and Goethe, from old schoolbooks, and 
modern lending-library books he would have spared himself the 
trouble of dying and Herr Daumer the hard work of writing his 
two volumes of "combinatory and aphoristic foundation". We, of 
course, should not then have had the edifying opportunity to 
become acquainted with the "religion of the new age" and at the 
same time with its first martyr. 
Herr Daumer's work is divided into two parts, a "preliminary" 
and a "main" one. In the preliminary part the faithful Eckart of Ger­
man philosophy expresses his profound concern that even thinking 
and educated Germans have let themselves be led astray for the past 
two years and have given up the inestimable achievements of thought 
for mere "external" revolutionary activity. He considers the pres­
ent moment appropriate to appeal once more to the better feelings 
of the nation and points out what it means so light-mindedly to 
abandon all German culture, through which alone the German 
burgher was still anything at all. He summarises the whole content of 

=====第265页=====
242 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
German culture in the pithiest sayings that the casket of his erudition 
contains and thus discredits German culture no less than German 
philosophy. His anthology of the loftiest products of the German 
mind surpasses in platitude and triviality even the most ordinary 
reading book for young ladies in the educated walks of life. From 
Goethe's and Schiller's philistine sallies against the first French 
Revolution, from the classic "Dangerous it is to rouse the lion"a 
down to the most modern literature, the high priest of the new 
religion zealously digs up every passage in which German pedantry 
stiffens with sleepy ill-humour against the historical movement it 
loathes. Authorities of the weight of a Friedrich Raumer, Berthold 
Auerbach, Lochner, Moriz Carrière, Alfred Meissner, Krug, Dingel-
stedt, Ronge, Nürnberger Bote, h Max Waldau, Sternberg, German 
Maurer, Luise Aston, Eckermann, Noack, Blätter für literarische 
Unterhaltung, A. Kunze, Ghillany, Th. Mundt, Saphir, Gutzkow, a 
certain "née Gatterer" and the like are the pillars on which the 
temple of the new religion rests. The revolutionary movement, 
which is here declared anathema in so many voices, is confined for 
Herr Daumer on the one hand to the tritest prattle about politics 
as carried on in Nuremberg under the auspices of Correspondent von 
und für Deutschland, and on the other hand to mob outrages of which 
he has the most fantastic idea. The sources on which he draws are 
worthy of being placed on a par with those already mentioned: side 
by side with the oft-named Nuremberg Correspondent figure the 
Bamberger Zeitung, the Munich Landbötin, c the Augsburg Allgemeine 
Zeitung and others. The same philistine meanness that sees nothing 
in the proletarian but a disgusting, corrupt ragamuffin and which 
rubs its hands with satisfaction at the Paris massacres in June 1848, 
when more than 3,000 of those "ragamuffins" were but­
chered—that same meanness is indignant at the raillery of which 
sentimental societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals are the 
object. 
"The frightful tortures," Herr Daumer exclaims on page 293 of Volume I, "that 
unfortunate beasts suffer at the cruel, tyrannous hand of man are for these barbarians 
'trifles'  that nobody should bother about!" 
The entire class struggle of our times seems to Herr Daumer only 
a struggle of "coarseness" against "culture". Instead of explaining it 
by the historical conditions of these classes, he finds its origin in the 
Schiller, Das Lied von der Glocke, 26th stanza.— Ed. 
b Nürnberger Courier.—Ed. 
c Bayerische Landbôtin.—Ed. 

=====第266页=====
G. Fr. Daumer, Die Religion des neuen Weltalters 243 
seditious doings of a few malevolent individuals who incite the base 
appetites of the populace against the educated estates. 
"This democratic reformism ... excites the envy, the rage, the rapacity of the lower 
classes of society against the upper classes—a fine way of making man better and 
nobler and founding a higher stage of culture!" (Vol. I, p[p]. [288-] 289.) 
Herr Daumer does not even know what struggles "of the lower 
classes of society against the upper classes" it took to bring forth even 
a Nuremberg "stage of culture" and to make possible a Moloch-
fighter à la Daumer. 3 
The second, "main", part contains the positive aspect of the new 
religion. It voices all the annoyance of the German philosopher over 
the oblivion into which his struggles against Christianity have fallen, 
over the people's indifference towards religion, the only object 
worthy to be considered by the philosopher. To restore credit to his 
trade, which has been ousted by competition, all our world-wise man 
can do is to invent a new religion, after long barking against the old. 
But this new religion is confined, in accordance with the first part, to 
a continuation of the anthology of maxims, album verses and versus 
memorialesh of German philistine culture. The suras of the new 
Koran183 are nothing but a series of phrases morally palliating and 
poetically embellishing the existing German conditions—phrases 
which, though divested of the immediately religious form, are 
none the less interwoven with the old religion. 
"Completely new world conditions and world relations can arise only through new 
religions. Examples and proofs of what religions are capable of are Christianity and 
Islam; most clear and palpable evidence of the powerlessness and futility of 
abstract, exclusive politics are the movements started in the year 1848." (Vol. I, 
p.313.) 
This weighty proposition immediately brings out the shallowness 
and ignorance of the German "thinker" who takes the small German 
and specifically Bavarian "March achievements" for the European 
movement of 1848 and 1849 and who demands that the first, in 
themselves very superficial, eruptions of a gradually developing and 
concentrating major revolution should bring forth "completely new 
world conditions and world relations". The "world-wise" Daumer 
reduces the whole complicated social struggle, the first skirmishes of 
which were fought between Paris and Debrecen, Berlin and Palermo 
a An allusion to Daumer's books Der Feuer- und Molochdienst der alten Hebräer... 
Braunschweig, 1842, and Die Geheimnisse des christlichen Alterthums, Bd. 1-2, 
Hamburg, 1847.— Ed. 
b Memorial verses.— Ed. 

=====第267页=====
244 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
in the last two years, to the fact that "in January 1849 the hopes of the 
constitutional societies of Erlangen were postponed indefinitely" 
(Vol. I, p. 312) and to fear of a new struggle that could once more be 
unpleasantly shocking for Herr Daumer in his occupations with 
Hafiz, Mohammed 3 and Berthold Auerbach. 
The same shameless superficiality allows Herr Daumer to ig­
nore completely that Christianity was preceded by the total collapse 
of the ancient' "world conditions" of which Christianity was the 
mere expression; that "completely new world conditions" arose not 
internally through Christianity but only when the Huns and the 
Germans fell "externally" on the corpse of the Roman Empire; that 
after the Germanic invasion the "new world conditions" did not 
adapt themselves to Christianity but that Christianity itself changed 
with every new phase of these world conditions. We should like 
Herr Daumer to give us an example of the old world conditions chang­
ing with a new religion without the mightiest "external" and ab­
stract political convulsions setting in at the same time. 
It is clear that with every great historical upheaval of social 
conditions the outlooks and ideas of men, and consequently their 
religious ideas, are revolutionised. The difference between the 
present upheaval and all earlier ones lies in the very fact that man 
has at last found out the secret of this process of historical upheaval 
and hence, instead of once again exalting this practical, "external", 
process in the rapturous form of a new religion, divests himself of all 
religion. 
After the gentle moral doctrines of the new world wisdom, which 
are even superior to Knigge1" inasmuch as they contain all that is 
necessary not only on intercourse with men, but also on intercourse 
with animals—after the Proverbs of Solomon comes the Song of the 
new Solomon. 
"Nature and woman are the really divine, as distinct from the human and man.... 
The sacrifice of the human to the natural, of the male to the female, is the genuine, 
the only true meekness and self-externalisation, the highest, nay, the only virtue and 
piety." (Vol. II, p. 257.) 
We see here that the superficiality and ignorance of the 
speculating founder of a religion is transformed into a very 
pronounced cowardice. Herr Daumer flees before the historical 
tragedy that is threatening him too closely to alleged nature,  i. e. to a 
stupid rustic idyll, and preaches the cult of the female to cloak his 
own womanish resignation. 
a G. Fr. Daumer, Hafis, Hamburg, 1846; Mahomed und sein Werk, Hamburg, 
1848.—  Ed. 
A. Knigge, Ueber den Umgang mit Menschen, Hannover, 1804.— Ed. 

=====第268页=====
G. Fr. Daumer, Die Religion des neuen Weltalters 245 
Herr Daumer's cult of nature, by the way, is a peculiar one. He 
manages to be reactionary even in comparison with Christianity. He 
tries to restore the old pre-Christian natural religion in a modernised 
form. Thus he of course achieves nothing but Christian-Germanic-
patriarchal drivel on nature expressed, for example, as follows: 
"Nature holy, Mother sweet, 
In Thy footsteps place my feet. 
My baby hand to Thy hand clings, 
Hold me as in leading strings!"3 
"Such things have gone out of fashion, but not to the benefit of culture, progress 
or human felicity." (Vol. II, p. 157.) 
We see that this cult of nature is limited to the Sunday walks of an 
inhabitant of a small provincial town who childishly wonders at the 
cuckoo laying its eggs in another bird's nest (Vol. II, p. 40), at tears 
being designed to keep the surface of the eyes moist (Vol. II, p. 73), 
and so on, and finally trembles with reverence as he recites 
Klopstock's Ode to Springb  to his children. (Vol. II, p. 23 et seqq.) 
There is no mention, of course, of modern natural science, which, 
with modern industry, has revolutionised the whole of nature and 
put an end to man's childish attitude towards nature as well as to 
other forms of childishness. But instead we get mysterious hints and 
astonished philistine notions about Nostradamus' prophecies, 
second sight in Scotsmen and animal magnetism. 184 For the rest, it 
would be desirable that Bavaria's sluggish peasant economy, the 
ground on which grow priests and Daumers alike, should at last be 
ploughed up by modern cultivation and modern machines. 
It is the same with the cult of the female as with the cult of nature. 
Herr Daumer naturally does not say a word about the present soci­
al position of women; on the contrary it is a question only of the fe­
male as such. He tries to console women for their civic destitution 
by making them the object of a rhetorical cult which is as empty as 
it would fain be mysterious. Thus he seeks to comfort them by tell­
ing them that marriage puts an end to their talents through their hav­
ing to take care of the children (Vol. II, p. 237), that they retain the 
ability to suckle babes even until the age of sixty (Vol. II, p. 251), and 
so on. Herr Daumer calls this the "devotion of the male to the 
female". In order to find the necessary ideal women characters for 
his male devotion in his native country, he is forced to resort to 
various aristocratic ladies of the last century. Thus his cult of the 
a From F. Stolberg's poem "An die Natur", which Daumer quotes in his 
book.— Ed. 
° Daumer quotes Klopstock's ode "Dem Allgegenwärtigen". — Ed. 
10-1124 

=====第269页=====
246 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
woman is reduced to the depressed attitude of a man of letters to 
respected patronesses— Wilhelm Meister. 3 
The "culture" whose decay Herr Daumer laments is that of the 
time in which Nuremberg flourished as a free Reichsstadt, in which 
Nuremberg's industry—that cross between art and craftsmanship 
—played a role of importance, the German petty-bourgeois 
[Kleinbürgertum] culture which is perishing with the petty bour­
geoisie. If the decline of former classes such as the knighthood 
could offer material for great tragic works of art, philistinism can 
achieve nothing but impotent expressions of fanatic malignity and a 
collection of Sancho Panza maxims and rules of wisdom. Herr 
Daumer is the dry, absolutely humourless continuation of Hans 
Sachs.  German philosophy, wringing its hands and lamenting at the 
deathbed of its foster father, German philistinism—such is the 
touching picture opened up to us by the religion of the new age. 
Written in January and February 1850 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue 
No. 2, 1850 
Cf. Goethe, Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre. —Ed. 

=====第270页=====
247 
il 
LUDWIG SIMON OF TRIER, 
EIN WORT DES RECHTS FÜR ALLE 
REICHSVERFASSUNGSKÄMPFER 
AN DIE DEUTSCHEN GESCHWORNEN, 
FRANKFURT AM MAIN, 1849 
"We had voted against the inheritability of the office of Supreme Head of the 
Empire; on the next day we abstained from voting. When the whole result lay before 
us, however, as it had emerged from the will of the majority of an assembly elected on 
the basis of universal franchise, we declared that we should submit. Had we not done 
so we should have proved that we did not fit into civil society in general." a (p. 43.) 
According to Herr L. Simon "of Trier", therefore, the most 
extreme members of the Frankfurt Assembly no longer "fitted into 
civil society in general". Herr L. Simon "of Trier" thus appears to 
conceive the bounds of civil society in general as being even narrower 
than the bounds of St. Paul's Church. 185 
Incidentally, in his confession of April 11, 1849, Herr Simon had 
the tact to reveal the secret of both his former opposition and his 
later conversion. 
"Cold mists have arisen from the gloomy waters of pre-March diplomacy. These 
mists will gather into clouds and we shall have a thunderstorm pregnant with ruin, 
threatening to strike first of all the tower of the church in which we are sitting. Take 
heed and arrange for a lightning-conductor to conduct the lightning away from 
yourselvesV'^ 
That is, gentlemen, it is now our skins that are at stake! 
The beggarly proposals, the wretched compromises offered to the 
majority by the Frankfurt Left on the question of the Emperor and 
after the humiliated return of the deputation to the Emperor,186 
merely in order to retain them in the Assembly, the dirty attempts at 
a Here and below the italics in quotations are mostly by the reviewers.— Ed. 
From Ludwig Simon's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on April 11, 
1849.  Quoted from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 271 (second edition), April 13, 
1849.—  Ed. 
10* 

=====第271页=====
248 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
agreement which they were at that time making in all directions, all 
receive their higher consecration in the following words of Herr 
Simon: 
"The events of the past year have made the word agreement the butt of a very 
disquieting scorn. It is hardly possible to speak of it any longer without being derided. 
Yet of two possibilities only one can be realised: either people agree with one another, 
or they fall upon one another like wild animals." (p. 43.) 
That is, either the parties concerned fight their battle to the finish, 
or they postpone it by means of any compromise they choose. The 
latter is at all events "more educated" and "more humane". With 
his theory set forth above, incidentally, Herr Simon opens up an 
endless series of agreements by means of which he will remain 
acceptable in any and every "civil society". 
The late Imperial Constitution is justified in the following 
philosophical deduction: 
"The Imperial Constitution was thus in fact properly the expression of what was 
possible without new exertions of violence.... It was the living (!) expression of 
democratic monarchy, and hence of a contradiction in principle. But much has 
already existed in actual fact which was self-contradictory in principle, and it is 
precisely from the actual existence of contradictions in principle that further life 
develops." (p. 44.) 
It can be seen that to apply Hegelian dialectics is still rather more 
difficult than to quote snippets of verse by Schiller. The Imperial 
Constitution, if it was "actually" to endure in spite of its "contradic­
tion in principle", ought at least to have expressed in a "principled" 
fashion that contradiction which "actually" existed. "Actually", 
there stood on the one hand Prussia and Austria, military absolutism, 
and on the other the German people, cheated of the fruits of their 
March rising, cheated to a great extent by their foolish belief in the 
wretched Frankfurt Assembly, and on the point of daring at last to 
embark on a new fight against military absolutism. This actual 
contradiction could only be resolved by an actual conflict. Did the 
Imperial Constitution express this contradiction? Not in the least. It 
expressed the contradiction as it existed in March 1848, before 
Prussia and Austria had recovered their strength, before the 
opposition had been split, weakened and disarmed by partial defeats. 
It expressed nothing more than the childish self-deception of the 
gentlemen of St. Paul's Church, who, in March 1849, still imagined 
themselves able to prescribe laws to the Prussian and Austrian 
governments, and to ensure for themselves for all posterity the 
position of imperial German Barrots, a position as profitable as it 
would be secure. 

=====第272页=====
Ludwig Simon of Trier, Ein Wort des Rechts 249 
Then Herr Simon congratulates himself and his colleagues for 
being totally unshakable in their self-interested infatuation with the 
Imperial Constitution: 
"Admit in shame, ye renegades of Gotha, that in the midst of pressing passions 
we have resisted every temptation, have faithfully kept our word and have not altered 
pur common achievement by even one iota!" (p. 67.) 
He then refers to their heroic deeds in connection with 
Württemberg and the Palatinate, and to their Stuttgart decision of 
June 8, in which they placed Baden under the protection of the 
Empire, although by that time the Empire was already essentially 
under the protection of Baden, 188 and their decisions only proved 
that they were determined not to shift "by even one iota" from their 
cowardice, and to maintain by force an illusion in. which they 
themselves no longer believed. 
The accusation that "the Imperial Constitution was only a mask 
for the republic" is ingeniously rejected by Herr Simon as follows: 
"Only if the struggle against all governments without  exception  had to be pursued to 
the end, ... and who tells you then that the struggle against all governments without 
exception ought to have been pursued to the end? Who can calculate them all, the 
possible permutations of battle and of the fortunes of war, and if the hostile brothers" 
(governments and people) "had stood face to face after a bloody struggle, exhausted 
and undecided as to the  outcome,  and if the spirit of peace and reconciliation had come 
upon them, would we then have harmed even in the slightest the banner of the 
Imperial Constitution, under which the brothers could have stretched out their hands 
to each other in conciliation? Look about you! Place your hands on your hearts! Delve 
sincerely into your innermost conscience, and you will, you must answer: no, no, and 
again no!" (p. 70.) 
This is the true quiver of oratory from which Herr Simon drew 
those arrows which he fired to such astonishing effect in St. Paul's 
Church! — In spite of its flatness, however, this touching pathos has 
its interest. It shows how the gentlemen of Frankfurt sat calmly in 
Stuttgart and waited for the hostile parties to fight to a standstill so 
that they could step between the exhausted combatants at the right 
moment and offer them the panacea of conciliation, the Imperial 
Constitution. And the extent to which Herr Simon is expressing the 
innermost thoughts of his colleagues can be seen from the way in 
which these gentlemen are even now in session in Berne at 
innkeeper Benz's in Kesslergasse, a waiting only for a new conflict to 
break out so that they may step in when the sides "are standing face 
to face, exhausted and undecided as to the outcome", and offer 
them as a basis for agreement the Imperial Constitution, this perfect 
expression of exhaustion and indecision. 
See this volume, p. 8.— Ed. 

=====第273页=====
250 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"But I say to you in spite of all that and however painful it may be to roam far from 
one's fatherland, far from one's home and far from aged parents, on the lonely path 
of exile, I will not exchange my pure conscience for the remorse of the renegades and 
the sleepless nights of the rulers, not even if I should be offered a surfeit of all worldly 
goods!" (p. 71.) 
If it were only possible to send these gentlemen into exile! But do 
they not drag the fatherland along behind them in their suitcases in 
the form of the stenographic reports from Frankfurt?3 And do these 
not waft towards them currents of the purest air of the homeland 
and the fullness of the fairest self-complacency? 
Incidentally, when Herr Simon maintains that he is putting in a 
good word for those who fought for the Imperial Constitution he is 
indulging in a pious deceit. Those who fought for the Imperial 
Constitution had no need of his "Word of Justice". They defended 
themselves better and more energetically. But Herr Simon has to 
push them forward in order to conceal the fact that, in the interest of 
the Frankfurters who have compromised themselves in every 
respect, in the interest of those who framed the Imperial Constitu­
tion, in his own interest, he considers it indispensable to deliver an 
oratio pro dômo. h 
Written in January and February 1850 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue time 
No. 2, 1850 
a Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen knnstituirenden 
Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, 1848-49.— Ed. 
Speech on one's own  behalf.—  Ed. 

=====第274页=====
251 
m 
G U IZ OT, POURQUOI LA RÉVOLUTION D'ANGLETERRE 
A-T-ELLE RÉUSSI? DISCOURS SUR L'HISTOIRE 
DE LA RÉVOLUTION D'ANGLETERRE, 
PARIS,  1850 
The purpose of M. Guizot's pamphlet is to show why Louis 
Philippe and Guizot's policy should really not have been overthrown 
on February 24, 1848, and how the abominable character of the 
French was to blame for the ignominious downfall of the July 
monarchy of 1830 after an arduous existence of eighteen years and 
for its failure to attain the permanency enjoyed by the English 
monarchy ever since 1688. 
From this pamphlet one may see how even the most capable 
people of the ancien régime, people whose own kind of talent in the 
realm of history can by no means be disputed, have been brought to 
such a state of perplexity by the fatal events of February that they 
have lost all understanding of history, that they now even fail to 
comprehend their own former actions. Instead of being impelled by 
the February Revolution to realise the totally different historical 
conditions, the totally different class alignment of society, in the 
French monarchy of 1830 and the English of 1688, M. Guizot 
dissolves the whole difference in a few moralising phrases, averring 
in conclusion that the policy that was overthrown on February 24 
"preserves the states and alone quells revolutions". 
Exactly formulated, the question M. Guizot wants to answer is as 
follows: Why has bourgeois society developed longer in England in 
the form of a constitutional monarchy than in France? 
The following passage will serve to characterise M. Guizot's 
acquaintance with the course of bourgeois development in England: 
"In the reigns of George I and George II public opinion veered. Foreign policy 
ceased to be their main concern; home administration, maintenance of peace, 
problems of finance, colonies and trade, the development and the struggles of the 
parliamentary regime now mainly engaged the attention of both the government and 
the public." (P [p]. 168[-169"|.) 

=====第275页=====
252 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
M. Guizot finds only two things worthy of mention in the reign of 
William III: maintenance of the balance between Parliament and 
Crown, and maintenance of the balance in Europe by fighting Louis 
XIV. Then, under the Hanoverian dynasty, "public opinion" 
suddenly "veered", no one knows how or why. We see here that 
M. Guizot applies the expressions most commonly used in French 
parliamentary debate to English history and believes he has thereby 
explained it. Similarly, M. Guizot imagined, when he was minister, 
that he held the balance between Parliament and Crown as well as 
the balance in Europe, whereas in reality all he did was to barter 
away piecemeal the whole French state and the whole of French 
society to the financial Shy locks of the Paris Bourse. 
M. Guizot does not consider it worth while mentioning that the 
wars against Louis XIV were exclusively trade wars waged to destroy 
French commerce and French sea power, that under William 
III the domination of the financial bourgeoisie received its first 
sanction by the establishment of the Bank and the institution of the 
national debt,189 and that the manufacturing bourgeoisie was given a 
new impetus by the consistent application of the system of protective 
tariffs. Only political phrases mean anything to him. He does not 
even mention that in Queen Anne's reign the ruling parties could 
maintain themselves and the constitutional monarchy only by an 
arbitrary measure, the lengthening of the term of Parliament to 
seven years, thus almost completely destroying the influence of the 
people upon the government. 
Under the Hanoverian dynasty England was already so far ad­
vanced that it could wage trade war against France in its modern 
form. England itself fought France only in America and East 
India; on the Continent it confined itself to hiring foreign princes 
like Frederick II to fight France. And when foreign war assumes 
a different form, M. Guizot says: "foreign policy ceases to be 
the main concern" and is replaced by the "maintenance of peace". 
The extent to which "the development and the struggles of the 
parliamentary regime now mainly engaged the attention of both the 
government and the public" may be gauged from the accounts of the 
bribery practised under Walpole's ministry, which, of course, do not 
differ a hair's breadth from the scandals that became the order of the 
day under M. Guizot. 
M. Guizot sees two particular reasons why the English Revolution 
took a more favourable course than the French: first, because the 
English Revolution was thoroughly religious in character and 
therefore by no means broke with all the traditions of the past; 
secondly, because from its very inception it did not act destructively 

=====第276页=====
Guizot, Pourquoi la révolution d'Angleterre a-t-elle réussi? 253 
but conservatively, and Parliament defended the old laws in force 
against the usurpations of the Crown. 
Concerning the first point, M. Guizot forgets that free-thinking, 
which so horrifies him in the French Revolution, was brought to 
France from no other country than England. Locke was its father, 
and with Shaftesbury and Bolingbroke it assumed that keen-spirited 
form which was subsequently developed so brilliantly in France. We 
thus arrive at the odd conclusion that free-thinking on which, 
according to M. Guizot, the French Revolution foundered, was one 
of the most essential products of the religious English Revolution. 
As far as the second point is concerned, M. Guizot forgets entirely 
that the French Revolution began just as conservatively as the 
English, indeed much more so. Absolutism, particularly as it 
manifested itself finally in France, was here, too, an innovation, and 
it was against this innovation that the parliaments190  rose and 
defended the old laws, the us et coutumes*  of the old monarchy based 
on estates. Whereas the first step of the French Revolution was the 
resurrection of the States General, 191 which had been dormant since 
Henry IV and Louis XIII, no fact of equal classical conservatism can 
be found in the English Revolution. 
According to M. Guizot the main result of the English Revolution 
was that the King was put in a position where he could not possibly 
rule against the will of Parliament, particularly the House of 
Commons. The whole revolution consisted in both sides, Crown and 
Parliament, overstepping the mark in the beginning and going too 
far until at last, under William III, they found the correct balance 
and neutralised each other. M. Guizot deems it superfluous to 
mention that the subordination of the monarchy to Parliament 
was its subordination to the rule of a class. He need not therefore go 
into the details of how this class acquired the power necessary to 
make the Crown finally its servant. In his opinion the only issues 
involved in the whole struggle between Charles I and Parliament 
were purely political prerogatives. Not a word about the reason why 
Parliament and the class represented in it needed these prerogatives. 
He has just as little to say about Charles I's direct interference in free 
competition, which jeopardised England's trade and industry more 
and more; or about his dependence upon Parliament, which because 
of his constant financial straits became all the greater the more he 
sought to defy Parliament. Hence the only explanation he can find 
for the whole revolution is the malevolence and religious fanaticism 
of individual troublemakers who would not be satisfied with a 
a Usages and customs.— Ed. 

=====第277页=====
254 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
moderate freedom. Nor can M. Guizot enlighten us on the 
connection between the religious movement and the development of 
bourgeois society. The republic, too, is naturally only the handiwork 
of a few ambitious, fanatic and evil-minded people. That about the 
same time attempts to set up a republic were likewise made in Lisbon, 
Naples and Messina, 192 patterned likewise, as in England, after 
Holland, is a fact that he entirely fails to mention. Although 
M. Guizot never loses sight of the French Revolution, he does not 
even draw the simple conclusion that everywhere the transition from 
absolute to constitutional monarchy is effected only after fierce 
struggles and after passage through a republican form of govern­
ment and that even then the old dynasty, having become useless, 
has to make room for a usurpatory collateral line. The only 
information he can give us about the overthrow of the restored 
English monarchy consists of the most trivial commonplaces. He 
does not even mention its immediate causes: the fear of the new big 
landed proprietors created by the Reformation that Catholicism 
might be re-established, in which event they would naturally have 
had to give back all the lands of which they had robbed the 
Church—a proceeding in which seven-tenths of the entire area of 
England would have changed hands; the commercial and industrial 
bourgeoisie's dread of Catholicism, which in no way suited their 
book; the nonchalance with which the Stuarts, to their own 
advantage and that of the court aristocracy, sold all English industry, 
as well as trade, to the government of France, that is, to the only 
country which at that time dangerously, and in many respects 
successfully, competed with the English, etc. As M. Guizot omits 
everywhere the most important points, all he has left is a most 
inadequate and banal narration of mere political events. 
The big riddle for M. Guizot, the one for which he sees an 
explanation only in the superior intelligence of the English, the 
riddle of the conservatism of the English Revolution, is the persisting 
alliance of the bourgeoisie with the majority of the big landowners, 
an alliance that distinguishes the English Revolution essentially from 
the French, which eliminated big landed property by parcellation. 
This class of big landowners allied with the bourgeoisie—which, 
incidentally, arose as early as under Henry VIII—found itself not 
in contradiction with the conditions of existence of the bourgeoisie as 
did French landed'property in 1789, but, on the contrary, in per­
fect harmony with them. In actual fact their landed estates were 
not feudal but bourgeois property. On the one hand, the landed 
proprietors provided the industrial bourgeoisie with the labour force 
necessary to operate its manufactories and, on the other, were in a 

=====第278页=====
Guizot, Pourquoi la révolution d'Angleterre a-t-elle réussi? 255 
position to develop agriculture in accordance with the level of 
industry and trade. Hence their common interests with the 
bourgeoisie; hence their alliance with it. 
For M. Guizot, English history ends with the consolidation of 
the constitutional monarchy in England. For him everything that 
followed was merely a pleasant game of seesaw between Tories 
and Whigs, something in the nature of the great debate between 
M.Guizot and M.Thiers. In reality, however, it was only with the 
consolidation of the constitutional monarchy that the large-
scale development and transformation of bourgeois society in 
England began. Where M. Guizot sees only placid tranquillity and 
idyllic peace, the most violent conflicts, the most thoroughgoing 
revolutions, were actually developing. It was under the constitutional 
monarchy that manufacture first developed to a hitherto unknown 
extent, to make room, subsequently, for big industry, the steam-
engine and the gigantic factories. Entire classes of the population 
disappear, and new ones with new conditions of existence and new 
requirements take their place. A new, more colossal bourgeoisie 
arises.  While the old bourgeoisie fights the French Revolution, the 
new one conquers the world market. It becomes so omnipotent that 
even before the Reform Bill193 puts direct political power into its 
hands it forces its opponents to pass laws almost exclusively in its 
interests and according to its needs. It wins for itself direct 
representation in Parliament and uses it to destroy the last remnants 
of real power that landed property retains. Lastly, it is engaged at 
present in utterly demolishing the handsome edifice of the English 
constitution which M. Guizot so admires. 
While M. Guizot compliments the English on the fact that in their 
country the detestable excrescences of French social life—republi­
canism and socialism—have not shaken the foundations of the 
monarchy, the only source of salvation, the class antagonisms in 
English society have become more acute than in any other country. 
Here a bourgeoisie possessed of unequalled wealth and productive 
forces is opposed by a proletariat whose strength and concentration 
are likewise unequalled. Thus what M. Guizot acknowledges in 
England finally comes to this, that here, under the protection of 
constitutional monarchy, far more numerous and far more radical 
elements of social revolution have developed than in all other 
countries of the world taken together. 
When the threads of development in England become entangled 
in a knot which he can no longer cut, even in appearance, with mere 
political phrases, M. Guizot has recourse to religious phrases, to the 
armed intervention of God. Thus, for instance, the spirit of the Lord 

=====第279页=====
256 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
suddenly descends upon the army and prevents Cromwell from 
proclaiming himself king, etc., etc. From his conscience Guizot seeks 
safety in God; from the profane public, in his style. 
Indeed, not only les rois s'en vont, but also les capacités de la 
bourgeoisie s'en vont. 3 
Written in February 1850 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue 
No. 2, 1850 
Not only "kings pass away", but also "the talent of the bourgeoisie".— Ed. 

=====第280页=====
257 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
REVIEW 
[January-February 1850]194 
A tout seigneur, tout honneur? Let us start with Prussia. 
The King of Prussia is doing his best to push the present situation 
of tepid agreement, of inadequate compromise, towards a crisis.195 
He bestows a constitution and, after various unpleasantnesses, 
creates two Chambers which revise this constitution. Just so that the 
constitution may appear as acceptable as possible to the Crown, the 
Chambers delete every article which might in any way be objectiona­
ble to it, and believe that now the King will confirm the constitution 
with his oath straight away. But on the contrary. In order to give 
the Chambers a proof of his "royal conscientiousness" Frederick 
William issues an announcement15  in which he makes new proposals 
for the improvement of the constitution, proposals whose acceptance 
would deprive the said document of even the least trace of the 
most insignificant so-called constitutional civil guarantees. The King 
hopes that the Chambers will reject these proposals—on the 
contrary. If the Chambers had been disappointed with the Crown, 
then they now made sure that the Crown would be disappointed with 
them. They accept everything: peerage and extraordinary courts, 
Landsturm and entailment, 196 merely in order not to be sent home, 
merely to force the King at last to swear a solemn "corporeal" oath. 
Thus does a Prussian constitutional bourgeois take his revenge. 
The King will find it difficult to invent a humiliation which might 
appear too harsh for these Chambers. He will finally feel himself 
a To every lord his honour.— Ed. 
"Allerhöchste Botschaft", January 7, 1850. Published in the Preussischer 
Staats-AnzeigerNo. 10, January 10, 1850. A somewhat paraphrased passage from that 
announcement is quoted further in the text.— Ed. 

=====第281页=====
258 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
obliged to declare that "the more sacred he holds the sworn vow he is 
to give, the more do the duties laid upon him by God for the beloved 
fatherland appear before his soul", and the less does his "royal 
conscientiousness" permit him to confirm by oath a constitution 
which offers him everything, but the country nothing. 
The gentlemen of the defunct "United Diet",197 who are now 
together again in the Chambers, are so afraid of being driven back to 
their old situation, as it was prior to March 18, because they would 
then again have before them the revolution, which will bring them 
no roses this time. What is more, in 1847 they were still able to refuse 
the loan for the alleged Eastern railway, whereas in 1849 they 
first actually granted the government the loan in question, and 
afterwards most humbly raised with the government the matter of 
the theoretical right of granting the money. 
In the meantime the bourgeoisie outside the Chambers is taking its 
pleasure in jury decisions acquitting those accused of political 
offences, thus demonstrating its opposition to the government. In 
these trials, on the one hand the government and on the other the 
democracy represented by the accused and the public, discredit 
themselves at regular intervals. We remind our readers of the trial of 
the "ever constitutional" Waldeck, the trial in Trier.198 etc. 
When old Arndt asks: "What is the fatherland of a German?" 3 
Frederick William IV replies: Erfurt.199 It was not very difficult to 
travesty the Iliad in the Battle of  the Frogs  and the Mice,  but nobody has 
hitherto dared contemplate a travesty of the Battle of  the Frogs  and the 
Mice. The Erfurt Plan succeeds in travestying even the battle of the 
frogs and the mice of St. Paul's Church  itself.200  It is of course 
completely irrelevant whether the unbelievable assembly in Erfurt in 
fact assembles or whether the Orthodox Tsarb  forbids it, just as 
irrelevant as the protest against its competency, in issuing which 
Herr Vogt will undoubtedly enter into an agreement with Herr 
Venedey. The whole invention is of interest only to those profound 
politicians for whose leading articles the question of a "Great 
Germany" or a "Little Germany" was a mine as rich as it was 
indispensable, and to those Prussian bourgeois who live in the 
comforting belief that the King of Prussia will grant everything in 
Erfurt precisely because he has refused everything in Berlin. 
If the Frankfurt "National Assembly" is to be more or less 
faithfully reflected in Erfurt, then the old Federal Diet will be reborn 
a From Ernst Moritz Arndt's poem "Des Teutschen Vaterland". — Ed. 
b Nicholas I.— Ed. 

=====第282页=====
Review 259 
in the "Interim" 201 and simultaneously reduced to its simplest 
expression, to an Austro-Prussian federal commission. The Interim 
has already materialised in Württemberg and will shortly materialise 
in Mecklenburg and Schleswig-Holstein. 
While Prussia has been able for a long time to scrape its budget 
together by means of emissions of paper money, stealthy loans from 
the Seehandlung, 202 and the remains of the state treasury, and has 
only now rushed forward down the road of public loans, in Austria 
state bankruptcy is in full bloom. A deficit of 155 million guilders in 
the first nine months of the year 1849, which is bound to have 
increased to 210-220 million by the end of December; the complete 
ruin of state credit at home and abroad after the resounding failure 
of the attempt at raising a new loan; total exhaustion of the internal 
financial resources: ordinary taxes, contributions, emissions of paper 
money; the necessity of imposing new and desperate taxes on the 
country which had already been sucked dry, taxes which, one can see 
in advance, will not be paid in—these are the main features in which 
naked financial need reveals itself in Austria. Simultaneously the 
decay of the Austrian state organism is proceeding ever more 
rapidly. In vain does the government counter it by means of 
convulsive centralisation; the disorganisation has already reached 
the furthest extremities of the state organism, and Austria is 
becoming intolerable even to the most barbaric nationalities, to the 
principal pillars of the old Austria, to the Southern Slavs in Dalmatia, 
Croatia, and the Banat, the "trusty" borderers. 203 Only an act of 
desperation remains, offering a slight chance of rescue—an external 
war; this external war to which Austria is irresistibly being driven 
must rapidly complete its total dissolution. 
Nor has Russia proved rich enough to pay for its fame, which it 
had to purchase for cash into the bargain. In spite of the widely 
vaunted gold-mines of the Urals and the Altai, in spite of the 
inexhaustible treasures in the vaults of the Peter and Paul fortress, 
in spite of the annuity purchases in London and Paris, allegedly 
made out of a surplus of money, the Orthodox Tsar feels himself 
constrained not only to remove 5,000,000 silver rubles, using all 
kinds of false pretexts, from the bullion stores lying in the Peter and 
Paul fortress as security for his paper currency, and to order the 
sale of his annuities on the Paris Bourse, but also to beg the 
unbelieving City of London for an advance of 30 million silver 
rubles. 
Russia has become so deeply involved in European politics on 
account of the movements of the years 1848 and 1849 that it will 
have to execute its old plans against Turkey, against Constantinople, 

=====第283页=====
260 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"the key to its house",3 as speedily as it can if they are not to become 
for ever impossible to execute. The progress of the counter-rev­
olution and the daily growing power of the revolutionary party in 
Western Europe, the internal situation in Russia itself and the bad 
state of its finances are forcing it towards rapid action. We recently 
saw the diplomatic prelude to this new oriental drama of state  204; in a 
few months we shall witness the drama  itself. 
War against Turkey is necessarily a European war. So much the 
better for Holy Russia, which is thus given an opportunity of 
obtaining a firm foothold in Germany, leading the counter­
revolution there energetically to its conclusion, helping Prussia to 
conquer Neuchâtel, and, in the last instance, marching on the centre 
of the revolution, on Paris. 
In such a European war England cannot remain neutral. It must 
take a stand against Russia. And for Russia England is by far the 
most dangerous antagonist. If the land armies of the Continent 
cannot help weakening themselves more and more as a result of their 
having to spread out more the further they press forward into 
Russia, if their advance, upon the penalty of a repetition of 1812, 
must come to an almost complete halt on the eastern frontier of the 
former Poland, England has the means of tackling Russia on its most 
vulnerable flanks. Apart from the fact that it can force Sweden to 
reconquer Finland, St. Petersburg and Odessa stand open to its 
navy. The Russian navy is known to be the worst in the world, and 
Kronstadt and Schlüsselburg are as vulnerable to capture as 
Saint-Jean d'Acre and San Juan de Ulua. 205 And Russia without 
St. Petersburg and Odessa is a giant with its hands chopped off. 
Moreover Russia cannot dispense with England either for the sale of 
its raw materials or the purchase of industrial products for even as 
little as six months, which emerged clearly at the time of Napoleon's 
continental blockade, 206 but is now the case to a far greater degree. 
Cutting off from the English market would in a few months induce 
the most violent convulsions in Russia. England, on the other hand, 
can not only do without the Russian market for a time, but it can also 
procure all Russian raw materials from other markets. One can see 
that the dreaded Russia is by no means so very dangerous. It must 
assume such a terror-inspiring shape for the German burgher, 
however, since it directly controls his princes and since he quite 
rightly suspects that Russia's barbarian hordes will before long 
inundate Germany and to some extent play a messianic role there. 
The phrase was used by Alexander I in a conversation with the French 
Ambassador Caulaincourt in 1808.— Ed. 

=====第284页=====
Review 261 
Switzerland's attitude to the Holy Alliance in general resembles 
that of the Prussian Chambers to their King in particular. Except 
that Switzerland has behind it an additional scapegoat to which it can 
pass on all the blows it receives from the Holy Alliance two- or 
threefold, a scapegoat which is defenceless into the bargain and quite 
abandoned to its favour or disfavour—the German refugees. It is 
true that a section of the "radical" Swiss in Geneva, in Vaud and in 
Berne has protested against the cowardly policy of the Federal 
Council207—cowardly both in respect of the Holy Alliance and of the 
refugees; it is, however, just as true that the Federal Council was 
correct when it maintained that its policy was "that of the huge 
majority of the Swiss people". In the midst of all this the Central 
Authority quite tranquilly continues to carry out small bourgeois 
reforms internally: centralisation of customs, of coinage, of the post, 
of weights and measures—reforms which assure it the applause of 
the petty bourgeoisie. To be sure it dares not carry out its decision 
concerning the repeal of the military enlistment agreements, and the 
men of the L/r-cantons still go in droves daily to Como to get 
themselves enlisted in the service of Naples.208  But in spite of all its 
humility and complaisance towards the Holy Alliance, a fatal storm 
threatens Switzerland. In the first flush of high spirits after the war 
against the Sonderbund and in complete euphoria after the 
February Revolution, the otherwise so timid Swiss allowed them­
selves to be tempted to imprudent actions. They ventured the 
enormity of wanting at last to be independent; they gave themselves 
a new constitution instead of the one guaranteed by the powers in 
1814,  they recognised the independence of Neuchâtel 209 contrary to 
the treaties. For this they will be punished, in spite of all their bowing 
and scraping, their readiness to oblige and their police services. And 
once it is involved in the European war Switzerland will not find itself 
in the most pleasant of situations; if Switzerland has insulted the holy 
allies,  it has on the other hand betrayed the revolution. 
In France, where the bourgeoisie itself is leading the reaction in its 
own interests, and where the republican form of government 
permits reaction its freest and most consistent development, the 
suppression of the revolution is being executed in the most 
shameless and violent fashion. In the short space of one month the 
following measures were taken one after another: the restoration of 
the drink tax, which directly completes the ruin of half the rural 
population, the d'Hautpoul circular, which appoints the gendarmes 
as spies even upon the civil servants, the law on schoolteachers, which 
declares that all elementary schoolteachers are to be subject to 
arbitrary dismissal by the prefects, the education law, which hands 

=====第285页=====
262 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
the schools over to the priests, the deportation law, in which the 
bourgeoisie unleashes the whole of its pent-up lust for vengeance on 
the June insurgents and, in the absence of any other executioner, 
delivers them up to the most deadly climate in the whole of Algeria. 
We will not even mention the innumerable deportations of even the 
most innocent foreigners, which have never ceased since June 13.a 
The purpose of this violent bourgeois reaction is, of course, to 
restore the monarchy. However, the monarchist restoration is 
considerably hindered by the various pretenders themselves, and by 
the parties they have in the country. The Legitimists and the 
Orleanists, the two strongest monarchist parties, more or less 
counterbalance each other; the third party, the Bonapartists, is by far 
the weakest. Louis Napoleon does not, in spite of his seven million 
votes,  even possess a real party, he merely has a coterie. Although he 
is given constant support by the majority of the Chamber in the 
general handling of the reaction, he finds himself abandoned as soon 
as his particular interests as pretender emerge, abandoned not only 
by the majority but also by his ministers, who each time give him the 
lie and force him to declare in writing the next day in spite of 
everything that they have his confidence. The quarrels in which he 
thus gets embroiled with the majority, however serious the 
consequences to which they might lead, have for this reason so far 
only been comical episodes in which the President of the Republic 
has each time played the part of the dupe. It goes without saying that 
in these conditions each monarchist faction is conspiring with the 
Holy Alliance on its own initiative. The Assemblée nationale is brazen 
enough to threaten the people publicly with the Russians' 3; there is 
already ample evidence that Louis Napoleon is plotting with 
Nicholas. 
At the same rate as the reaction advances, the forces of the 
revolutionary party naturally grow too. The great mass of the rural 
population, ruined by the consequences of land parcelling, by the tax 
burden and the purely fiscal nature of most of the taxes, damaging 
even from the point of view of the bourgeoisie, disappointed with the 
promises of Louis Napoleon and the reactionary deputies, the mass 
of the rural population has thrown itself into the arms of the 
revolutionary party and professes a socialism which is, admittedly, 
still very crude and bourgeois for the most part. The revolutionary 
mood of even the most legitimist  départements  is proved by the latest 
See this volume, pp. 105-07.— Ed. 
Presumably a reference to the leading article in L'Assemblée nationale No. 23, 
January 25, 1850.— Ed. 

=====第286页=====
Review 263 
election in the Gard département, 210 the centre of royalism and of the 
"white terror" of 1815, where a red was elected. 3 The petty 
bourgeoisie, oppressed by big capital, which has once more adopted 
exactly the same position in commerce and politics as under Louis 
Philippe, has followed the rural population. The turnabout is so 
marked that even the traitor Marrast and the grocers' journal, the 
Siècle, have had to declare themselves socialists. The position of 
the various classes in relation to one another, for which the mutual 
relationships of the political parties are only another expression, is 
again almost exactly the same as on February 22, 1848. Except that 
other matters are now at stake, that the workers are much more 
conscious, and that in particular a class hitherto dead politically, the 
peasantry, has been dragged into the movement and won for the 
revolution. 
In this lies the necessity for the ruling bourgeoisie of trying to 
abolish universal franchise as rapidly as possible; and in this necessity 
lies in turn the certainty of impending victory for the revolution even 
disregarding external circumstances. 
The tension of the situation in general is revealed by the comical 
bill proposed by people's representative Pradié, b who attempts in 
approximately 200 clauses to prevent coups d'état and revolutions by 
a decree of the National Assembly. And the vast lack of confidence 
felt by high finance for the "order" now apparently restored here 
and in other capitals can be seen in the fact that a few months ago the 
various branches of the house of Rothschild only prolonged their 
deeds of partnership for one year—a period of unprecedented 
brevity in the annals of large-scale commerce. 
While the Continent has been occupying itself for the past two 
years with revolutions, counter-revolutions and the floods of rhetoric 
inseparable from these, industrial England has been dealing in a 
quite different article: prosperity. Here the commercial crisis which 
broke out in due coursec in the autumn of 1845 was interrupted 
twice—at the beginning of 1846 by the Free Trade decisions of 
Parliament,211 and at the beginning of 1848 by the February 
Revolution. A quantity of commodities depressing overseas markets 
had in the meantime gradually found outlets. The February Rev­
olution eliminated competition from continental industry precise­
ly in these markets, while English industry did not lose much more 
because of the disturbed continental market than it would have done 
a Favand.— Ed. 
b The bill was submitted to the Legislative Assembly on January 12 and 19, 
1850.—  Ed. 
c The words "in due course" are in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第287页=====
264 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
anyway in the further development of the crisis. In this way the 
February Revolution, momentarily bringing continental industry to 
an almost complete standstill, helped the English to weather a year of 
crisis in a quite tolerable fashion, contributed substantially to clearing 
away the piled-up stocks of goods in the overseas markets, and made 
a new industrial upswing possible in the spring of 1849. This 
upswing, which incidentally extended to a great part of continental 
industry, has reached such a level in the last three months that the 
manufacturers are claiming that they have never experienced such 
good times before—a claim always made on the eve of a crisis. The 
factories are overloaded with orders and are working at an 
accelerated rate; every means is being sought to dodge the Ten 
Hours' Bill3 and gain new hours of labour; new factories are being 
built in great numbers in all parts of the industrial regions, and the 
old ones are being extended. Cash is pouring into the market, idle 
capital wants to take advantage of the occasion of universal profit; 
speculation is brimming over with discount-dealing, which is 
throwing itself into production b or into the raw materials trade, and 
almost all articles show an absolute and all a relative rise in price. In 
short, England is blessed with "prosperity" in its most splendid 
bloom, and the only question is how long this intoxication will last. 
Not very long, at all events. Several of the largest markets, East 
India in particular, are already almost glutted; export is already less 
favourable to the really great markets than to the emporia of world 
trade, from which the commodities may be directed to the most 
favourable markets. Soon the markets still left, particularly those of 
North and South America and Australia, will be similarly glutted, 
given the colossal forces of production which English industry added 
to those it already had between 1843 and 1845, in 1846 and 1847, 
and especially in 1849, and which are still being daily added to. And 
with the first reports of this glut, panic0 will break out simultaneously 
in speculation and production—perhaps as soon as towards the end 
of spring, in July or August at the latest. This crisis, however, since it 
is bound to coincide with great collisions on the Continent, will bring 
forth results quite different from those of all previous crises. 
Whereas every crisis hitherto has been the signal for a new advance, 
a See this volume, pp. 273-74 and  296-98.—  Ed. 
In the copy of the journal with Engels' corrections the passage "speculation is 
brimming over with discount-dealing, which is throwing itself into production" is 
changed and reads thus: "discount is falling, speculation is throwing itself into 
production".— Ed. 
This word is in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第288页=====
Review 265 
a new victory of the industrial bourgeoisie over landed property and 
the finance bourgeoisie, this crisis will mark the beginning of the 
modern English revolution, a revolution in which Cobden will 
assume the role of a Necker. 
And now we come to America. The most important thing to have 
occurred here, more important even than the February Revolution, 
is the discovery of the Californian gold-mines. Already now, after 
barely eighteen months, one may predict that this discovery will have 
much more impressive consequences than the discovery of America 
itself.  For three hundred and thirty years the whole of Europe's 
trade with the Pacific Ocean has been carried with the most moving 
patience around the Cape of Good Hope or Cape Horn. All propos­
als for cutting through the Isthmus of Panama have come to grief 
because of the petty jealousies of the trading nations. It is a mere 
eighteen months since the Californian gold-mines were discovered, 
and the Yankees have already started work on a railway, a large 
highway and a canal from the Gulf of Mexico, steamships are already 
making regular trips from New York to Chagres and from Panama 
to San Francisco, the Pacific trade is already becoming concentrated 
on Panama and the route around Cape Horn is obsolete. A coast 
thirty degrees of latitude in length, one of the most beautiful and 
fertile in the world, hitherto as good as uninhabited, is visibly being 
transformed into a rich and civilised country, densely populated by 
people of all races, from Yankee to Chinaman, from Negro to Indian 
and Malay, from Creole and Mestizo to European. Rivers of 
Californian gold are pouring over America and the Asiatic coast of 
the Pacific Ocean, and dragging the most reluctant barbarian nations 
into world trade, into civilisation. For the second time world trade is 
taking a new direction. The role played by Tyre, Carthage and 
Alexandria in antiquity, and Genoa and Venice in the Middle Ages, 
the role of London and Liverpool until now—that of the emporia of 
world trade—is now being assumed by New York and San Francisco, 
San Juan de Nicaragua 3 and Leon, Chagres and Panama. The centre 
of gravity of world commerce, Italy in the Middle Ages, England in 
modern times, is now the southern half of the North American 
peninsula. The industry and trade of old Europe will have to make 
huge exertions if they are not to fall into the same decay as the 
industry and trade of Italy since the sixteenth century, if England 
and France are not to become what Venice, Genoa and Holland are 
today. In a few years we shall have a regular steam-packet service 
from England to Chagres and from Chagres and San Francisco to 
a San Juan del Norte (Greytown).— Ed. 

=====第289页=====
266 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Sydney, Canton and Singapore. Thanks to Californian gold and the 
tireless energy of the Yankees, both coasts of the Pacific Ocean will 
soon be as populous, as open to trade and as industrialised as the 
coast from Boston to New Orleans is now. And then the Pacific 
Ocean will have the same role as the Atlantic has now and the 
Mediterranean had in antiquity and in the Middle Ages—that of the 
great water highway of world commerce; and the Atlantic will 
decline to the status of an inland sea, like the Mediterranean 
nowadays. The only chance the civilised nations of Europe have, not 
to fall into the same industrial, commercial and political dependence 
to which Italy, Spain and Portugal are now reduced, lies in a social 
revolution which, so long as there is still time, will revolutionise the 
mode of production and commerce in accordance with the needs of 
production themselves as they emerge from the modern forces of 
production, thus making possible the creation of new forces of 
production, which can ensure the superiority of European industry 
and so compensate for the disadvantages of its geographical position. 
And finally, another characteristic curiosity from China, which the 
well-known German missionary Gützlaff has brought back with 
him. 212 The slowly but steadily growing over-population in this 
country had long made social conditions there particularly oppres­
sive for the great majority of the nation. Then came the English and 
extorted free trade for themselves in five ports.213 Thousands of 
English and American ships sailed to China and before long the 
country was glutted with inexpensive British and American industri­
al manufactures. Chinese industry, dependent on manual labour, 
succumbed to competition from the machine. The imperturbable 
Middle Kingdom was aroused by a social crisis. The taxes no longer 
came in, the state reached the brink of bankruptcy, the population 
sank en masse into pauperism, erupted in revolts, refused to 
acknowledge the mandarins of the Emperor or the priests of Fo, 
mishandled and killed them. The country reached the brink of ruin 
and is already threatened with a mighty revolution. But worse was to 
come. Among the rebellious plebs individuals appeared who pointed 
to the poverty of some and to the wealth of others, and who 
demanded, and are still demanding a different distribution of 
property, and even the complete abolition of private property.214 
When Herr Gützlaff came among civilised people and Europeans 
again after an absence of twenty years, he heard talk of socialism and 
asked what this might be. When it had been explained to him he 
cried out in horror: 
"Shall I then nowhere escape this pernicious doctrine? For some time now many of 
the mob have been preaching exactly the same thing in China!" 

=====第290页=====
Review 267 
Now Chinese socialism may admittedly be the same in relation to 
European socialism as Chinese philosophy in relation to Hegelian 
philosophy. Nevertheless, it is a gratifying fact that in eight years the 
calico bales of the English bourgeoisie have brought the oldest and 
least perturbable kingdom on earth to the eve of a social upheaval, 
which, in any event, is bound to have the most significant results for 
civilisation. When our European reactionaries, on their presently 
impending flight through Asia, finally come to the Great Wall of 
China, to the gates leading to the stronghold of arch-reaction and 
arch-conservatism, who knows if they may not read the following 
inscription upon them: 
RÉPUBLIQUE CHINOISE 
LIBERTÉ, ÉGALITÉ, FRATERNITÉ 
London, January 31, 1850 
* * * 
The wishes of the Prussian bourgeoisie have been fulfilled: the 
"man of honour" has confirmed the constitution with his oath on 
condition that "it be made possible" for him "to govern with this 
constitution".3 And in the few days which have passed since 
February 6 the bourgeois gentlemen in the Chambers have already 
granted this wish in full. Before February 6 they said: "We must 
make concessions, only to get the constitution sworn to; once the 
oath is taken we can behave quite differently." After February 6 they 
say: "The constitution has been confirmed by oath, we have every 
conceivable guarantee; we can therefore make concessions in all 
tranquillity." They grant eighteen million for armaments, for the 
mobilisation of 500,000 men against an as yet unknown enemy, 
without any discussion, without any opposition, almost unanimously; 
the budget is voted through in four days, all the government's 
proposals pass through the Chambers in the twinkling of an eye. It is 
evident that the German bourgeoisie still lacks neither cowardice nor 
excuses for this cowardice. 
Thanks to this benevolent Chamber the King of Prussia has had 
enough opportunities to realise the advantages the constitutional 
system offers over the absolutist one and indeed for the rulers as well 
as for those they rule. If we think back to the financial straits of 
1842-48,  to the vain attempts at getting credit from the See-
a Frederick William IV swore to the constitution on February 6, 1850.— Ed 

=====第291页=====
268 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
handlung and the Bank, to Rothschild's refusals, to the loan 
refused by the United Diet, to the depletion of the state treasury and 
the public coffers, and if we compare with all this the financial 
abundance of 1850—three budgets with a deficit of seventy million 
covered by a grant of the Chambers, loan certificates, treasury 
bonds placed in mass circulation, the state on better terms with the 
Bank than it ever was with the Seehandlung, and on top of all this 
another thirty-four million of granted loans in reserve—what a 
contrast! 
According to the statements of the Minister of War the Prussian 
Government thus considers eventualities likely which could force it 
to mobilise its whole army, in the interests of European "order and 
tranquillity".2 With this declaration Prussia has proclaimed its 
renewed entry into the Holy Alliance loudly and clearly enough. The 
identity of the enemy who is to be the target of the new crusade is 
clear. The centre of anarchy and insurrection, the Gallic Babylon, is 
to be wiped out. Whether France will be attacked directly, or whether 
this will be preceded by diversions against Switzerland and Turkey, 
will often depend solely  b on developments in Paris. In any case the 
Prussian Government now has the means to raise its 180,000 soldiers 
to 500,000 within two months; 400,000 Russians are deployed in 
Poland, Volhynia and Bessarabia; Austria has at least 650,000 men 
standing in readiness. Merely to feed these colossal armed forces 
Russia and Austria will have to begin a war of invasion before this 
year is out. And as regards the initial direction of this invasion a 
remarkable document has just been made public. 
In one of its most recent issues the  Schweizerische  National-Zeitung 
communicates to its readers a memorandum alleged to have been 
written by the Austrian General Schönhals, which contains a 
complete plan for the invasion of Switzerland. 0 The main points of 
this plan are as follows: 
Prussia brings around 60,000 men together on the Main, near the railways; a corps 
of men from Hesse, Bavaria and Württemberg is concentrated partly at Rottweil and 
Tuttlingen, partly at Kempten and Memmingen. Austria draws up 50,000 troops in 
Vorarlberg and in the direction of Innsbruck and forms a second corps in Italy 
between Sesto-Calende and Lecco. In the meantime Switzerland will be held off with 
diplomatic negotiations. Once the moment for attack arrives, the Prussians will rush to 
d From the Minister of War K. Adolf Strotha's speech in the Prussian National 
Assembly on February 12, 1850.— Ed. 
In the copy of the journal with Engels' corrections the words oft nur (often solely) 
have been replaced with fast nur (almost solely).— Ed. 
"Ein Invasionsprojekt", Schweizerische National-Zeitung No. 44, February 21, 
1850.—  Ed. 

=====第292页=====
Review 269 
Lörrach by rail, and the small contingents to Donaueschingen. The Austrians will 
concentrate more closely at Bregenz and Feld-kirch, and the Italian army at Como and 
Lecco. One brigade remains at Varese threatening Bellinzona. The envoys deliver the 
ultimatum and leave. Operations commence. The principal pretext is that of restoring 
the Federal Constitution of 1814 and the freedom of the Sonderbund cantons. The 
attack itself is a concentric one against Lucerne. The Prussians press towards the Aare 
by way of Basle, and the Austrians towards the Limmat by way of St. Gallen and 
Zurich. The former deploy from Solothurn to Zurzach, and the latter from Zurzach 
through Zurich to Uznach. At the same time a detachment of 15,000 Austrians 
advances against the Spliigen Pass by way of Chur and links up with the Italian corps, 
whereupon both press forward through the Vorderrhein valley to the St. Gotthard 
Pass where they will once again link up with the corps from Varese and Bellinzona, 
and raise an insurrection in the t/r-cantons. Meanwhile these will have been cut off 
from Western Switzerland and the sheep separated from the goats by the advance of 
the main armies, which will be joined by the smaller contingents via Schaffhausen, and 
by the conquest of Lucerne. At the same time France, which by the "secret treaty of 
January 30" is obliged to provide 60,000 men in Lyons and Colmar, occupies Geneva 
and the Jura under the same pretext as it occupied Rome. Berne will thus have 
become impossible to defend and the "revolutionary" government will be forced 
either to capitulate immediately or to starve to death with its troops in the Bernese 
High Alps. 
One can see that the project is not at all bad. It takes the nature of 
the terrain into account, as it should; it suggests capturing first of all 
the flatter and more fertile Northern Switzerland, and forcing the 
only serious position in Northern Switzerland, that behind the Aare 
and the Limmat, with united main forces. It has the advantage of 
cutting off the Swiss army from its granary and leaving it, to begin 
with, only the more difficult mountain terrain. Thus the project can 
be put into action as early as the beginning of spring, and the earlier 
it is executed the more difficult will be the situation of the Swiss 
pressed back into the mountains. 
On the basis of purely internal evidence it is difficult to decide 
whether the document has been published against the will of its 
authors or whether it has been deliberately composed to be 
manoeuvred into the hands of a Swiss paper for publication. In the 
latter case, it could only have the purpose of making the Swiss 
exhaust their finances with a rapid and large-scale call-up of their 
troops, and making them show themselves more and more 
submissive towards the Holy Alliance, as well as of misleading public 
opinion in general about the intentions of the Allies. The sabre-
rattling now taking place, with the war preparations of Russia and 
Prussia and the war plans against Switzerland, seems to support this 
interpretation. As does also a sentence in the memorandum  itself,  in 
which the greatest speed is recommended in all operations so that 
the largest possible area may be conquered before the contingents 
have been withdrawn from it into concentrations and marched 

=====第293页=====
270 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
off. On the other hand, just as much internal evidence speaks for the 
genuineness of the memorandum as being an invasion plan against 
Switzerland which has really been put forward. 
This much is certain: the Holy Alliance will march before the year 
is out, be it against Switzerland or Turkey to begin with, or directly 
against France, and in both cases the Federal Council should put its 
house in order. Whether the Holy Alliance or the revolution arrives 
first in Berne, the Council will itself have brought about its fall 
because of its cowardly neutrality. The counter-revolution cannot be 
satisfied with its concessions, since its origin is more or less 
revolutionary; the revolution cannot for an instant tolerate such a 
treacherous and cowardly government in the heart of Europe in the 
midst of the three nations most intimately involved in the movement. 
The behaviour of the Swiss Federal Council provides the most 
striking and it is to be hoped the last example of what the alleged 
"independence" and "autonomy" of small nations sandwiched 
between the great nations of today really mean. 
Written January 31-February 1850 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English in full for 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue the first time 
No. 2, 1850 

=====第294页=====
271 
Frederick Engels 
THE TEN HOURS' QUESTION 215 
It has generally been the habit of the champions of the working 
classes to meet the argument of the free-trading middle classes, of 
what is called the "Manchester School",216 by mere indignant 
comments upon the immoral and impudently-selfish character of 
their doctrines. The working man, ground down to the dust, 
trodden upon, physically ruined and mentally exhausted by a 
haughty class of money-loving mill-lords, the working man, certain­
ly, would deserve his fate if he did not feel his blood mount into his 
cheeks upon being very coolly told that he is doomed for ever to 
serve as a piece of machinery, to be used and misused as it suits his 
lord, for the greater glory and the more rapid accumulation of 
capital; and that it is under this condition only that the "ascendancy 
of his country" and the existence of the working class itself can be 
made to continue. Were it not for this feeling of passionate, 
revolutionary indignation, there would be no hope for proletarian 
emancipation. But it is one thing to keep up the manly spirit of 
opposition among the working people, and another to meet their 
enemies in public debate. And here mere indignation, the mere 
outburst of a violent feeling, though ever so justified, will not do. It is 
argument which is required. And there is no doubt but that even in 
cool argumentative discussion, that even on their own favourite field 
of political economy, the free-trading school will easily be beaten by 
the supporters of the working men's interest. 
As to the barefaced impudence with which the free-trading 
manufacturers declare the existence of modern society dependent 
upon their continuing to heap up wealth from the blood and sinews 
of the working people, we will say only one word. At all periods of 
history the vast majority of the people have been, in some shape or 

=====第295页=====
272 Frederick Engels 
another, mere instruments for enriching the privileged few. In all 
past times, however, this bloodsucking system was carried on under 
the cover of various moral, religious, and political pretexts; priests, 
philosophers, lawyers, and statesmen told the people that they 
were handed over to misery and starvation for their own good, 
and because it was God's ordinance. Now, on the contrary, the 
free-traders boldly declare—"You, working men, are slaves, and 
shall remain slaves, because only by your slavery can we increase our 
wealth and comforts; because we, the ruling class of this country, 
cannot continue to rule without you being slaves." Now, then, the 
mystery of oppression has, at last, come out; now, at last, thanks to 
the free-traders, the people can clearly perceive their position; now, 
at last, the question is fairly, unmistakeably put—Either we, or you! 
And therefore, just as before the false friend we prefer the open foe, 
so to the canting philanthropic aristocrat we prefer the brazenfaced 
free-trader, before Lord Ashley we prefer Quaker Bright. 
The Ten Hours' Bill was carried after a long and violent struggle, 
which had gone on for forty years in parliament, on the platform, in 
the press, and in every factory and workshop in the manufacturing 
districts. On the one side the most heart-rending pictures were 
produced, of children stunted in their growth and murdered; of 
women torn from their homes and little ones; of entire generations 
infected with lingering disease; of human life sacrificed by wholesale, 
and human happiness destroyed upon a national scale; and all this to 
enrich a few already over-rich individuals. And there was no fiction 
about it; all of it was fact, stubborn fact. Yet no one dared to ask that 
this infamous system should be done away with; it was only asked to 
limit it in some degree. On the other side came forward the cool, 
heartless, political economist, the paid servant of those who fat­
tened upon this system, and proved by a series of conclusions, as 
undeniable and as stringent as the rule of three, that, under penalty 
of "ruining the country", there was no means of interfering in any 
way with this system. 
It must be confessed, the advocates of the factory-workers never 
could confound, and even very seldom dared to grapple with the 
argument of the political economists. The reason is that under the 
present social system, as long as capital is in the hands of the few, to 
whom the many are obliged to sell their labour, these arguments are 
as many facts—facts as undeniable as those brought forth by their 
opponents. Yes, under the present social system, England, with all 
classes of her population, is entirely dependent upon the prosperity 
of her manufactures; and that prosperity, under the present system, 
is entirely dependent upon the most unlimited freedom of buying 

=====第296页=====
The Ten Hours' Question 273 
and selling, and of turning to the greatest possible profit all the 
resources of the country. 
Yes, the only means to keep up anything like this manufacturing 
prosperity, upon which now the very existence of the empire 
depends, is, under the present system, to produce more every year at 
less expense. And how produce more at less expense? First, by 
making the instrument of production—the machine and the 
working man—work more this year than last; secondly, by 
superseding the hitherto usual method of production by a new and 
more perfect one, that is to say, superseding men by improved 
machinery; thirdly, by reducing the cost of the working man, in 
reducing the cost of his sustenance (free trade in corn, etc.), or in 
merely reducing his wages to the lowest possible level. Thus, in all 
cases,  the working man is the loser—thus, England can only be saved 
by the ruin of her working people! Such is the position—these are 
the necessities, to which the progress of machinery, the accumulation 
of capital, and consequent home and foreign competition, have 
reduced England. 
Thus the Ten Hours' Bill, considered in  itself,  and as a final 
measure, was decidedly a false step, an impolitic, and even 
reactionary measure, and which bore within itself the germ of its own 
destruction. On the one hand it did not destroy the present social 
system, and on the other it did not favour its development. Instead 
of forcing the system onwards to its utmost limits, to a point where 
the ruling class would find all their resources exhausted, to that point 
where the dominion of another class—where a social revolution 
would become necessary—instead of that, the Ten Hours' Bill was 
intended to screw back society to a state superseded, long ago, by the 
present system. This becomes quite evident, if we only look at the 
parties who forced the bill through parliament against the opposing 
free-traders. Was it the working classes, whose agitated state, whose 
threatening demeanour, carried it? Certainly not. Had it been so, the 
working people might have carried the Charter217 many a year ago. 
Besides, the men who, among the working classes, took the lead in 
the short-time movement, were anything but threatening and 
revolutionary characters. They were mostly moderate, respectable, 
church-and-king men. They kept aloof from Chartism, and inclined 
mostly towards some sort of sentimental Toryism. They never 
inspired dread to any government. The Ten Hours' Bill was carried 
by the reactionary opponents of free trade, by the allied landed, 
funded, colonial and shipping interest; by the combined aristocracy 
and those portions of the bourgeoisie who themselves dreaded the 
ascendancy of the free-trading manufacturers. Did they carry it from 

=====第297页=====
274 Frederick Engels 
any sympathy with the people? Not they. They lived, and live, upon 
the spoils of the people. They are quite as bad, though less barefaced 
and more sentimental, than the manufacturers. But they would not 
be superseded by them, and thus, from hatred towards them, they 
passed this law which should secure to themselves popular sympathy, 
and, at the same time, arrest the rapid growth of the manufacturers' 
social and political power. The passing of the Ten Hours' Bill proved 
not that the working classes were strong, it proved only that the 
manufacturers were not yet strong enough to do as they liked. 
Since then, the manufacturers have virtually secured their 
ascendancy, by forcing free trade in corn, and in navigation, through 
parliament. The landed and the shipping interests have been 
sacrificed to their rising star. The stronger they grew, the more they 
felt the fetters imposed upon them by the Ten Hours' Bill. They 
openly set it at defiance; they re-introduced the relay system218; they 
forced the Home Secretary to issue circulars,3 by which the factory 
inspectors were ordered not to notice this breach of the law; and 
when, at last, the growing demand for their produce made the 
remonstrances of some troublesome inspectors insupportable, they 
brought the question before the Court of Exchequer, which, by one 
single judgment, destroyed, to the last vestige, the Ten Hours' Bill.219 
Thus the fruit of forty years' agitation has in one day been 
annihilated by the rising strength of the manufacturers, aided by one 
single flush of "prosperity" and "growing demand"; and the judges 
of England have proved that they, not less than parsons, attorneys, 
statesmen, and political economists, are but the paid servants of the 
ruling class, be it the class of landlords, of fund-lords, or of 
mill-lords. 
Are we, then, opposed to the Ten Hours' Bill? Do we want that 
horrible system of making money out of the marrow and blood of 
women and children to continue? Certainly not. We are so little 
opposed to it, that we are of opinion that the working classes, the 
very first day they get political power, will have to pass far more 
stringent measures against over-working women and children than a 
Ten Hours', or even an Eight Hours' Bill. But we contend that the 
bill, as passed in 1847, was passed not by the working classes, but by 
their momentary allies, the reactionary classes of society, and 
followed, as it was, by not a single other measure to fundamentally 
alter the relations between Capital and Labour, was an ill-timed, 
untenable and even reactionary measure. 
d An allusion to the circular issued by the Home Secretary George Grey on August 
5, 1848.— Ed 

=====第298页=====
The Ten Hours' Question 275 
But if the Ten Hours' Bill be lost, yet the working classes will be the 
gainers in this case. Let them allow the factory-lords a few moments 
of exultation, in the end it will be they who will exult, and the 
factory-lords who will lament. For— 
Firstly. The time and exertions spent in agitating so many years for 
the Ten Hours' Bill is not lost, although its immediate end be 
defeated. The working classes, in this agitation, found a mighty 
means to get acquainted with each other, to come to a knowledge of 
their social position and interests, to organise themselves and to 
know their strength. The working man, who has passed through 
such an agitation, is no longer the same he was before; and the whole 
working class, after passing through it, is a hundred times stronger, 
more enlightened, and better organised than it was at the outset. It 
was an agglomeration of mere units, without any knowledge of each 
other, without any common tie; and now it is a powerful body, 
conscious of its strength, recognised as the "Fourth Estate", and 
which will soon be the first. 
Secondly. The working classes will have learned by experience that 
no lasting benefit whatever can be obtained for them by others, but that they 
must obtain it themselves by conquering, first of all, political power. They 
must see now that under no circumstances have they any guarantee for 
bettering their social position unless by Universal Suffrage, which would 
enable them to seat a Majority of Working Men in the House of 
Commons. And thus the destruction of the Ten Hours' Bill will be an 
enormous benefit for the Democratic movement. 
Thirdly. The virtual repeal of the act of 1847 will force the 
manufacturers into such a rush at overtrading that revulsions upon 
revulsions will follow, so that very soon all the expedients and 
resources of the present system will be exhausted, and a revolution 
made inevitable, which, uprooting society far deeper than 1793 
and 1848 ever did, will speedily lead to the political and social 
ascendancy of the proletarians. We have already seen how the 
present social system is dependent upon the ascendancy of the 
manufacturing capitalists, and how this ascendancy is dependent 
upon the possibility of always extending production and, at the same 
time,  reducing its cost. But this extended production has a certain 
limit: it cannot outdo the existing markets. If it does, a revulsion 
follows, with its consequent ruin, bankruptcy, and misery. We have 
had many of these revulsions, happily overcome hitherto by the 
opening of new markets (China in 1842), or the better exploring of 
old ones, by reducing the cost of production (as by free trade in 
corn).  But there is a limit tc this, too. There are no new markets to be 
opened now; and there is only one means left to reduce wages, 

=====第299页=====
276 Frederick Engels 
namely, radical financial reform and reduction of the taxes by 
repudiation of  the national  debt.  And if the free-trading mill-lords have 
not the courage to go the length of that, or if this temporary 
expedient be once exploded, too, why, they will die of repletion. It 
is evident that, with no chance of further extending markets, under a 
system which is obliged to extend production every day, there is an 
end to mill-lord ascendancy. And what next? "Universal ruin and 
chaos,"  say the free-traders. Social revolution and proletarian ascendan­
cy, say we. 
Working men of England! If you, your wives, and children are 
again to be locked up in the "rattle-boxes" for thirteen hours a-day, 
do not despair. This is a cup which, though bitter, must be drunk. 
The sooner you get over it the better. Your proud masters, be 
assured, have dug their own graves in obtaining what they call a 
victory over you. The virtual repeal of the Ten Hours' Bill is an event 
which will materially hasten the approaching hour of your delivery. 
Your brethren, the French and German working men, never were 
satisfied with Ten Hours' Bills. They wanted to be  entirely  freed from 
the tyranny of Capital. And you—who have, in machinery, in skill, and 
in comparative numbers, far more materials at hand to work out 
your own salvation, and to produce enough for all of you—surely you 
will not be satisfied to be paid off with a small instalment. Ask, then, no 
longer for "Protection for Labour", but boldly and at once struggle 
for that political and social ascendancy of the proletarian  class  which will 
enable you to protect your labour yourselves. 
Written between February 8 and 20, 1850 Reprinted from the journal 
First published in The Democratic Review, 
March 1850 
Signed: F. E. 

=====第300页=====
277 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
ADDRESS OF THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY 
TO THE LEAGUE220 
March 1850 
THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY TO THE LEAGUE 
Brothers! 
In the two revolutionary years 1848-49 the League proved itself in 
double fashion: first, in that its members energetically took part in 
the movement in all places, that in the press, on the barricades and 
on the battlefields, they stood in the front ranks of the only resolutely 
revolutionary class, the proletariat. The League further proved itself 
in that its conception of the movement as laid down in the circulars 
of the congresses and of the Central Authority of 1847 as well as in 
the Communist Manifesto3 turned out to be the only correct one, that 
the expectations expressed in those documents were completely 
fulfilled and the conception of present-day social conditions, 
previously propagated only in secret by the League, is now on 
everyone's lips and is openly preached in the market places. At the 
same time the former firm organisation of the League was 
considerably slackened. A large part of the members who directly 
participated in the revolutionary movement believed the time for 
secret societies to have gone by and open activities alone to be 
sufficient. The individual districts and communities allowed their 
connections with the Central Authority to become loose and 
gradually dormant. Consequendy, while the democratic party, the 
party of the petty bourgeoisie, organised itself more and more in 
Germany, the workers' party lost its only firm foothold, remained 
organised at the most in separate localities for local purposes and in 
the general movement thus came completely under the domination 
and leadership of the petty-bourgeois democrats. An end must be 
put to this state of affairs, the independence of the workers must be 
a See present edition, Vol. 6.— Ed. 
11-1124 

=====第301页=====
278 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
restored. The Central Authority realised this necessity and therefore 
as early as the winter of 1848-49 it sent an emissary, Joseph Moll, to 
Germany to reorganise the League. Moll's mission, however, was 
without lasting effect, partly because the German workers at that 
time had not yet acquired sufficient experience and partly because it 
was interrupted by the insurrection in May last year. Moll himself 
took up the musket, joined the Baden-Palatinate army and fell on 
June 29 a in the encounter on the Murg. The League lost in him one 
of its oldest, most active and most trustworthy members, one who 
had been active in all the congresses and Central Authorities and 
even prior to this had carried out a series of missions with great 
success. After the defeat of the revolutionary parties of Germany 
and France in July 1849, almost all the members of the Central 
Authority came together again in London, replenished their 
numbers with new revolutionary forces and set about the reorganisa­
tion of the League with renewed zeal. 
The reorganisation can only be carried out by an emissary, and the 
Central Authority considers it extremely important that the emis­
saryb should leave precisely at this moment when a new revolution is 
impending, when the workers' party, therefore, must act in the most 
organised, most unanimous and most independent fashion possible 
if it is not again to be exploited and taken in tow by the bourgeoisie as 
in 1848. 
Brothers! We told you as early as 1848 that the German liberal 
bourgeois would soon come to power and would immediately turn 
their newly acquired power against the workers. You have seen how 
this has been fulfilled. In fact, it was the bourgeois who, immediately 
after the March movement of 1848, took possession of the state 
power and used this power in order at once to force the workers, 
their allies in the struggle, back into their former oppressed position. 
Though the bourgeoisie was not able to accomplish this without 
uniting with the feudal party, which had been ousted in March, 
without finally even relinquishing power once again to this feudal 
absolutist party, still it has secured conditions for itself which, in the 
long run, owing to the financial embarrassment of the government, 
would place power in its hands and would safeguard all its interests, 
if it were possible that the revolutionary movement would already 
now assume a so-called peaceful development. To safeguard its rule 
the bourgeoisie would not even need to make itself obnoxious by 
a The 1885 edition inaccurately gives July 19 as the date of Moll's death (see more 
about it on pp. 228-29 of this volume).— Ed. 
Heinrich Bauer.— Ed. 

=====第302页=====
Address of the Central Authority to the League 279 
violent measures against the people, since all these violent steps have 
already been taken by the feudal counter-revolution. Developments, 
however, will not take this peaceful course. On the contrary, the 
revolution, which will accelerate these developments, is near at 
hand, whether it will be called forth by an independent uprising 
of the French proletariat or by an invasion of the Holy Alliance 
against the revolutionary Babylon. 
And the role which the German liberal bourgeois played in 1848 
against the people, this so treacherous role will be taken over in the 
impending revolution by the democratic petty bourgeois, who at 
present take the same attitude in the opposition as the liberal 
bourgeois before 1848. This party, the democratic party, which is far 
more dangerous to the workers than the previous liberal party, 
consists of three elements: 
I. The most advanced sections of the big bourgeoisie, which 
pursue the aim of the immediate and complete overthrow of feudal­
ism and absolutism. This faction is represented by the one-time 
Berlin agreers, the tax resisters.221 
II. The democratic-constitutional petty bourgeois, whose main 
aim during the previous movement was the establishment of a more 
or less democratic federal state as striven for by their representatives, 
the Lefts in the Frankfurt Assembly, and later by the Stuttgart 
parliament,222 and by themselves in the campaign for the Imperial 
Constitution. 
III. The republican petty bourgeois, whose ideal is a German 
federative republic after the manner of Switzerland, and who now 
call themselves red and social-democratic because they cherish the 
pious wish of abolishing the pressure of big capital on small capital, 
of the big bourgeois on the petty bourgeois. The representatives of 
this faction were the members of the democratic congresses and 
committees, the leaders of the democratic associations, the editors of 
the democratic newspapers. 
Now, after their defeat, all these factions call themselves republi­
cans or reds, just as the republican petty bourgeois in France now 
call themselves socialists. Where, as in Württemberg, Bavaria, etc., 
they still find opportunity to pursue their aims constitutionally, they 
seize the occasion to retain their old phrases and to prove by deeds 
that they have not changed in the least. It is evident, incidentally, that 
the altered name of this party does not make the slightest difference 
to its attitude to the workers, but merely proves that it is now obliged 
to turn against the bourgeoisie, which is united with absolutism, and 
to seek the support of the proletariat. 
The petty-bourgeois democratic party in Germany is very 
H* 

=====第303页=====
280 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
powerful; it comprises not only the great majority of the burgher 
inhabitants of the towns, the small people in industry and trade and 
the master craftsmen; it numbers among its followers also the peas­
ants and the rural proletariat, insofar as the latter has not yet 
found a support in the independent urban proletariat. 
The relation of the revolutionary workers' party to the petty-
bourgeois democrats is this: it marches together with them against 
the faction which it aims at overthrowing, it opposes them in 
everything by which they seek to consolidate their position in their 
own interests. 
Far from desiring to transform the whole of society for the 
revolutionary proletarians, the democratic petty bourgeois strive for 
a change in social conditions by means of which the existing society 
will be made as tolerable and comfortable as possible for them. 
Hence they demand above all a diminution of state expenditure by 
curtailing the bureaucracy and shifting the bulk of the taxes on to the 
big landowners and bourgeois. Further, they demand the abolition 
of the pressure of big capital on small, through public credit 
institutions and laws against usury, by which means it will be pos­
sible for them and the peasants to obtain advances on favourable 
conditions from the state instead of from the capitalists; they also 
demand the establishment of bourgeois property relations in the 
countryside by the complete abolition of feudalism. To accomplish 
all this they need a democratic state structure, either constitutional or 
republican, that will give them and their allies, the peasants, a 
majority; also a democratic communal structure that will give them 
direct control over communal property, and a number of func­
tions now performed by the bureaucrats. 
The domination and speedy increase of capital is further to be 
counteracted partly by restricting the right of inheritance and partly 
by transferring as many jobs of work as possible to the state. As far as 
the workers are concerned, it is certain above all that they are to 
remain wage-workers as before; the democratic petty bourgeois only 
desire better wages and a more secure existence for the workers and 
hope to achieve this through partial employment by the state and 
through charity measures; in short, they hope to bribe the workers 
by more or less concealed alms and to sap their revolutionary vigour 
by making their position tolerable for the moment. The demands of 
the petty-bourgeois democrats here summarised are not put forward 
by all of their factions and only very few of their members consider 
these demands in their aggregate as a definite aim. The further 
individual people or factions among them go, the more of these 
demands will they make their own, and those few who see their own 

=====第304页=====
Address of the Central Authority to the League 281 
programme in what has been outlined above would believe that 
thereby they have put forward the utmost that can be demanded 
from the revolution. But these demands can in no wise suffice for the 
party of the proletariat. While the democratic petty bourgeois wish to 
bring the revolution to a conclusion as quickly as possible, and with 
the achievement, at most, of the above demands, it is our interest 
and our task to make the revolution permanent, until all more or 
less possessing classes have been forced out of their position of 
dominance, the proletariat has conquered state power, and the 
association of proletarians, not only in one country but in all the 
dominant countries of the world, has advanced so far that 
competition among the proletarians in these countries has ceased 
and that at least the decisive productive forces are concentrated 
in the hands of the proletarians. For us the issue cannot be the 
alteration of private property but only its annihilation, not the 
smoothing over of class antagonisms but the abolition of classes, not 
the improvement of the existing society but the foundation of a new 
one. That, during the further development of the revolution, 
petty-bourgeois democracy will for a moment obtain predominating 
influence in Germany is not open to doubt. The question, therefore, 
is what the attitude of the proletariat and in particular of the League 
will be in relation to it: 
1. during the continuance of the present relations, under which 
the petty-bourgeois democrats are likewise oppressed; 
2. in the next revolutionary struggle, which will give them the 
upper hand; 
3. after this struggle, during the period of preponderance over 
the overthrown classes and the proletariat. 
1. At the present moment, when the democratic petty bourgeois 
are everywhere oppressed, they preach in general unity and 
reconciliation to the proletariat, they offer it their hand and strive 
for the establishment of a large opposition party which will embrace 
all shades of opinion in the democratic party, that is, they strive to 
entangle the workers in a party organisation in which general 
social-democratic phrases predominate, and serve to conceal their 
special interests, and in which the definite demands of the proletariat 
must not be brought forward for the sake of beloved peace. Such a 
union would turn out solely to their advantage and altogether to the 
disadvantage of the proletariat. The proletariat would lose its whole 
independent, laboriously achieved position and once more be 
reduced to an appendage of official bourgeois democracy. This 
union must, therefore, be most decisively rejected. Instead of once 
again stooping to serve as the applauding chorus of the bourgeois 

=====第305页=====
282 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
democrats, the workers, and above all the League, must exert 
themselves to establish an independent secret and public organisa­
tion of the workers' party alongside the official democrats and make 
each community the central point and nucleus of workers' associa­
tions in which the attitude and interests of the proletariat will be 
discussed independently of bourgeois influences. How far the 
bourgeois democrats are from seriously considering an alliance in 
which the proletarians would stand side by side with them with equal 
power and equal rights is shown, for example, by the Breslau 
democrats who, in their organ, the Neue Oder-Zeitung, most furiously 
attack the independently organised workers, whom they style 
socialists. In the case of a struggle against a common adversary no 
special union is required. As soon as such an adversary has to be 
fought directly, the interests of both parties, for the moment, 
coincide, and, as previously so also in the future, this alliance, 
calculated to last only for the moment, will come about of  itself.  It is 
self-evident that in the impending bloody conflicts, as in all earlier 
ones,  it is the workers who, in the main, will have to win the victory by 
their courage, determination and self-sacrifice. As previously so also 
in this struggle, the mass of the petty bourgeois will as long as 
possible remain hesitant, undecided and inactive, and then, as soon 
as the issue has been decided, will seize the victory for themselves, 
will call upon the workers to maintain tranquillity and return to their 
work, will guard against so-called excesses and bar the proletariat 
from the fruits of victory. It is not in the power of the workers to 
prevent the petty-bourgeois democrats from doing this, but it is in 
their power to make it difficult for them to gain the upper hand as 
against the armed proletariat, and to dictate such conditions to them 
that the rule of the bourgeois democrats will from the outset bear 
within it the seeds of its downfall, and that its subsequent extrusion 
by the rule of the proletariat will be considerably facilitated. Above 
all things, the workers must counteract, as much as is at all possible, 
during the conflict and immediately after the struggle, the bourgeois 
endeavours to allay the storm, and must compel the democrats to 
carry out their present terrorist phrases. They must work to prevent 
the direct revolutionary excitement from being suppressed again 
immediately after the victory. On the contrary, they must keep it 
alive as long as possible. Far from opposing so-called excesses, 
instances of popular revenge against hated individuals or public 
buildings that are associated only with hateful recollections, such 
instances must not only be tolerated but the lead in them must be 
taken. During the struggle and after the struggle, the workers must, 
at every opportunity, put forward their own demands alongside the 

=====第306页=====
Address of the Central Authority to the League 283 
demands of the bourgeois democrats. They must demand guaran­
tees for the workers as soon as the democratic bourgeois set about 
taking the government into their hands. If necessary they must 
wring these guarantees by force and in general they must see to it 
that the new rulers pledge themselves to all possible concessions and 
promises—the surest way to compromise them. In general, they 
must in every way restrain as far as possible the intoxication of 
victory and the enthusiasm for the new state of things which follows 
every victorious street battle by a calm and dispassionate assess­
ment of the situation and by unconcealed mistrust in the new go­
vernment. Alongside the new official governments they must im­
mediately establish their own revolutionary workers' governments, 
whether in the form of municipal committees and municipal coun­
cils or in the form of workers' clubs or workers' committees, 
so that the bourgeois-democratic governments not only imme­
diately lose the support of the workers but from the outset 
see themselves supervised and threatened by authorities backed by 
the whole mass of the workers. In a word, from the first moment of 
victory, mistrust must be directed no longer against the defeated 
reactionary party, but against the workers' previous allies, against 
the party that wishes to exploit the common victory for itself 
alone. 
2. But in order to be able energetically 'and threateningly to 
oppose this party, whose treachery to the workers will begin from the 
first hour of victory, the workers must be armed and organised. The 
arming of the whole proletariat with rifles, muskets, cannon and 
ammunition must be carried out at once, the revival of the old civic 
militia directed against the workers must be resisted. However, 
where the latter is not feasible the workers must try to organise 
themselves independently as a proletarian guard with commanders 
elected by themselves and with a general staff of their own choosing, 
and to put themselves under the command not of the state authority 
but of the revolutionary municipal councils set up by the workers. 
Where workers are employed at the expense of the state they must 
see that they are armed and organised in a separate corps with 
commanders of their own choosing or as part of the proletarian 
guard. Arms and ammunition must not be surrendered on any 
pretext; any attempt at disarming must be frustrated, if necessary, by 
force. Destruction of the influence of the bourgeois democrats upon 
the workers, immediate independent and armed organisation of the 
workers and the enforcement of conditions as difficult and 
compromising as possible for the inevitable momentary rule of 
bourgeois democracy — these are the main points which the prole-

=====第307页=====
284 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
tariat and hence the League must keep in view during and after 
the impending insurrection. 
3. As soon as the new governments have consolidated their 
positions to some extent, their struggle against the workers will 
begin. Here in order to be able to offer energetic opposition to the 
democratic petty bourgeois, it is above all necessary for the workers 
to be independently organised and centralised in clubs. After the 
overthrow of the existing governments, the Central Authority will, as 
soon as at all possible, betake itself to Germany, immediately convene 
a congress and put before it the necessary proposals for the 
centralisation of the workers' clubs under a leadership established in 
the chief seat of the movement. The speedy organisation of at least a 
provincial association of the workers' clubs is one of the most 
important points for strengthening and developing the workers' 
party; the immediate consequence of the overthrow of the existing 
governments will be the election of a national representative 
assembly. Here the proletariat must see to it: 
I. that no groups of workers are barred on any pretext by any 
kind of trickery on the part of local authorities or government 
commissaries; 
II. that everywhere workers' candidates are put up alongside the 
bourgeois-democratic candidates, that they are as far as possible 
members of the League, and that their election is promoted by all 
possible means. Even where there is no prospect whatever of their 
being elected, the workers must put up their own candidates in order 
to preserve their independence, to count their forces and to lay 
before the public their revolutionary attitude and party standpoint. 
In this connection they must not allow themselves to be bribed by 
such arguments of the democrats as, for example, that by so doing 
they are splitting the democratic party and giving the reactionaries 
the possibility of victory. The ultimate purpose of all such phrases is 
to dupe the proletariat. The advance which the proletarian party is 
bound to make by such independent action is infinitely more 
important than the disadvantage that might be incurred by the 
presence of a few reactionaries in the representative body. If from 
the outset the democrats come out resolutely and terroristically 
against the reactionaries, the influence of the latter in the elections 
will be destroyed in advance. 
The first point on which the bourgeois democrats will come into 
conflict with the workers will be the abolition of feudalism. As in the 
first French Revolution, the petty bourgeois will give the feudal lands 
to the peasants as free property, that is to say, try to leave the rural 
proletariat in existence and form a petty-bourgeois peasant class, 

=====第308页=====
Address of the Central Authority to the League 285 
which will go through the same cycle of impoverishment and 
indebtedness which the French peasant is now still caught in. 
The workers must oppose this plan in the interest of the rural 
proletariat and in their own interest. They must demand that the 
confiscated feudal property remain state property and be converted 
into workers' colonies cultivated by the associated rural proletariat 
with all the advantages of large-scale agriculture, through which the 
principle of common property immediately obtains a firm basis in 
the midst of the tottering bourgeois property relations. Just as the 
democrats combine with the peasants so must the workers combine 
with the rural proletariat.223 further, the democrats will work either 
directly for a federative republic or, if they cannot avoid a single and 
indivisible republic, they will at least attempt to cripple the central 
government by the utmost possible autonomy and independence for 
the communities and provinces. The workers, in opposition to this 
plan, must not only strive for a single and indivisible German 
republic, but also within  , this republic for the most determined 
centralisation of power iri the hands of the state authority. They 
must not allow themselves to be misguided by the democratic talk of 
freedom for the communities, of self-government, etc. In a country 
like Germany, where there are still so many remnants of the Middle 
Ages to be abolished, where there is so much local and provincial 
obstinacy to be broken, it must under no circumstances be permitted 
that every village, every town and every province should put a new 
obstacle in the path of revolutionary activity, which can proceed with 
full force only from the centre.— It is not to be tolerated that the 
present state of affairs should be renewed, that Germans must fight 
separately in every town and in every province for one and the same 
advance. Least of all is it to be tolerated that a form of property 
which still lags behind modern private property and everywhere is 
necessarily disintegrating into it—that communal property with the 
quarrels between poor and rich communities resulting from it, as 
well as communal civil law, with its trickery against the workers, 
which exists alongside state civil law, should be perpetuated by a 
so-called free communal constitution. As in France in 1793 so today 
in Germany, it is the task of the really revolutionary party to carry 
through the strictest centralisation.* 
* It must be recalled today that this passage is based on a misunderstanding. At 
that time — thanks to the Bonapartist and liberal falsifiers of history—it was 
considered as established that the French centralised machine of administration had 
been introduced by the Great Revolution and in particular that it had been used by the 
Convention as an indispensable and decisive weapon for defeating the royalist and 

=====第309页=====
286 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
We have seen how the democrats will come to power with the next 
movement, how they will be compelled to propose more or less 
socialist measures. It will be asked what measures the workers ought 
to propose in reply. At the beginning of the movement, of course, 
the workers cannot yet propose any directly communist measures. 
But they can: 
1. Compel the democrats to interfere in as many spheres as 
possible of the hitherto existing social order, to disturb its regular 
course and to compromise themselves as well as to concentrate the 
utmost possible productive forces, means of transport, factories, 
railways, etc., in the hands of the state. 
2. They must carry to the extreme the proposals of the democrats, 
who in any case will not act in a revolutionary but in a merely 
reformist manner, and transform them into direct attacks upon 
private property; thus, for example, if the petty bourgeois propose 
purchase of the railways and factories, the workers must demand 
that these railways and factories should be simply confiscated by the 
state without compensation as being the property of reactionaries. If 
the democrats propose proportional taxation, the workers must 
demand progressive taxation; if the democrats themselves put 
forward a moderately progressive taxation, the workers must insist 
on a taxation with rates that rise so steeply that big capital will be 
ruined by it; if the democrats demand the regulation of state debts, 
the workers must demand state bankruptcy. Thus, the demands of 
the workers must everywhere be governed by the concessions and 
measures of the democrats. 
If the German workers are not able to attain power and achieve 
their own class interests without completely going through a lengthy 
revolutionary development, they at least know for a certainty this 
time that the first act of this approaching revolutionary drama will 
federalist reaction and the external enemy. It is now, however, a well-known fact that 
throughout the revolution up to the eighteenth Brumaire the whole administration of 
the départements, arrondissements and communes consisted of authorities elected by 
the respective constituents themselves, and that these authorities acted with complete 
freedom within the general state laws; that precisely this provincial and local 
self-government, similar to the American, became the most powerful lever of the 
revolution and indeed to such an extent that Napoleon, immediately after his coup 
d'état of the eighteenth Brumaire, hastened to replace it by the still existing 
administration by prefects, which, therefore, was a pure instrument of reaction from 
the beginning. But no more than local and provincial self-government is in 
contradiction to political, national centralisation, is it necessarily bound up with that 
narrow-minded cantonal or communal self-seeking which strikes us as so repulsive in 
Switzerland, and which all the South German federal republicans wanted to make the 
rule in Germany in 1849.— Note by Engels to the 1885 edition. 

=====第310页=====
Address of the Central Authority to the League 287 
coincide with the direct victory of their own class in France and will 
be very much accelerated by it. 
But they themselves must do the utmost for their final victory by 
making it clear to themselves what their class interests are, by taking 
up their position as an independent party as soon as possible and by 
not allowing themselves to be misled for a single moment by the 
hypocritical phrases of the democratic petty bourgeois into re­
fraining from the independent organisation of the party of the 
proletariat. Their battle cry must be: The Revolution in Permanence. 
London, March 1850 
Written about March 24, 1850 Printed according to the book 
Distributed in handwritten copies in 1850 
Published by Engels in the appendices 
to the book: Karl Marx, Enthüllungen 
über den Kommunisten-Prozess zu Köln, 
Hottingen-Zurich, 1885 

=====第311页=====
288 
Frederick Engels 
THE ENGLISH TEN HOURS' BILL 5 
The workers of England have suffered a significant defeat, and 
from a direction from which they had least expected it. A few weeks 
ago the Court of Exchequer, one of the four highest courts of law in 
England, pronounced a judgment by which the main provisions of 
the Ten Hours' Bill enacted in 1847 are as good as abolished.225 
The history of the Ten Hours' Bill provides a striking example of 
the peculiar mode of development of class antagonisms in England 
and therefore deserves closer investigation. 
We know how, with the rise of large-scale industry, there arose a 
quite new and infinitely callous exploitation of the working class by 
the factory owners. The new machines rendered the labour of grown 
men superfluous; their supervision demanded women and children, 
who were much more suited to this occupation than the men and 
simultaneously cheaper to employ. Thus industrial exploitation at 
once took possession of the whole of the worker's family and locked 
it up in the factory; women and children had to work day and night 
without a break until they were overcome by utter physical 
exhaustion. The pauper children of the workhouses3 became a 
regular article of trade with the growing demand for children; 
four-year-olds and even three-year-olds were auctioned off by the 
score in the form of apprenticeship contracts to the highest bidding 
manufacturers. The callously brutal exploitation of children and 
women at that time—an exploitation which did not let up so long as 
there was a muscle, a sinew or a drop of blood left to extract profit 
from—still remains a vivid memory for the older generation of 
English workers, and not a few of them bear this memory in the form 
3 Engels uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第312页=====
- 1 -
Unfer greunb Coûté 9Wénarb, Serfaffer bfé S3ucf)cé 
„Prologue d'une révolution" tjat une fcaé fofgenbe, g(etd) 
nad) ben 5um?9ReÇe(eten »on 1848 gefdmebene ®ebtd)t gut 
ftufnafyme mitgefreut: 
Jambes. 
Quand le jour espéré, le jour inévitable 
des justes expiations 
Viendra pour balayer une race coupable 
au vent des révolutions; 
Alors,  tous les pleureurs qui parlent de clémence, 
Ceux à qui le bourreau fait peur, 
Ceux pour qui la justice est colère et vengeance, 
le crime faiblesse et malheur, 
Reviendront nous crier que la peine est impie, 
qu'il faut pardonner, non punir, 
Et, quand le sang versé veut du sang qui l'expie, 
on parlera de repentir. 
Déesse qu'invoquaient les siècles forts et rudes, 
par qui tout meurtre était vengé, 
O Samte Nemesis, vois nos décrépitudes, 
ton glaive en férule est changé 
9t. SRI).  Stitung. 4* «eft 1850. 1 
A page from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue with verses by 
Louis Ménard. The introduction by Marx and Engels says: "Our friend Louis 
Ménard, author of the book Prologue d'une révolution, has sent us the following verses, 
which he wrote in the wake of the June 1848 events." 

=====第313页=====

=====第314页=====
The English Ten Hours' Bill 291 
of a crooked spine or a mutilated limb, and they all bear their 
thoroughly ruined health with them wherever they go. The fate of 
the slaves in the worst of the American plantations was golden in 
comparison with that of the English workers in that period. 
Very soon measures had to be taken by the state to curb the 
manufacturers' utterly ruthless frenzy for exploitation, which was 
trampling all the requirements of civilised society underfoot. These 
first legal restrictions were, however, extremely inadequate and were 
soon circumvented. Only half a century after the introduction of 
large-scale industry, when the stream of industrial development had 
found a regular course for  itself,  only in 1833 was it possible to bring 
in an effective law that to some extent curbed at least the most blatant 
excesses. 
As early as the beginning of this century a party had been formed 
under the leadership of a number of philanthropists which 
demanded the legal limitation of labour time in the factories to ten 
hours.  This party, which, under Sadler in the twenties and after his 
death under the leadership of Lord Ashley and R. Oastler, continued 
its agitation up to the actual passing of the Ten Hours' Bill, gradually 
united under its banner, besides the workers themselves, the 
aristocracy and all the factions of the bourgeoisie hostile to the 
manufacturers. This association of the workers with the most 
heterogeneous and reactionary elements of English society made it 
necessary for the Ten Hours agitation to be pursued quite 
separately from the revolutionary agitation of the workers. It is true 
that the Chartists were for the Ten Hours' Bill to the last man; they 
were the mass, the chorus, in all the Ten Hours meetings; they made 
their press available to the Ten Hours Committee. But not a single 
Chartist agitated officially in conjunction with the aristocratic or 
bourgeois Ten Hours men, or sat on the Short Time Committee3 in 
Manchester. This Committee was exclusively composed of workers 
and factory overseers. But these workers were completely broken, 
exhausted by work, placid, god-fearing, respectable folk who felt a 
pious abhorrence towards Chartism and socialism, who held throne 
and altar in due respect and who, too crushed to hate the industrial 
bourgeoisie, only retained the capacity for humble veneration of the 
aristocracy, which at least deigned to interest itself in their misery. 
The working-class Toryism of these Ten Hours people was the echo 
of that first opposition of the workers to industrial progress which 
attempted to restore the old patriarchal situation and whose most 
a In the original the name of the Committee is given in German (Zehnstunden­
komitee),  and the English term is given in parenthesis.— Ed. 

=====第315页=====
292 Frederick Engels 
energetic manifestations of life did not go beyond the smashing of 
machines. Just as reactionary as these workers were the bourgeois 
and aristocratic chiefs of the Ten Hours party. They were without 
exception sentimental Tories, for the most part romantic ideologues 
revelling in the memory of vanished, patriarchal forms of hole-and-
corner exploitation with their train of religiosity, domesticity, virtue 
and narrow-mindedness, and with their stable, traditionally inherit­
ed ways. One look at the revolutionary maelstrom of industry and 
their narrow skulls were seized with dizziness. Their petty-bourgeois 
frame of mind was horrified in the presence of these new forces of 
production shooting up with magical suddenness, flushing away in a 
few years the hitherto most venerable, most inviolable, most essential 
classes of society and replacing them with new, hitherto unknown 
classes whose interests, whose' sympathies and whose whole way of 
living and thinking stood in contradiction to the institutions of the 
old English society. These soft-hearted ideologues did not fail to take 
the field from the standpoint of morality, humanity and compassion 
against the pitiless harshness and ruthlessness with which this 
process of upheaval asserted  itself,  and to oppose to it as their social 
ideal the stability, the stagnant comfort and moral complacency of 
dying patriarchalism. 
Whenever the Ten Hours question attracted public attention these 
elements were joined by all sections of society whose interests were 
suffering and whose existence was being threatened by the industrial 
upheaval. The bankers, stockjobbers,3 shipowners and merchants, 
the landed aristocracy, the big West Indian landowners and the petty 
bourgeoisie joined forces more and more at such times under the 
leadership of the Ten Hours agitators. 
The Ten Hours' Bill provided splendid terrain for these 
reactionary classes and factions to combine with the proletariat 
against the industrial bourgeoisie. While significantly restricting the 
rapid development of the wealth, the influence, and the social and 
political power of the manufacturers, it gave the workers merely 
material, indeed exclusively physical advantages. It protected their 
health from being too rapidly ruined. But it gave them nothing 
which could make them dangerous to their reactionary allies; it 
neither gave them political power nor altered their social position as 
wage-labourers. On the contrary, the Ten Hours agitation kept the 
workers still under the influence and partly under the leadership of 
these propertied allies of theirs, which they had been more and more 
striving to draw away from since the Reform Bill226 and the rise of 
a Engels uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第316页=====
The English Ten Hours' Bill 293 
the Chartist agitation. It was quite natural, especially at the start of 
the industrial upheaval, that the workers, who were in direct conflict 
only with the industrial bourgeoisie, should ally themselves with the 
aristocracy and the other factions of the bourgeoisie by whom they 
were not directly exploited and who were also struggling against the 
industrial bourgeoisie. But this alliance adulterated the labour 
movement with a strong reactionary admixture which is only 
gradually disappearing; it reinforced significantly the reactionary 
element within the labour movement—those workers whose trade 
still belongs to manufacture and is thus itself threatened by industrial 
progress, like for instance the handweavers. 
It was thus a piece of good fortune for the workers that in the 
confused period of 1847, when all the old parliamentary parties were 
dissolved and the new ones had not yet taken shape, the Ten Hours' 
Bill was finally passed. It was passed in a series of most confused 
votes,  directed apparently only by chance, in which no party voted 
compactly and consistently except the decidedly Free Trade 
manufacturers on the one hand and the fanatically protectionist 
landowners on the other. It got through as a piece of chicanery that 
the aristocrats and a faction of the Peelites and the Whigs put over 
on the manufacturers to avenge themselves for the great victory 
which these had wrested from them in the repeal of the Corn 
Laws. 227 
The Ten Hours' Bill not only gave the workers the satisfaction of 
an indispensable physical need, by protecting their health to some 
extent from the manufacturers' frenzy for exploitation, it also 
liberated the workers from their alliance with the sentimental 
dreamers, from their solidarity with all the reactionary classes of 
England. The patriarchal drivel of an Oastler, or the moving 
assurances of sympathy from a Lord Ashley could find no more 
listeners once the Ten Hours' Bill ceased to provide point to these 
tirades. Only now did the labour movement concentrate wholly on 
achieving the political rule of the proletariat as the prime means of 
transforming the whole of existing society. And here it was faced 
by the aristocracy and the reactionary factions of the bourgeoisie, 
only shortly before still the allies of the workers, as so many raging 
enemies, as so many allies of the industrial bourgeoisie. 
Thanks to the industrial revolution, industry, by which England 
conquered the world market and held it in subjugation, had become 
the decisive branch of production for England. England stood and 
fell with industry, rose and declined with its fluctuations. With the 
decisive influence of industry, the industrial bourgeoisie, the 
manufacturers, became the decisive class in English society, and the 

=====第317页=====
294 Frederick Engels 
political rule of the industrialists, the removal of all social and 
political institutions standing in the way of the development of 
large-scale industry became a necessity. The industrial bourgeoisie 
got down to the task. The history of England from 1830 until now is 
the history of the victories which it has one after the other achieved 
over its united reactionary opponents. 
Whereas the July Revolution in France brought the finance 
aristocracy to power, the Reform Bill in England, which was carried 
immediately afterwards in 1832, marked the fall of the finance 
aristocracy. The Bank, the creditors of the national debt and the 
stock-exchange speculators, in a word the money-dealers to whom 
the aristocracy was deeply in debt, had hitherto held almost exclusive 
sway in England under the brightly chequered mantle of the 
electoral monopoly. The further large-scale industry and world 
trade developed, the more intolerable their rule became, despite 
individual concessions. The alliance of all other factions of the 
bourgeoisie with the English proletariat and the Irish peasantry 
toppled them. The people threatened a revolution, the bourgeoisie 
gave the Bank its notes back en  masse  and brought it to the brink of 
bankruptcy. The finance aristocracy yielded at the right moment; its 
flexibility saved England from a February Revolution. 
The Reform Bill gave all the propertied classes of the country, 
right down to the smallest shopkeeper, a share in political power. All 
the factions of the bourgeoisie were thus given a legal ground on 
which they could establish their claims and assert their power. The 
same struggles of the individual factions of the bourgeoisie among 
themselves which have been fought out under the Republic in 
France since the June victory of 1848,a have in England been fought 
out in Parliament since the Reform Bill. It goes without saying that 
the conditions being quite different the consequences in the two 
countries are also different. 
The industrial bourgeoisie, once it had conquered the terrain for 
parliamentary struggle with the Reform Bill, could not help gaining 
victory upon victory. The aristocratic appendages of the financiers 
were sacrificed to it in the limitation of sinecures, the paupers in the 
Poor Law of  1833, 228 and the tax exemption of the financiers and 
landowners in the tariff reductions and the introduction of income 
tax. With the victories of the industrialists the number of their vassals 
increased. Wholesale and retail trade became their tributaries. 
London and Liverpool fell to their knees before Free Trade, the 
a The reference is to the suppression of the June insurrection of the Paris 
proletariat.— Ed. 

=====第318页=====
The English Ten Hours' Bill 295 
Messiah of the industrialists. But with their victories their require­
ments and their demands also grew. 
Modern large-scale industry can only exist provided it expands 
incessantly, continually conquers new market^. The boundless 
facility of production on the most massive scale, the unceasing 
development and improvement of machinery, and the consequent 
uninterrupted displacement of capital and labour power, force it to 
do so. Any stoppage here can only mean the beginning of ruin. But 
the expansion of industry is conditioned by the expansion of 
markets. And since industry at its present level of development 
increases its forces of production at a rate disproportionately faster 
than that at which it can increase its markets, there arise periodical 
crises in which, due to the excess of means of production and 
products, circulation in the commercial body suddenly comes to a 
standstill and industry and trade are almost totally immobilised until 
the glut of products has found an outlet in new channels. England is 
the focus of these crises, whose crippling effects unfailingly reach 
into the most distant, most obscure corners of the world market, and 
everywhere drag a significant part of the industrial and commercial 
bourgeoisie down into ruin. From such crises, which moreover bring 
home most tangibly to every section of English society its depend­
ence on the manufacturers, there is only one means of escape: 
expanding markets, either by conquering new ones or by exploiting 
the old ones more thoroughly. Apart from the few exceptional cases, 
like China in 1842, in which a hitherto stubbornly closed market is 
burst open by force of arms,229 there is only one means of opening up 
new markets and exploiting old ones more thoroughly by industrial 
methods—by cheaper prices, that is, by reducing production costs. 
Production costs are reduced by new and more highly perfected 
modes of production, by cutting profit or by cutting wages. But the 
introduction of more highly perfected modes of production cannot 
provide a way out of the crisis since it increases production and thus 
itself makes new markets necessary. There can be no question of 
reducing profit in a crisis when everyone is glad to sell even at a loss. 
The same goes for wages, which are furthermore, like profit, 
determined by laws that are independent of the will or the intentions 
of the manufacturers. And yet wages form the principal component 
of the production costs, and their permanent reduction is the only 
means of expanding markets and escaping from the crisis. Wages 
will fall, however, if the workers' necessities of life are produced 
more cheaply. But in England the cost of the workers' necessities of 
life was raised by the protective tariffs on corn, English colonial 
products,etc., and by indirect taxes. 

=====第319页=====
296 Frederick Engels 
Hence the stubborn, vigorous and universal agitation by the 
industrialists for Free Trade and particularly for the abolition of the 
corn tariffs. Hence the characteristic fact that since 1842 every crisis 
in trade and industry has brought them a fresh victory. With the 
abolition of the corn tariffs the English landowners were sacrificed to 
the industrialists, with the abolition of the differential tariffs on 
sugar, etc., the landowners in the colonies, with the abolition of the 
Navigation Acts230 the shipowners. At the present moment they are 
agitating for limitation of state expenditure and a reduction of taxes, 
as well as for the admission to the franchise of that section of the 
workers which offers the surest guarantees. They wish to draw new 
allies into Parliament in order to conquer so much the more quickly 
direct political power for themselves, by means of which alone they 
can get rid of the traditional appendages of the English state 
machine, now emptied of meaning but very expensive, the 
aristocracy, the Church, the sinecures and the semi-feudal system of 
jurisprudence. Undoubtedly the new trade crisis, which is now 
imminent, and which to all appearances will coincide with new and 
great collisions on the Continent, will bring with it at least this step 
forward in England's development. 
In the midst of these uninterrupted victories of the industrial 
bourgeoisie, the reactionary factions succeeded in forging the chains 
of the Ten Hours' Bill for it. The Ten Hours' Bill was passed at a 
moment of neither prosperity nor crisis, in one of those in-between 
periods in which industry is still labouring sufficiently under the 
consequences of over-production to be able to set only a part of its 
resources in motion, in which the manufacturers themselves 
therefore do not allow full-time working. At such a juncture, when 
the Ten Hours' Bill limited competition among the manufacturers 
themselves, and only at such a juncture could it be tolerated. But this 
juncture soon gave way to renewed prosperity. The empty markets 
demanded new supplies; speculation rose again and doubled 
demand; the manufacturers were unable to work their factories hard 
enough. The Ten Hours' Bill now became an intolerable fetter upon 
industry, which now more than ever needed the most complete 
independence and the most unrestricted disposal of all its 
resources. What would become of the industrialists during the next 
crisis if they were not permitted to exploit the brief period of 
prosperity with all their might? The Ten Hours' Bill had to succumb. 
If the strength to revoke it in Parliament was lacking, then ways had 
to be found for getting round it. 
The Ten Hours' Bill limited the labour time of young people 
under the age of eighteen and of all female workers to ten hours 

=====第320页=====
The English Ten Hours' Bill 297 
daily. Since these and children are the decisive categories of workers 
in the factories, the necessary consequence was that the factories 
were able to work only ten hours daily. The manufacturers, however, 
when the boom made an increase in the labour time a necessity for 
them, found a way out. As hitherto with children under fourteen, 
whose labour time is even more restricted, they engaged a few more 
women and young people than before for assistance and replace­
ment. In this way they could make their factories and their adult 
workers work thirteen, fourteen or fifteen hours at a stretch, without 
a single individual covered by the Ten Hours' Bill working more 
than ten hours daily. This conflicted partially with the letter of the 
law, but it conflicted still more with the spirit of the law and the 
intention of the legislators; the factory inspectors complained, the 
justices of the peace were divided and gave contradictory judgments. 
The higher the level of prosperity the more loudly the industrialists 
protested against the Ten Hours' Bill and against the interventions 
of the factory inspectors. The Home Secretary, Sir George Grey, 
ordered the inspectors to tolerate the relay or shift system.3 But 
many of them, with the support of the law, did not allow themselves 
to be deterred by this. Finally a sensational case was taken right up to 
the Court of Exchequer, and this court pronounced for the 
manufacturers. With this decision the Ten Hours' Bill has been 
abolished in practice, and the manufacturers have once again 
become the complete masters of their factories; in time of crisis they 
are able to work two, three or six hours, and in time of prosperity 
thirteen to fifteen hours, and the factory inspector no longer has any 
right to interfere. 
If the Ten Hours' Bill was advocated mainly by reactionaries and 
carried exclusively by reactionary classes, we can see here that in the 
mode in which it was carried it was a thoroughly reactionary 
measure. England's whole social development is bound up with the 
development, the progress of industry. All institutions which inhibit 
this progress, which limit it or wish to regulate and rule it according 
to extraneous standards, are reactionary, untenable, and must 
succumb to it. The revolutionary force which has made child's play 
of dealing with the whole patriarchal society of old England, with the 
aristocracy and the finance bourgeoisie, will indeed not permit itself 
to be dammed up within the moderate course of the Ten Hours' 
Bill. All the attempts of Lord Ashley and his comrades to restore 
the fallen Bill by means of an authentic interpretation will be 
a Here Engels uses the German word Ablösungssystem and, in parenthesis, the 
corresponding English words: "relay" and "shift system".— Ed. 

=====第321页=====
298 Frederick Engels 
unproductive or, in the most favourable case, will only achieve an 
ephemeral and delusive result. 
And nevertheless the Ten Hours' Bill is indispensable for the 
workers. It is a physical necessity for them. Without the Ten Hours' 
Bill this whole generation of English workers will be physically 
ruined. But there is a vast difference between the Ten Hours' Bill 
demanded by the workers today and the Ten Hours' Bill which was 
propagated by Sadler, Oastler and Ashley and passed by the 
reactionary coalition in 1847. The workers have learnt the value of 
an alliance with reaction from the brief existence of the Bill, from its 
easy annihilation—a simple court decision, not even an Act of 
Parliament, was all that was needed to annul it—and from the 
subsequent behaviour of their reactionary former allies. They have 
learnt the use of passing separate partial measures against the 
industrial bourgeoisie. They have learnt that the bourgeois industri­
alists are still in the first instance the class which alone is capable of 
marching at the head of the movement at the present moment, and 
that it would be a vain task to work against them in this progressive 
mission. For this reason, in spite of their direct and not in the least 
dormant hostility towards the industrialists, the workers are now 
much more inclined to support them in their agitation for the 
complete implementation of Free Trade, financial reform and 
extension of the franchise, than to allow themselves to be decoyed 
once again by philanthropic allurements to the banner of the united 
reactionaries. They feel that their day can only come when the 
industrialists have worn themselves out, and hence their instinct is 
correct in hastening the process of development which will give the 
industrialists power and thus prepare their fall. But because of this 
they do not forget that in the industrialists they are bringing to 
power their own direct enemies, and that they can achieve their own 
liberation only through toppling the industrialists and conquering 
political power for themselves. The annulment of the Ten Hours' 
Bill has once more proved this to them in the most striking fashion. 
The restoration of this Bill can only have any significance now under 
the rule of universal franchise, and universal franchise in an 
England two-thirds of whose inhabitants are industrial proletarians 
means the exclusive political rule of the working class with all the 
revolutionary changes in social conditions which are inseparable 
from it. The Ten Hours' Bill demanded by the workers today is thus 
quite different from the one which has just been overruled by the 
Court of Exchequer. It is no longer an isolated attempt to cripple 
industrial development, it is a link in a long chain of measures which 
will revolutionise the whole of the present form of society and 
T 

=====第322页=====
The English Ten Hours' Bill 299 
gradually destroy the class antagonisms which have hitherto existed; 
it is not a reactionary measure, but a revolutionary one. 
The de facto suspension of the Ten Hours' Bill, in the first 
instance by the manufacturers on their own initiative and then by the 
Court of Exchequer, has above all contributed to shortening the 
period of prosperity and hastening the crisis. Whatever hastens 
crises,  however, simultaneously hastens the pace of development in 
England and its next goal, the overthrow of the industrial 
bourgeoisie by the industrial proletariat. The means available to the 
industrialists for expanding their markets and averting crises are 
very limited. Cobden's reduction of state expenditure is either 
mere Whiggish jargon a or equals, even if it should only help for a 
moment, a complete revolution. And if it is executed in the most 
extensive and most revolutionary fashion—as far as the English 
industrialists can be revolutionary—then how will the next crisis be 
met? It is evident that the English industrialists, whose means of 
production have a power of expansion incomparably superior to that 
of their outlets, are rapidly approaching the point where their 
expedients will be exhausted and where the period of prosperity 
which now still divides every crisis from its successor will disappear 
completely under the weight of the excessively increased forces of 
production; where the only thing still separating the crises will be 
brief periods of a dull, half-comatose industrial activity and where 
industry, trade and the whole of modern society must necessarily 
perish from a superfluity of unusable life force on the one hand and 
total emaciation on the other, if this abnormal situation did not bear 
within itself its own remedy and the development of industry had not 
simultaneously engendered the class which alone can assume the 
leadership of society—the proletariat. The proletarian revolution 
will then be inevitable, and its victory certain. 
This is the regular, normal course of events, produced, with a 
necessity which cannot be averted, by the totality of the present 
conditions of society in England. It will soon be seen to what extent 
this normal process may be shortened by collisions on the Continent 
and revolutionary upsurges in England. 
And the Ten Hours' Bill? 
From the moment the limits of the world market itself become too 
narrow for the full unfolding of all the resources of modern 
industry, when the latter requires a social revolution to regain free 
scope for its energies—from this moment on the limitation of labour 
In the copy of the journal with Engels' corrections the word Whigsphrase (Whig 
phrase) is substituted for the word Whigsprache (Whiggish jargon).— Ed. 

=====第323页=====
300 Frederick Engels 
time is no longer reactionary, it is no longer a brake on industry. On 
the contrary, it will be introduced quite of its own accord. The first 
consequence of the proletarian revolution in England will be the 
centralisation of large-scale industry in the hands of the state, that is, 
the ruling proletariat, and with the centralisation of industry all the 
conditions of competition, which nowadays bring the regulation of 
labour time into conflict with the progress of industry, fall away. And 
thus the only solution to the Ten Hours question, as to every 
question depending on the antagonism between capital and wage 
labour, lies in the proletarian revolution. 
• Written in March 1850 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue 
No. 4, 1850 
Signed: Frederick Engels 

=====第324页=====
301 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
[REVIEWS FROM THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG. 
POLITISCH-ÖKONOMISCHE REVUE No. 4, 
April 1850] 231 
I 
LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS, EDITED 
BY THOMAS CARLYLE— 
No. I, THE PRESENT TIME, No. II, MODEL PRISONS-
LONDON, 1850 232 
Thomas Carlyle is the only English writer on whom German 
literature has exercised a direct and particularly significant influ­
ence.  Courtesy at the very least demands that a German should not 
let his writings pass without notice. 
The latest publication by Guizot (No. 2 of the N. Rh. Z. a) has 
shown us that the intellectual powers of the bourgeoisie are in a 
process of decline. In the present two pamphlets by Carlyle we 
witness the decline of literary genius in historical struggles which 
have reached a point of crisis and against which it attempts to assert 
its unrecognised, direct, prophetic inspirations. 
To Thomas Carlyle belongs the credit of having taken the literary 
field against the bourgeoisie at a time when its views, tastes and ideas 
held the whole of official English literature totally in thrall, and in a 
manner which is at times even revolutionary. For example, in his 
history of the French Revolution, in his apology for Cromwell, in the 
pamphlet on Chartism and in Past and  Present)*  But in all these 
writings the critique of the present is closely bound up with a 
strangely unhistorical apotheosis of the Middle Ages, which is a 
frequent characteristic of other English revolutionaries too, for 
instance Cobbett and a section of the Chartists. Whilst he at least 
admires in the past the classical periods of a specific stage of society, 
the present drives him to despair and he shudders at the thought of 
a See this volume, pp.  251-56.—  Ed. 
b Th. Carlyle, The French Revolution: A History, Vols. 1-3, London, 1837; Oliver 
Cromwell's Letters and  Speeches,  Vols. 1-2, London, 1845; Chartism, London, 1840; Past 
and Present, London,  1843.—  Ed. 

=====第325页=====
302 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
the future. Where he recognises the revolution, or indeed apotheo-
sises it, in his eyes it becomes concentrated in a single individual, a 
Cromwell or a Danton. He pays them the same hero-worship that he 
preached in his Lectures on Heroes and Hero-Worship* as the only 
refuge from a present pregnant with despair, as a new religion. 
Carlyle's style is at one with his ideas. It is a direct violent reaction 
against the modern bourgeois English Pecksniffery, whose enervated 
affectedness, circumspect verbosity and vague, sentimentally moral 
tediousness has spread from the original inventors, the educated 
Cockneys, to the whole of English literature. In comparison, Carlyle 
treated the English language as though it were completely raw 
material which he had to cast utterly afresh. Obsolete expressions 
and words were sought out again and new ones invented, in the 
German manner and especially in the manner of Jean Paul. The new 
style was often in bad taste and hugely pretentious, but frequently 
brilliant and always original. In this respect too the Latter-Day 
Pamphlets represent a remarkable step backwards. 
It is, incidentally, characteristic that out of the whole of German 
literature the mind that had the greatest influence on Carlyle was not 
Hegel but the literary apothecary Jean Paul. 
In the cult of genius, which Carlyle shares with Strauss, the genius 
has got lost in the present pamphlets. The cult remains. 
The Present Time begins with the statement that the present is the 
child of the past and the parent of the future, but quite apart from 
that is a new era. 
The first manifestation of this new era is a reforming  Pope.  Gospel 
in hand, Pius IX set out to promulgate from the Vatican "the Law of 
Veracity" to Christendom. 
"More than three hundred years ago, the throne of St. Peter received peremptory 
judicial notice [...] authentic order, registered in Heaven's chancery and since legible 
in the hearts of all brave men, to take itself away,— to begone, and let us have no more 
to do with it and its delusions and impious deliriums; — and it has been sitting every 
day since [...] at its own peril [...], and will have to pay exact damages yet for every day 
it has so sat. Law of veracity? What this Popedom had to do by the law of veracity, was 
to give up its own foul galvanic life, an offence to gods and men; honestly to die; and 
get itself buried! Far from this was the thing the poor Pope undertook  [...];—and  yet 
on the whole it was essentially this too. Reforming Pope? [...] Turgot and Necker were 
nothing to this. God is great; and when a scandal is to end, brings some devoted man 
to take charge of it in hope, not in despair!" (P. 3.) 
With his manifestos of reform the Pope had aroused questions, 
Th. Carlyle, On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the Heroic in History, London, 
1841.—  Ed. 

=====第326页=====
Th. Carlyle, Latter-Day Pamphlets 303 
"mothers  of the  whirlwinds, conflagrations, earthquakes.... Questions which  all 
official  men  wished,  and  mostly hoped,  to postpone till Doomsday. Doomsday itself 
had come; that  was the  terrible truth".  (P. 4.) 
The law of  veracity was proclaimed.  The  Sicilians 
"were  the  first people that  set about applying this new  [...]  rule sanctioned  by the 
holy Father;  [...] We do not by the law of  veracity belong  to Naples  and  these 
Neapolitan Officials;  we  will, by favour  of Heaven  and the  Pope,  be free of these". 
Hence  the  Sicilian Revolution. 
The French people, which considers itself  as a  kind  of "Messiah 
people",  as "the  chosen soldiers  of liberty", feared that  the  poor, 
despised Sicilians might take this trade3  out of  their hands—Feb­
ruary Revolution. [Pp.  4-5.] 
"As if by  sympathetic subterranean electricities,  all Europe exploded, boundless, 
uncontrollable;  and we had the  year 1848,  one of the  most singular, disastrous, 
amazing,  and on  the whole humiliating years  the  European world ever saw.... Kings 
everywhere,  and  reigning persons, stared  in sudden horror,  the  voice  of the  whole 
world bellowing  in their ear, 'Begone, ye imbecile hypocrites, histrios  not  heroes!  Off 
with you, off!'—and, what was peculiar and heard  of in this year  for the first time,  the 
Kings  all  made haste  to go, as if  exclaiming,  'We are  poor histrios,  we  sure 
enough;—do  you  need heroes? Don't kill us; we couldn't help it!'—Not one  of them 
turned round, and stood upon his Kingship, as upon  a right he could afford to die  for, 
or to risk his  skin upon.... That,  I repeat,  is the  alarming peculiarity  at present. 
Democracy, on this new occasion, finds  all Kings  conscious  that they are but Playactors. 
[...] They fled precipitately, some  of them with what  we may  call an exquisite 
ignominy,— in terror  of the  treadmill  or worse.  And  everywhere  the  people,  or the 
populace, take their own government upon themselves; and open 'kinglessness', what 
we call anarchy,—how happy  if it be  anarchy plus  a street-constable!—is everywhere 
the order  of the  day. Such was  the  history, from Baltic  to Mediterranean,  in Italy, 
France, Prussia, Austria, from  end  to end  of Europe,  in those March days  of 1848.  [...] 
And so,  then, there remained  no  King  in Europe;  no  King except  the  Public 
Haranguer, haranguing  on barrelhead,  in leading article;  or assembling with his like 
in the  National Parliament.  And for  about four months  all France,  and to a  great 
degree all Europe, rough-ridden by every species  of delirium [...] was  a weltering mob, 
presided over  by M. de  Lamartine  at the  Hôtel-de-Ville  [....] A  sorrowful spectacle  to 
men of reflection, during the time  he lasted, that poor M. de Lamartine; with nothing 
in him  but  melodious wind  and  soft sowder  [....]  Sad enough: the most eloquent latest 
impersonation  of Chaos-come-again; able  to talk for itself,  and  declare persuasively 
that it is  Cosmos! However, you have  but to  wait a little,  in such cases;  all balloons  [...] 
must give  up their  gas in the  pressure  of things,  and are  collapsed  in a  repulsively 
flabby manner before long."  (Pp. 6-8.) 
Who  was it  that kindled this universal revolution,  the  fuel for 
which  was of  course  at hand? 
a The  German word Industriezweig  is used  in the  original  and the  correspond­
ing English word "trade"  is given  in parenthesis.— Ed. 
The authors,of  the  review  use the  word Königslosigkeit  and give  the  English 
equivalent  in parenthesis.—Ed. 

=====第327页=====
304 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"Students, young men of letters, advocates, newspaper writers, hot inexperienced 
enthusiasts, or fierce and justly bankrupt desperadoes [...]. Never till now did young 
men, and almost children, take such a command in human affairs. A changed time 
since the word Senior (Seigneur, or Elder) was first devised to signify lord or 
superior;—as in all languages of men we find it.... Looking more closely [...] you will 
find that the old has ceased to be venerable, and has begun to be contemptible; a 
foolish boy still, a boy without the graces, generosities and opulent strength of young 
boys [...]. This mad state of matters will of course before long allay  itself,  as it has 
everywhere begun to do; the ordinary necessities of men's daily existence cannot 
comport with it, and these, whatever else is cast aside, will go their way. Some 
remounting [...] of the old machine, under new colours and altered forms, will 
probably ensue soon in most countries: the old histrionic Kings will be admitted back 
under conditions, under Constitutions, with national Parliaments, or the like 
fashionable adjuncts; and everywhere the old daily life will try to begin again. But 
there is now no hope that such arrangements can be permanent [...]. In such baleful 
oscillation, afloat as amid raging bottomless eddies and conflicting sea-currents, not 
steadfast as on fixed foundations, must European Society continue swaying; now 
disastrously tumbling, then painfully readjusting  itself,  at ever shorter intervals,—till 
once the new  rock-basis  does come to light, and the weltering deluges of mutiny, and of 
need to mutiny, abate again!" (Pp.  8-10.) 
So much for history, which even in this form offers the old world 
little comfort. Now for the moral. 
"For universal  Democracy,  whatever we may think of it, is the inevitable fact of the 
days in which we live." (P. 10.) 
What is democracy? It must have a meaning, or it would not exist. 
It is all a matter, then, of finding the true meaning of democracy. If 
we succeed in this, we can deal with it; if not, we are lost. The 
February Revolution was "a universal Bankruptcy of Imposture; 
that may be the brief definition of it". (P. 14.) Counterfeit and falsities, 
"shams", "delusions", "phantasms",3 instead of real relationships 
and things, names that have lost all meaning, in a word, lying instead 
of truth has held sway in modern times. Individual and social divorce 
from these falsities and phantoms, that is the task of reform, and the 
necessity of putting an end to all sham and deceit is not to be 
gainsaid. 
"Yet strange to many a man it may seem; and to many a solid Englishman, 
wholesomely digesting his pudding among what are called the cultivated classes, it 
seems strange exceedingly; a mad ignorant notion, quite heterodox, and big with 
mere ruin. He has been used to decent forms long since fallen empty of meaning, to 
plausible modes, solemnities grown ceremonial,—what you in your iconoclast humour 
call shams,—all his life long; never heard that there was any harm in them, that there 
was any getting-on without them. Did not cotton spin  itself,  beef grow, and groceries 
a Here and below the words "shams", "delusions", and "phantasms" are given in 
English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第328页=====
Th. Carlyle, Latter-Day Pamphlets 305 
and spiceries come in from the East and the West, quite comfortably by the side of 
shams?" (P. 15.) 
Now will democracy accomplish this necessary reform, this 
liberation from shams? 
"Democracy, when it is organised by means of universal suffrage will itself 
accomplish the salutary universal change from Delusive to Real, from false to true, 
and make a new blessed world by and by?" (P. 17.) 
Carlyle denies this. Indeed, he sees in general in democracy and in 
universal suffrage only a contagion of all nations by the superstitious 
English belief in the infallibility of parliamentary government. The 
crew of the ship that had lost its course round Cape Horn and, 
instead of keeping watch on wind and weather and using the sextant, 
voted on the course to be set, declaring the decision of the majority 
to be infallible—that is the universal suffrage that lays claim to 
steering the state. As for every individual, so for society it is just a 
matter of discovering the true regulations of the Universe, the 
everlasting laws of nature relative to the task in hand at each 
moment, and acting accordingly. Whoever reveals these eternal laws 
to us, him shall we follow, "were it the Russian Autocrat or Chartist 
Parliament, the Archbishop of Canterbury or Grand Lama". But 
how do we discover these eternal, divine precepts? At all events 
universal suffrage, which gives each man a ballot paper and counts 
heads,  is the worst method of doing so. The Universe is of a very 
exclusive nature and has ever disclosed its secrets but to a few elect, a 
small minority of wise and noble-minded alone. That is why no 
nation was ever able to exist on the basis of democracy. The Greeks 
and Romans? We all know today that theirs were no democracies, 
that slavery was the basis of their states. It is quite superfluous to 
speak of the various French Republics. And the Model Republic of 
North America? It cannot yet even be said of the Americans that they 
form a nation or a state. The American population lives without a 
government; what is there constituted is anarchy plus a street-
constable. What makes this condition possible is the great area of yet 
unbroken land and the respect brought over from England for the 
constable's baton. As the population grows, that too comes to an end. 
"What great human soul, what great thought, what great noble thing that one 
could worship,or loyally admire, has America yet produced?" (P. 25.) 
It has doubled its population every twenty years— voilà tout. 
On this side of the Atlantic and on that, democracy is thus for ever 
impossible. The Universe itself is a monarchy and hierarchy. No 
nation in which the divine everlasting duty of directing and 

=====第329页=====
306 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
controlling the ignorant is not entrusted to the  Noblest,  with his select 
series of Nobler Ones, has the Kingdom of God, or corresponds to the 
eternal laws of nature. 
Now we are also apprised of the secret, the origin and the necessity 
of modern democracy. It consists simply in the fact that the 
sham-noblea has been raised up and consecrated by tradition or 
newly invented delusions. 
And who is to discover the true precious stone with all its setting of 
smaller human jewels and pearls? Certainly not universal suffrage, 
for only the noble can discern the noble. And so Carlyle affirms that 
England still possesses many such nobles and "kings", and on p. 38 
he summons them to him. 
We see the "noble" Carlyle proceed from a thoroughly pantheistic 
mode of thinking. The whole process of history is determined not by 
the development of the living masses themselves, naturally dep­
endent on specific but in turn historically created changing condi­
tions,  it is determined by an eternal law of nature, unalterable 
for all time, from which it departs today and to which it returns 
tomorrow, and on the correct apprehension of which everything 
depends. This correct apprehension of the eternal law of nature 
is the eternal truth, everything else is false. With this mode 
of thinking, the real class conflicts, for all their variety at various 
periods, are completely resolved into the one great and eternal 
conflict, between those who have fathomed the eternal law of 
nature and act in keeping with it, the wise and the noble, and 
those who misunderstand it, distort it and work against it, the 
fools and the rogues. The historically produced distinction be­
tween classes thus becomes a natural distinction which itself 
must be acknowledged and revered as a part of the eternal law 
of nature, by bowing to nature's noble and wise: the cult of genius. 
The whole conception of the process of historical development 
is reduced to the shallow triviality of the lore of the Illuminati 
and the Freemasons of the previous century, to the simple morality 
we find in the Magic Flute23i and to an infinitely depraved and 
trivialised form of Saint-Simonism. And there of course we have the 
old question of who then should in fact rule, which is discussed at 
great length and with self-important shallowness and is finally 
answered to the effect that the noble, wise and knowledgeable should 
rule,  which leads quite naturally to the conclusion that there would 
have to be a large amount, a very large amount of governing, and 
The authors use the expression falsche Edle and give the English equivalent in 
parenthesis.— Ed. 

=====第330页=====
Th. Carlyle, Latter-Day Pamphlets 307 
there could never be too much governing, for after all governing is 
the constant revelation and assertion of the law of nature vis-à-vis the 
masses. But how are the noble and the wise to be discovered? They 
are not revealed by any celestial miracle; they have to be looked for. 
And here the historical class distinctions which have been made into 
purely natural distinctions once more rear their heads. The noble 
man is noble because he is wise and knowledgeable. He will therefore 
have to be sought among the classes which have the monopoly of 
education—among the privileged classes, and it will be the same 
classes who will have to seek him out in their midst and to judge his 
claims to the rank of a noble and wise man. In so doing the privileged 
classes automatically become, if not precisely the noble and wise class, 
at least the "articulate" class; the oppressed classes are of course the 
"silent, inarticulate' and class rule is thereby sanctioned anew. All 
this highly indignant bluster turns out to be a thinly disguised 
acceptance of existing class rule whose sole grumble and complaint is 
that the bourgeoisie does not assign a position at the top of society to 
its unrecognised geniuses, and for highly practical reasons does not 
accede to the starry-eyed drivellings of these gentlemen. Carlyle 
incidentally provides us with striking examples of the way in which 
here too pompous cant becomes its opposite and the noble, 
knowledgeable and wise man is transformed in practice into a base, 
ignorant and foolish man. 
Since for him everything depends on strong government, he turns 
upon the cry for liberation and emancipation with extreme 
indignation: 
"Let us all be free of one another [...]. Free without bond or connexion except that 
of cash payment; fair day's wages for the fair day's work; determined by voluntary 
contract, and law of supply and demand: this is thought to be the true solution of 
all difficulties and injustices that have occurred between man and man. To rectify the 
relation that exists between two men, is there no method, then, but that of ending it?" 
(P. 29.) 
This complete dissolution of all bonds, all relationships between 
men naturally reaches its climax in  anarchy,  the law of lawlessness, the 
condition in which the bond of bonds, the government, is completely 
cut to pieces. And this is what people in England and on the 
Continent alike are striving towards, yes, even in "staid Germany". 
Carlyle blusters on like this for several pages, lumping together 
Red Republic, fraternité, Louis Blanc, etc., in a most disconcerting 
way with free trade, 3 the abolition of the duty on corn, etc. (Cf. pp. 
29-42.) The destruction of the remnants of feudalism which are still 
preserved by tradition, the reduction of the state to what is 
a The words "free trade" are in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第331页=====
308 Karl Marx  and  Frederick Engels 
unavoidably necessary  and  absolutely cheapest,  the complete realisa­
tion of free competition  by the  bourgeoisie,  are  thus mixed  up 
together  and  identified  by Carlyle with  the elimination  of these same 
bourgeois relations, with  the abolition  of the  conflict between capital 
and wage labour, with  the  overthrow  of the  bourgeoisie  by the 
proletariat. Brilliant return  to the  "Night  of the  Absolute"  in which 
all cats  are grey! Deep knowledge  of the  "knowledgeable  man" who 
does  not  know  the first thing about what  is happening around  him! 
Strange perspicacity which believes that with  the  abolition  of 
feudalism  or free competition,  all  relations between  men are 
abolished! Unfathomable fathoming  of the  "eternal  law of  nature", 
seriously believing that  no more children will  be born from  the 
moment that  the  parents cease  to go to the  Mairie* first to "bind" 
themselves  in matrimony! 
After this edifying example  of a  wisdom amounting  to unmiti­
gated ignorance, Carlyle goes  on to  demonstrate  to us how 
high-principled nobility  of character  at once turns into undisguised 
baseness  as soon  as it  descends from  its heaven  of sententious 
verbiage  to the  world  of real relations. 
"In all European countries, especially  in England,  one  class  of Captains  and 
commanders  of men,  recognisable  as the  beginning  of a new,  real and not  imaginary 
Aristocracy,  has  already  in some measure developed  itself: the  Captains  of 
Industry;—happily  the class  who  above  all [...] are  wanted  in this time.  [...] And  surely, 
on the other hand, there  is no  lack  of men  needing  to be  commanded:  the sad  class  of 
brother-men whom  we have described  as 'Hodge's emancipated horses', reduced  to 
roving famine, this  too has in all  countries developed itself  and, in  fatal geometrical 
progression,  is ever more developing  itself,  with  a rapidity which alarms everyone.  On 
this ground  [...] it may be  truly said,  the Organisation  of Labour  [...] is the  universal 
vital Problem  of the  world."  (Pp. 42, 43.) 
Carlyle having thus vented  all his  virtuous fury time  and  time 
again  in the  first forty pages against selfishness, free competition, 
the abolition  of the  feudal bonds between  man and man,  supply  and 
demand, laissez-faire,234 cotton-spinning, cash payment,  etc., etc., we 
now suddenly find that  the  main exponents  of all  these shams,  the 
industrial bourgeoisie,  are not  merely counted among  the celebrated 
heroes  and  geniuses  but  even comprise  the most indispensable part 
of these heroes, that  the  trump card  in all his  attacks  on bourgeois 
relations  and  ideas  is the  apotheosis  of bourgeois individuals.  It 
appears  yet odder that Carlyle, having discovered  the  commanders 
and the commanded  of labour,  in other words,  a certain organisation 
of labour, nevertheless declares this organisation  to be a  great 
problem requiring solution.  But one  should  not be  deceived.  It is not 
a Town hall.—  Ed. 

=====第332页=====
Th. Carlyle, Latter-Day Pamphlets 309 
a question of the organisation of those workers who have been 
regimented, but of the organisation of those who are unregimented 
and captainless, and this Carlyle has reserved for  himself.  At the end 
of his pamphlet we suddenly see him in the role of the British Prime 
Minister in partions* summoning together the three million Irish 
and other beggars, the able-bodied lackalls, nomadic or stationary, 
and the general assembly of British paupers, outside the workhouse b 
and inside the workhouse,b and "haranguing" them in a speech in 
which he first repeats to the lackalls everything that he has previously 
confided to the reader and then addresses the select company as 
follows: 
"Vagrant Lackalls and Good-for-nothings, foolish most of you, criminal many of 
you, miserable all; the sight of you fills me with astonishment and despair. [...] Here 
are some three millions of you [...]: so many of you fallen sheer over into the abysses of 
open Beggary; and,fearful to think, every new unit tHat falls is loading so much more 
the chain that drags the others over. On the edge of the precipice hang uncounted 
millions; increasing, I am told, at the rate of 1,200 a-day [...] falling, falling one after 
the other; and the chain is getting ever heavier [...] and who ät last will stand? What to 
do with you?... The others that still stand have their own difficulties, I can tell 
you!—But you, by imperfect energy and redundant appetite, by doing too litde work 
and drinking too much beer, you [...] have proved that you cannot do it! [...] Know 
that, whoever may be 'sons of freedom', you for your part are not and cannot be such. 
Not 'free' you, ... you palpably are fallen captive ... you are of the nature of slaves, or if 
you prefer the word, of nomadic [...] and vagabond servants that can find no master.... 
Not as glorious unfortunate sons of freedom, but as recognised captives, as 
unfortunate fallen brothers requiring that I should command them, and if need were, 
control and compel them, can there henceforth be a relation between  us....  Before 
Heaven and Earth, and God the Maker of us all, I declare it is a scandal to see such a 
life kept in you, by the sweat and heart's blood of your brothers; and that, if we cannot 
mend it, death were preferable!... Enlist in my Irish, my Scotch and English 
'Regiments of the New Era'... ye poor wandering banditti; obey, work, suffer, abstain, 
as all of us have had to do.... Industrial Colonels, Workmasters, Taskmasters, 
Life-commanders, equitable as Rhadamanthus and inflexible as he: such [...] you do 
need; and such, you being once put under law as soldiers are, will be discoverable for 
you.... To each of you I will then say: Here is work for you; strike into it with manlike, 
soldierlike obedience and heartiness, according to the methods I here dictate,—wages 
follow for you without difficulty.... Refuse, shirk the heavy labour, disobey the 
rules,—  I will admonish and endeavour to incite you; if in vain, I will flog you; if still in 
vain, I will at last shoot you." (Pp. 46-55.) 
The "New Era", in which genius rules, is thus distinguished from 
the old era principally by the fact that the whip imagines it possesses 
genius. The genius Carlyle is distinguished from just any prison. 
Outside the sphere of reality. The words are part of the expression in partions 
infidelium, meaning literally "in the realm of infidels". It was added to the titles of 
Catholic bishops appointed to purely nominal dioceses in non-Christian coun­
tries.—  Ed. 
b The original has the English word.— Ed. 
12-1124 

=====第333页=====
310 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Cerberus or poor-law beadle by his virtuous indignation and the 
moral consciousness of flaying the paupers3  only in order to raise 
them to h is level. We here observe the high-principled genius in his 
world-redeeming anger fantastically justifying and exaggerating the 
infamies of the bourgeoisie. If the English bourgeoisie equated 
paupers 3 with criminals in order to create a deterrent to pauperism 
and brought into being the Poor Law of 1834,235 Carlyle accuses the 
paupers3 of high treason because pauperism generates pauperism. 
Just as previously the ruling class that had arisen in the course of 
history, the industrial bourgeoisie, was privy to genius simply by 
virtue of ruling, so now any oppressed class, the more deeply it is 
oppressed, the more is it excluded from genius and the more is it 
exposed to the raging fury of our unrecognised reformer. So it is 
here with the paupers.3 But his morally noble wrath reaches its 
highest peak with regard to those who are absolutely vile and 
ignoble, the "scoundrels", i.e. criminals. He treats of these in the 
pamphlet on Model Prisons. 
This pamphlet is distinguished from the first only by a fury much 
greater, yet all the cheaper for being directed against those officially 
expelled from established society, against people behind bars; a fury 
which sheds even that little shame which the ordinary bourgeois still 
for decency's sake display. Just as in the first pamphlet Carlyle erects 
a complete hierarchy of Nobles and seeks out the Noblest of the 
Noble, so here he arranges an equally complete hierarchy of 
scoundrels and villains and exerts himself in hunting down the worst 
of the bad,  the supreme  scoundrel  in England, for the exquisite pleasure 
of hanging him. Assuming he were to catch him and hang him; then 
another will be our Worst and must be hanged in turn, and then 
another again, until the turn of the Noble and then the More Noble 
is reached and finally no one is left but Carlyle, the Noblest, who as 
persecutor of scoundrels is at once the murderer of the Noble and 
has murdered what is noble even in the scoundrels; the Noblest of 
the Noble, who is suddenly transformed into the Vilest of Scoundrels 
and as such must hang  himself.  With that, all questions concerning 
government, state, the organisation of labour, and the hierarchy of 
the Noble would be resolved and the eternal law of nature realised at 
last. 
Written in March and April 1850 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue 
No. 4, 1850 
3 The original has the English word.— Ed. 

=====第334页=====
311 
II 
LES CONSPIRATEURS, PAR A.CHENU, 
EX-CAPITAINE DES GARDES DU CITOYEN CAUSSIDIÈRE. 
LES SOCIÉTÉS SECRÈTES; 
LA PRÉFECTURE DE POLICE SOUS CAUSSIDIÈRE; 
LES CORPS-FRANCS, 
PARIS,  1850 
LA NAISSANCE DE LA RÉPUBLIQUE EN FÉVRIER 1848, 
PAR LUCIEN DE LA HODDE, 
PARIS,  1850236 
Nothing is more to be desired than that the people who were at the 
head of the active party, whether before the revolution in the secret 
societies or the press, or afterwards in official positions, should at 
long last be portrayed in the stark colours of a Rembrandt, in the full 
flush of life. Hitherto these personalities have never been depicted as 
they really were, but only in their official guise, with buskins on their 
feet and halos around their heads. All verisimilitude is lost in these 
idealised, Raphaelesque pictures. 
It is true that the two present publications dispense with the 
buskins and halos in which the "great men" of the February 
Revolution hitherto appeared. They penetrate the private lives of 
these people, they show them to us in informal attire, surrounded by 
all their multifarious subordinates. But they are for all that no less 
far removed from being a real, faithful representation of persons 
and events. Of their authors, the one is a self-confessed long-time 
mouchard* of Louis Philippe, and the other a veteran conspirator by 
profession whose relations with the police are similarly very 
ambiguous and of whose powers of comprehension we have an early 
indication in the fact that he claims to have seen "that splendid chain 
of the Alps whose silver peaks dazzle the eye" between Rheinfelden 
and Basle, and "the Rhenish Alps whose distant peaks are lost on the 
horizon" between Kehl and Karlsruhe. From such people, especially 
when in addition they are writing to justify themselves, we can of 
course only expect a more or less exaggerated  chronique  scandaleuse oi 
the February Revolution. 
Police spy.— Ed. 
12* 

=====第335页=====
312 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
M. de la Hodde, in his pamphlet, attempts to portray himself after 
the manner of the spy in Cooper's novel. 3 He has, he claims, earned 
society's gratitude by paralysing the secret societies for eight years. 
But Cooper's spy is a very far cry from M. de la Hodde. M. de la 
Hodde, who worked on Le Charivari, was a member of the Central 
Committee of the Société des nouvelles saisons from 1 839, 237 was 
co-editor of La Réforme from its foundation and at the same time a 
paid spy of the Prefect of Police, Delessert, is compromised by no one 
more than by Chenu. His publication is a direct response to Chenu's 
revelations, but it takes very good care not to say even a syllable in 
reply to Chenu's allegations concerning de la Hodde  himself.  That 
part of Chenu's memoirs at least is therefore authentic. 
"On one of my nocturnal excursions," recounts Chenu, "I noticed de la Hodde 
walking up and down the quai Voltaire.... It was raining in torrents, a circumstance 
which set me thinking. Was this dear fellow de la Hodde also helping himself from the 
cash-box of the secret funds, by any chance? But I remembered his songs, his 
magnificent stanzas about Ireland and Poland, and particularly the violent articles he 
wrote for the journal La Réforme " (whereas M. de la Hodde tries to make out he 
tamed La Réforme). " 'Good evening, de la Hodde, what on earth are you up to here at 
this hour and in this fearful weather?'—'I am waiting for a rascal who owes me some 
money, and as he passes this way every evening at this time, he is going to pay me, or 
else'—and he struck the parapet of the embankment violently with his stick." 
De la Hodde attempts to get rid of him and walks towards the Pont 
du Carrousel. Chenu departs in the opposite direction, but only to 
conceal himself under the arcades of the Institut. De la Hodde soon 
comes back, looks round carefully in all directions and once more 
walks back and forth. 
"A quarter of an hour later I noticed the carriage with two little green lamps which 
my ex-agent had described to me" (a former spy who had revealed a large number of 
police secrets and identification signs to Chenu in prison). "It stopped at the corner of 
the rue des Vieux Augustins. A man got out; de la Hodde went straight up to him; 
they talked for a moment, and I saw de la Hodde make a movement as though putting 
money into his pocket.—After this incident I made every effort to have de la Hodde 
excluded from our meetings and above all to prevent Albert falling into some trap, for 
he was the cornerstone of our edifice [...]. Some days later La Réforme rejected an 
article by de la Hodde. This wounded his vanity as a writer. I advised him to avenge 
himself by founding another journal. He followed this advice and with Pilhes and 
Dupoty he even published the prospectus of a paper, Le Peuple,  and during that time 
we were almost completely rid of him." (Chenu, pp. 46-48 [p. 55].) 
As we see, this spy à la Cooper turns out to be a political prostitute 
of the vilest kind who hangs about in the street in the rain for the 
a Harvey Birch, the hero of Fenimore Cooper's novel The  Spy.—Ed. 

=====第336页=====
A. Chenu, Les Conspirateurs, de la Hodde, La naissance de la République 313 
payment of his cadeau* by the first officier de paix b who happens to 
come along. We see furthermore that it was not de la Hodde, as he 
would have us believe, but Albert who was at the head of the secret 
societies. This follows from Chenu's whole account. The mouchard 
"in the interests of order" is here suddenly transformed into the 
offended writer who is angry that the articles of the Charivari 
correspondent are not accepted without question by La Réforme, and 
who therefore breaks with La Réforme, a real party organ in which he 
was able to be of some use to the police, to found a new paper in 
which at best he was able to satisfy his vanity as a writer. Just as 
prostitutes make use of sentiment of a kind, so this mouchard sought 
to make use of his literary pretensions in order to escape from his 
dirty role. Hatred for La Réforme, which pervades his whole 
pamphlet, is resolved into the most trivial writer's vindictiveness. In 
the end we see that during the most important period of the secret 
societies, shortly before the February Revolution, de la Hodde was 
being increasingly forced out of them; and this explains why they, 
according to his account, quite contrary to Chenu, declined more 
and more in this period. 
We now come to the scene in which Chenu describes the exposure 
of de la Hodde's treacheries after the February Revolution. The 
Réforme party had assembled with Albert in the Luxembourg at 
Caussidière's invitation. Monnier, Sobrier, Grandménil, de la 
Hodde, Chenu, etc., were present. Caussidière opened the meeting 
and then said: 
"'There is a traitor among us. We shall form a secret tribunal to try him.'— 
Grandménil, as the oldest of those present, was appointed chairman, and Ti-
phaine secretary. 'Citizens,' continued Caussidière as public prosecutor, 'for a long 
time we have been accusing honest patriots. We were far from suspecting what a 
serpent had slipped in among us. Today I have discovered the real traitor: it is Lucien 
de la Hodde!' —The latter, who hitherto had sat quite unperturbed, leapt up at so 
direct an accusation. He made a move towards the door. Caussidière closed it quickly, 
drew a pistol and shouted: 'One move and I'll blow your brains out!'— De la Hodde 
passionately protested his innocence. 'Very well,' said Caussidière. 'Here is a file 
containing eighteen hundred reports to the Prefect of Police'... and he gave each of us 
the reports specially concerning him. De la Hodde obstinately denied that these 
reports, signed Pierre, originated with him until Caussidière read out the letter 
published in his memoirs, in which de la Hodde offered his services to the Prefect of 
Police and which he had signed with his real name. From then on the wretched man 
stopped denying and tried to excuse himself on the grounds of poverty which had 
given him the fatal idea of throwing himself into the arms of the police. Caussidière 
held out to him the pistol, the last means of escape left to him. De la Hodde then 
pleaded with his judges and whimperingly begged for mercy, but they remained 
a Gift.— Ed. 
Officer of the peace.— Ed. 

=====第337页=====
314 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
inflexible. Bocquet, one of those present, whose patience was exhausted, seized the 
pistol and offered it to him three times with the words: 'Allons* blow your brains out, 
you coward, or I'll kill you myself!'—Albert snatched it out of his hand, saying, 'But 
just think, a pistol-shot here in the Luxembourg would bring everybody running 
here!'—'That's true,' cried Bocquet, 'we need poison.' 'Poison?' said Caussidière. 'I 
brought poison with me—of every kind.' He took a glass, filled it with water, which he 
sugared, then poured in a white powder and offered it to de la Hodde, who recoiled in 
horror: 'You want to kill me then?'—'Yes we do,' said Bocquet, 'drink.'— De la 
Hodde was fearful to look at. His features were ashen, and his very curly, well-kempt 
hair stood on end on his head. His face was bathed in sweat. He implored, he wept: 'I 
don't want to die!' But Bocquet, inflexible, still held out the glass to him. 'Allons, 
drink,' said Caussidière, 'it will be all over before you know what has hap­
pened.'—'No, no, I will not drink.' And in his deranged state of mind he added with a 
terrible gesture: 'Oh, I shall have my revenge for all these torments!' 
"When it was seen that no appeal to his point d'honneur had any effect, de la 
Hodde was finally pardoned on Albert's intercession, and was taken to the 
Conciergerie prison." (Chenu, pp. .134-36 [pp. 147-50].) 
The self-styled spy à la Cooper becomes increasingly pathetic. We 
see him here in all his ignominy, only able to stand up to his 
opponents by cowardice. What we reproach him for is not that he 
did not shoot himself but that he did not shoot the first comer 
amongst his opponents. He seeks to justify himself after the event by 
means of a pamphlet in which he attempts to represent the whole 
revolution as a mere  escroquerie. 0 The title of this pamphlet ought to 
be: The Disillusioned  Policeman.  It demonstrates that a true revolution 
is the exact opposite of the ideas of a mouchard, who like the "men of 
action" sees in every revolution the work of a small coterie. Whilst all 
movements which were to a greater or lesser extent arbitrarily 
provoked by coteries did not go beyond mere insurgency, it is clear 
from de la Hodde's account itself that on the one hand the official 
republicans at the beginning of the February days still despaired of 
achieving the republic, and that on the other hand the bourgeoisie 
was obliged to help achieve the republic without wanting it, and thus 
that the February Republic was brought about by the force of 
circumstances driving the proletarian masses, who were outside any 
coterie, out into the streets and keeping the majority of the 
bourgeoisie at home or forcing them into common action with the 
proletarians.—What de la Hodde reveals apart from that is scanty 
indeed and amounts to no more than the most banal gossip. Only 
one scene is of interest: the meeting of the official democrats on the 
evening of February 21 on the premises of La Réforme, at which the 
leaders declared themselves firmly opposed to an attack by force. 
a Go on.— Ed. 
Sense of honour.— Ed. 
c Act of fraud.— Ed. 

=====第338页=====
A. Chenu, Les Conspirateurs, de la Hodde, La naissance de la République 315 
The content of their speeches testifies by and large to what was for 
that date still a correct understanding of the situation. They are 
ridiculous only because of their pompous style and the later claims of 
the same people to have consciously and deliberately worked towards 
the revolution from the start. And the worst thing, incidentally, that 
de la Hodde can say of them is that they tolerated him for so long in 
their midst. 
Let us turn to Chenu. Who is M. Chenu? He is a veteran 
conspirator, took part in every insurgency since 1832 and is 
well known to the police. Conscripted for military service, he soon 
deserted and remained undiscovered in Paris, despite his repeated 
participation in conspiracies and the 1839 revolt. 238 In 1844 he 
reported to his regiment, and strangely enough, despite his 
well-known record, he was spared a court-martial by the divisional 
general. And that was not all: he did not serve his full time with the 
regiment but was allowed to return to Paris. In 1847 he was 
implicated in the incendiary bomb conspiracy239; he escaped an 
attempted arrest, but for all that remained in Paris, although he had 
been sentenced to four years in contumaciam.11  Only when his 
fellow-conspirators accused him of being in league with the police 
did he go to Holland, whence he returned on February 21, 1848. 
After the February Revolution he became a captain in Caussidière's 
guards. Caussidière soon suspected him (a suspicion having a high 
degree of probability) of being in league with Marrast's special police 
and dispatched him without much resistance to Belgium and later to 
Germany. M. Chenu submitted willingly enough to successive 
enrolments in the Belgian, German and Polish volunteer corps. And 
all this at a time when Caussidière's power was already beginning to 
totter and although Chenu claims to have had complete control over 
him; thus he maintains he forced Caussidière by means of a 
threatening letter to free him immediately when he had once beert 
arrested. So much for our author's character and credibility. 
The quantities of make-up and patchouli beneath which prosti­
tutes attempt to smother the less attractive aspects of their physical 
being have their literary counterpart in the bel esprit  with which de la 
Hodde perfumes his pamphlet. The literary qualities of Chenu's 
book on the other hand frequently remind one of Gil Blas b by their 
naivety and the vivacity of their presentation. Just as in the most 
varied adventures Gil Bias always remains a servant and judges 
everything by a servant's standards, so Chenu always remains, from 
a For contempt of the court (in refusing to appear).— Ed. 
b Histoire de Gil Blas de Santillane, a novel by Alain René Le Sage.— Ed. 

=====第339页=====
316 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
the 1832 revolt up to his dismissal from the prefecture, the same 
low-ranking conspirator, whose own particular form of narrow-
mindedness can incidentally be very clearly distinguished from the 
dull ruminations of the literary "faiseur" apportioned to him by the 
Elysée. It is clear that there can be no question of any understanding 
of the revolutionary movement in Chenu's case either. For this 
reason the only chapters in his book which are of any interest are 
those in which he describes things more or less uninhibitedly from 
his own observation: the Conspirators and Caussidière the Hero. 
The propensity of the Latin peoples to conspiracy and the part 
which conspiracies have played in modern Spanish, Italian and 
French history are well known. After the defeat of the Spanish and 
Italian conspirators at the beginning of the twenties, Lyons and 
especially Paris became the centres of revolutionary clubs. It is a 
well-known fact that the liberal bourgeoisie headed the conspiracies 
against the Restoration up to 1830. After the July Revolution the 
republican bourgeoisie took their place; the proletariat, trained in 
conspiracy even under the Restoration, began to dominate to the 
extent that the republican bourgeoisie were deterred from conspir­
ing by the unsuccessful street battles. The Société  des saisons,  through 
which Barbes and Blanqui organised the 1839 revolt, was already 
exclusively proletarian, and so were the Nouvelles saisons, formed 
after the defeat, whose leader was Albert and in which Chenu, de la 
Hodde, Caussidière, etc., participated. Through its leaders the 
conspiracy was constantly in contact with the petty-bourgeois 
elements represented by La Réforme, but always kept itself strictly 
independent. These conspiracies never of course embraced the 
broad mass of the Paris proletariat. They were restricted to a 
comparatively small, continually fluctuating number of members 
which consisted partly of unchanging, veteran conspirators, regular­
ly bequeathed by each secret society to its successor, and partly of 
newly recruited workers. 
Of these veteran conspirators, Chenu describes virtually none but 
the class to which he himself belongs: the professional conspirators. 
With the development of proletarian conspiracies the need arose for 
a division of labour; the members were divided into occasional 
conspirators, conspirateurs d'occasion, i. e. workers who engaged in 
conspiracy alongside their other employment, merely attending 
meetings and holding themselves in readiness to appear at the place 
of assembly at the leaders' command, and professional conspirators 
who devoted their whole energy to the conspiracy and had their 
living from it. They formed the intermediate stratum between the 
workers and the leaders, and frequently even infiltrated the latter. 

=====第340页=====
A. Chenu, Les Conspirateurs, de la Hodde, La naissance de la République 317 
The social situation of this class determines its whole character 
from the very outset. Proletarian conspiracy naturally affords them 
only very limited and uncertain means of subsistence. They are 
therefore constantly obliged to dip into the cash-boxes of the 
conspiracy. A number of them also come into direct conflict with civil 
society as such and appear before the police courts with a greater 
or lesser degree of dignity. Their precarious livelihood, dependent 
in individual cases more on chance than on their activity, their 
irregular lives whose only fixed ports-of-call are the taverns of the 
marchands de vin 3—the places of rendezvous of the conspirators— 
their inevitable acquaintance with all kinds of dubious people, place 
them in that social category which in Paris is known as la bohème. 
These democratic bohemians of proletarian origin—there are also 
democratic bohemians of bourgeois origin, democratic loafers and 
piliers d'estaminet h—are therefore either workers who have given up 
their work and have as a consequence become dissolute, or 
characters who have emerged from the lumpenproletariat and bring 
all the dissolute habits of that class with them into their new way of 
life. One can understand how in these circumstances a few repris de 
justice c are to be found implicated in practically every conspiracy 
trial. 
The whole way of life of these professional conspirators has a most 
decidedly bohemian character. Recruiting sergeants for the conspir­
acy, they go from marchand de vin to marchand de vin, feeling the 
pulse of the workers, seeking out their men, cajoling them into the 
conspiracy and getting either the society's treasury or their new 
friends to foot the bill for the litres inevitably consumed in the 
process. Indeed it is really the marchand de vin who provides a roof 
over their heads. It is with him that the conspirator spends most of 
his time; it is here he has his rendezvous with his colleagues, with 
the members of his section and with prospective recruits; it is here, 
finally, that the secret meetings of sections (groups) and section 
leaders take place. The conspirator, highly sanguine in character 
anyway like all Parisian proletarians, soon develops into an absolute 
bambocheur d in this continual tavern atmosphere. The sinister 
conspirator, who in secret session exhibits a Spartan self-discipline, 
suddenly thaws and is transformed into a tavern regular whom 
everybody knows and who really understands how to enjoy his wine 
a Publicans.— Ed. 
b Public house regulars.— Ed. 
c Persons with a criminal record.— Ed. 
Boozer.— Ed. 

=====第341页=====
318 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
and women. This conviviality is further intensified by the constant 
dangers the conspirator is exposed to; at any moment he may be 
called to the barricades, where he may be killed; at every turn the 
police set snares for him which may deliver him to prison or even to 
the galleys. Such dangers constitute the real spice of the trade; the 
greater the insecurity, the more the conspirator hastens to seize the 
pleasures of the moment. At the same time familiarity with danger 
makes him utterly indifferent to life and liberty. He is as at home in 
prison as in the wine-shop. He is ready for the call to action any day. 
The desperate recklessness which is exhibited in every insurrection 
in Paris is introduced precisely by these veteran professional 
conspirators, the hommes de coups de main. 3 They are the ones who 
throw up and command the first barricades, who organise resistance, 
lead the looting of arms-shops and the seizure of arms and 
ammunition from houses, and in the midst of the uprising carry out 
those daring raids which so often throw the government party into 
confusion. In a word, they are the officers of the insurrection. 
It need scarcely be added that these conspirators do not confine 
themselves to the general organising of the revolutionary proletariat. 
It is precisely their business to anticipate the process of revolutionary 
development, to bring it artificially to crisis-point, to launch a 
revolution on the spur of the moment, without the conditions for a 
revolution. For them the only condition for revolution is the 
adequate preparation of their conspiracy. They are the alchemists of 
the revolution and are characterised by exactly the same chaotic 
thinking and blinkered obsessions as the alchemists of old. They leap 
at inventions which are supposed to work revolutionary miracles: 
incendiary bombs, destructive devices of magic effect, revolts which 
are expected to be all the more miraculous and astonishing in effect 
as their basis is less rational. Occupied with such scheming, they have 
no other purpose than the most immediate one of overthrowing the 
existing government and have the profoundest contempt for the 
more theoretical enlightenment of the proletariat about their class 
interests. Hence their plebeian rather than proletarian irritation at 
the habits noirs,h  people of a greater or lesser degree of education 
who represent that aspect of the movement, from whom, however, 
they can never make themselves quite independent, since they are 
the official representatives of the party. The habits noirs also serve at 
times as their source of money. It goes without saying that the 
a Men of daring raids.— Ed 
Frock-coats.— Ed. 

=====第342页=====
A. Chenu, Les Conspirateurs, de la Hodde, La naissance de la République 319 
conspirators are obliged to follow willy-nilly the development of the 
revolutionary party. 
The chief characteristic of the conspirators' way of life is their 
battle with the police, to whom they have precisely the same 
relationship as thieves and prostitutes. The police tolerate the 
conspiracies, and not just as a necessary evil: they tolerate them as 
centres which they can keep under easy observation and where the 
most violent revolutionary elements in society meet, as the forges of 
revolt, which in France has become a tool of government quite as 
necessary as the police themselves, and finally as a recruiting place 
for their own political mouchards. Just as the most serviceable 
rogue-catchers, the Vidocqs and their cronies, are taken from the 
class of greater and lesser rascals, thieves,  escrocs*  and fraudulent 
bankrupts, and often revert to their old trade, in precisely the same 
way the humbler political policemen are recruited from among the 
professional conspirators. The conspirators are constandy in touch 
with the police, they come into conflict with them all the time; they 
hunt the mouchards, just as the mouchards hunt them. Spying is one of 
their main occupations. It is no wonder therefore that the short step 
from being a conspirator by trade to being a paid police spy is so 
frequently made, facilitated as it is by poverty and prison, by threats 
and promises. Hence the web of limidess suspicion within the 
conspiracies, which completely blinds their members and makes 
them see mouchards in their best people and their most trustworthy 
people in the real mouchards. That these spies recruited from among 
the conspirators mostly allow themselves to become involved with the 
police in the honest belief that they will be able to outwit them, that 
they succeed in playing a double role for a while, until they succumb 
more and more to the consequences of their first step, and that the 
police are often really outwitted by them, is self-evident. Whether, 
incidentally, such a conspirator succumbs to the snares of the police 
depends entirely on the coincidence of circumstances and rather on 
a quantitative than a qualitative difference in strength of character. 
These are the conspirators whom Chenu parades before us, often 
in a most lively manner, and whose characters he sometimes eagerly 
and sometimes reluctantly describes. He  himself,  incidentally, is the 
epitome of the conspirator by trade, right down to his somewhat 
ambiguous connections with Delessert's and Marrast's police. 
To the extent that the Paris proletariat came to the fore itself as a 
party, these conspirators lost some of their dominant influence, they 
Swindlers.— Ed. 

=====第343页=====
320 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
were dispersed and they encountered dangerous competition in 
proletarian secret societies, whose purpose was not immediate 
insurrection but the organisation and development of the pro­
letariat. Even the 1839 revolt was decidedly proletarian and 
communist. But afterwards the divisions occurred which the veteran 
conspirators bemoan so much; divisions which had their origin in the 
workers' need to clarify their class interests and which found 
expression partly in the earlier conspiracies themselves and partly in 
new propagandist associations. The communist agitation which 
Cabet began so forcefully soon after 1839 and the controversies 
which arose within the Communist Party soon had the conspirators 
out of their depth. Both Chenu and de la Hodde admit that at the 
time of the February Revolution the Communists were by far the 
strongest party group among the revolutionary proletariat. The 
conspirators, if they were not to lose their influence on the workers 
and thus their importance as a counterbalance to the habits noirs, 
were obliged to go along with this trend and adopt socialist or 
communist ideas. Thus there arose even before the February 
Revolution that conflict between the workers' conspiracies, rep­
resented by Albert, and the Réforme people, the same conflict which 
was reproduced shortly afterwards in the Provisional Government. 
We would of course never dream of confusing Albert with these 
conspirators. It is clear from both works that Albert knew how to 
assert his own independent position above them, his tools, and he 
certainly does not belong to that category of people who practised 
conspiracy to earn their daily bread. 
The 1847 bomb affair, a matter in which direct police action was 
greater than in any previous case, finally scattered the most obstinate 
and contrary-minded of the veteran conspirators and drove their 
former sections into the proletarian movement proper. 
These professional conspirators, the most violent people in their 
sections and the détenus politiques* of proletarian origin, mostly 
veteran conspirators themselves, we find again as Montagnards in 
the Prefecture of Police after the February Revolution. The 
conspirators however form the core of the whole company. It is 
understandable that these people, suddenly armed and herded 
together here, mostly on quite familiar terms with their prefects and 
their officers, could not fail to form a somewhat turbulent corps. Just 
as the Montagne in the National Assembly was a parody of the 
original Montagne and by its impotence proved in the most striking 
manner that the old revolutionary traditions of 1793 no longer 
a Political detainees.— Ed. 

=====第344页=====
A. Chenu, Les Conspirateurs, de la Hodde, La naissance de la République 321 
suffice today, so the Montagnards in the Prefecture of Police, the 
new version of the original sansculottes, proved that in the modern 
revolution this section of the proletariat is also insufficient and that 
only the proletariat as a whole can carry the revolution through. 
Chenu describes the sansculotte life-style of this honourable 
company in the Prefecture in a most lively manner. These comic 
scenes, in which M. Chenu was obviously an active participant, are 
sometimes rather wild, but very understandable in view of the 
character of the old conspiratorial  bambocheurs,  and form a necessary 
and even a healthy contrast to the orgies of the bourgeoisie in the last 
years of Louis Philippe. 
We will quote just one example from the account of how they 
established themselves in the Prefecture. 
"When the day broke, I saw the group leaders arrive one after the other with their 
men, but for the most part unarmed [...]. I drew Caussidière's attention to this. 'I'll get 
arms for them,' he said. 'Look for a suitable place to quarter them in the Prefecture.' I 
carried out this order at once and sent them to occupy that former police guardroom 
where I had once been so vilely treated  myself.  A moment later I saw them come 
running back. 'Where are you going?' I asked them. 'The guardroom is occupied by a 
crowd of policemen,' Devaisse replied to me; 'they are fast asleep and we're looking 
for something to waken them with and throw them out.'—They now armed 
themselves with whatever came to hand, ramrods, sabre-sheaths, straps folded double 
and broom-sticks. Then my lads, who had all had greater or lesser reason to complain 
of the insolence and brutality of the sleepers, fell on them with fists flying and for over 
half an hour taught them such a harsh lesson that some of them took a considerable 
time to recover. At their cries of terror I dashed up, and I only managed with 
difficulty to open the door which the Montagnards wisely kept locked on the inside. It 
was a sight for sore eyes to see the policemen dashing half-undressed into the 
courtyard. They jumped down the stairs in one bound, and it was lucky for them they 
knew every nook and cranny in the Prefecture and were able to escape from the sight 
of their enemies hard on their heels. Once masters of the place whose garrison they 
had just relieved with such courtesy, our Montagnards decked themselves out 
triumphantly in what the vanquished had left behind, and for a long time they were to 
be seen walking up and down the courtyard of the Prefecture, swords by their sides, 
coats over their shoulders and their heads resplendent in the three-cornered hats once 
so feared by the majority of them." (Pp. 83-85 [pp. 95-96].) 
Now we have made the acquaintance of the Montagnards, let us 
turn to their leader, the hero of the Chenu saga, Caussidière. Chenu 
parades him all the more frequently before us as the whole book is 
actually directed against him. 
The main accusations levelled against Caussidière relate to his 
moral life-style, his cavalier dealings in bills of exchange and other 
modest attempts to rustle up money such as any spirited Parisian 
commis voyageur in debt may and does resort to. Indeed, it is only the 
amount of capital which determines whether the cases of fraud, 
profiteering, swindling and stock-exchange speculation on which the 

=====第345页=====
322 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
whole of commerce is based, impinge to any degree on the Code 
pénal. With regard to stock-exchange coups and the Chinese fraud 
which are especially typical of French commerce, it is worth referring 
for instance to Fourier's spicy descriptions in the Quatre mouvements, 
the Fausse industrie, the Traité de l'unité universelle and his posthum­
ous works. 240 M. Chenu does not even try to prove that Caussidière 
exploited his position as Prefect of Police for his own ends. Indeed a 
party can congratulate itself if its victorious opponents can do 
nothing more than expose such pathetic instances of commercial 
immorality. What a contrast between the petty dabblings of the 
commis voyageur Caussidière and the grandiose scandals of the 
bourgeoisie in 1847! The only reason for the whole attack is that 
Caussidière belonged to the Réforme party, which sought to conceal 
its lack of revolutionary energy and understanding behind protesta­
tions of republican virtue and an attitude of sombre gravity. 
Caussidière is the only entertaining figure amongst the leaders of 
the February Revolution. In his capacity as  loustic*  to the revolution, 
he was a most appropriate leader for the veteran professional 
conspirators. Sensual and endowed with a sense of humour, a 
regular of long standing in cafés and taverns of the most varied kind, 
happy to live and let live, but at the same time a brave soldier, 
concealing beneath broad-shouldered bonhomie and lack of inhibi­
tion great cunning, astute thought and acute observation, he 
possessed a certain revolutionary tact and revolutionary energy. At 
that time, Caussidière was a genuine plebeian who hated the 
bourgeoisie instinctively and shared all the plebeian passions to a 
high degree. Scarcely was he established in the Prefecture when he 
was already conspiring against the National, but without in so doing 
neglecting his predecessor's cuisine or cellar. He immediately 
organised a military force for  himself,  secured himself a newspaper, 
launched clubs, gave people parts to play and generally acted from 
the first moment with great self-confidence. In twenty-four hours 
the Prefecture was transformed into a fortress from which he could 
defy his enemies. But all his schemes either remained mere plans or 
amounted in practice to no more than plebeian pranks leading to 
nothing. When the conflicts became more acute, he shared the fate 
of his party, which remained indecisively in the middle between the 
National people and the proletarian revolutionaries such as Blanqui. 
His Montagnards split; the old  bambocheurs  grew too big for him 
and were no longer to be restrained, whilst the revolutionary section 
went over to Blanqui. Caussidière himself became increasingly 
a Wag, joker.— Ed. 

=====第346页=====
A. Chenu, Les Conspirateurs, de la Hodde, La naissance  .de la République 323 
bourgeois in his official position as Prefect and representative; on 
May 15 241 he kept prudently in the background and excused himself 
in the Chamber in an irresponsible manner; on June 23 he deserted 
the insurrection at the crucial moment. As a reward he was naturally 
removed from the Prefecture and shortly afterwards sent into exile. 
We now go on to some of the most significant passages from 
Chenu and de la Hodde concerning Caussidière. 
Scarcely was de la Hodde established on the evening of February 
24 as General Secretary to the Prefecture under Caussidière when 
the latter said to him: 
" 'I need reliable people here. The administrative side of things will always take 
care of itself more or less; for the time being I have kept on the old officials; as soon as 
the patriots have been trained, we shall send them packing. That is a secondary matter. 
What we must do is to make the Prefecture the stronghold of the revolution; give our 
men instructions to that effect; bring them all here. Once we have a thousand trusty 
comrades here, we shall have the whip hand. Ledru-Rollin, Flocon, Albert and I 
understand each other, and I hope everything will turn out all right. The National is 
for the high jump. And after that we shall republicanise the country all right, whether 
it likes it or not.' 
"Thereupon Garnier-Pagès, the Mayor of Paris, under whose command the 
National had placed the police, arrived on a visit and suggested to Caussidière he 
might prefer to take over command of the castle at Compiègne instead of the 
unpleasant post at the Prefecture. Caussidière replied in that thin high-pitched voice 
of his which contrasted so strangely with his broad shoulders: 'Go to Compiègne? Out 
of the question. I am needed here. I have got several hundred merry lads down there 
doing a splendid job; I am expecting twice as many again. If you at the Hôtel de Ville 
haven't enough good will or courage, I'll be able to help you.... Ha, ha, la révolution fera 
son petit bonhomme de chemin, il le faudra bien\' a—'The revolution? But it's 
over!'—'Pshaw, it's not even started yet!'—The poor Mayor stood there looking like 
an utter ninny." (De la Hodde, p 72 [pp. 103-05].) 
Amongst the most amusing scenes described by Chenu is the 
reception of the police officers and officiers de paix by the new 
Prefect, who was in the middle of a meal when they were announced. 
" 'Let them wait,' said Caussidière, 'the Prefect is working.' He went on working for 
a good half-hour more and then set the scene for the reception of the police 
officers who were meanwhile lined up on the great staircase. Caussidière sat down 
majestically in his armchair, his great sabre at his side; two wild, bloodthirsty-looking 
Montagnards were guarding the door, arms ordered and pipes in their mouths. Two 
captains with drawn sabres stood at each side of his desk. Then there were all the 
section leaders and the republicans who formed his general  staff,  grouped around the 
room, all of them armed with great sabres and cavalry pistols, muskets and shot-guns. 
Everyone was smoking and the cloud of smoke filling the room made their faces seem 
even more sombre and gave the scene a really frightening aspect. In the centre a space 
had remained clear for the police officers. Each man put on his hat and Caussidière 
gave the order for them to be brought in. The poor police officers wanted nothing 
a The revolution will go its little way, it will have  to! — Ed. 

=====第347页=====
324 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
better, for they were exposed to the vulgarity and threats of the Montagnards, who 
would have liked to fricassee them in every sauce known to man. 'You gang of 
blackguards,' they bellowed, 'now it's our turn to have got you! You won't get out of 
here,  you'll be flayed alive!...' As they entered the Prefect's office they felt they were 
exchanging Scylla for Charybdis. The first to set foot on the threshold seemed to 
hesitate a moment. He was uncertain whether to advance or retreat, so menacing were 
all the eyes fixed upon him. At last he ventured a step forward and bowed, another 
step and bowed more deeply, another step again and bowed even more deeply still. 
Each made his entry with deep bows in the direction of the awful Prefect, who 
received all these marks of respect coldly and in silence, his hand resting on the hilt of 
his sabre. The police officers took in this extraordinary scene with eyes like sauoers. 
Some of them, beside themselves with fear and no doubt wanting to curry favour with 
us, found the tableau imposing and majestic.—'Silence!' commanded a Montagnard 
in sepulchral tones.—When they had all come in, Caussidière, who had neither 
spoken nor moved until that moment, broke the silence and said in his most fearful 
voice: 
" 'A week ago you scarcely expected to find me here in this position, surrounded by 
trusty friends. So they are your masters today, these cardboard republicans, as you 
once called them! You tremble before those whom you subjected to the most ignoble 
treatment. You, Vassal, were the vilest seidea of the fallen government, the most 
violent persecutor of the republicans, and now you have fallen into the hands of your 
most implacable enemies, for there is not one present here who escaped your 
persecutions. If I listened to the just demands that are put to me, I would take 
reprisals. I prefer to forget. Return to your posts again, all of you; but if I ever hear 
that you have lent a hand to any reactionary trickery, I shall crush you like vermin. 
Go!' 
"The police officers had been through every gradation of terror, and happy to 
escape with a dressing-down from the Prefect, they went off in good spirits. The 
Montagnards who were waiting for them at the bottom of the stairs escorted them to 
the end of the rue de Jérusalem with a hubbub of catcalls and jeers. Scarcely had'the 
last of them disappeared when we burst out into a tremendous fit of laughter. 
Caussidière was beaming and laughed more than anyone at the magnificent prank he 
had just played on his police officers.  " (Chenu, pp. 87-90 [pp. 99-102].) 
After March 17, in which Caussidière played a big part, he said to 
Chenu: 
" 'I can raise up the masses and set them against the bourgeoisie whenever I like.' " 
(Chenu, p. 140 [p. 154].) 
Caussidière never actually went .further with his opponents than 
playing at giving them a fright. 
Finally, concerning Caussidière's relations with the Montagnards, 
Chenu says: 
"When I mentioned to Caussidière the excesses his men were indulging in, he 
sighed, but his hands were tied. The majority of them had lived his life with him, he 
had shared their joys and sorrows; several had done him good turns. If he was 
unable to restrain them, it was a consequence of his own past." (P. 97 [pp. 109-10].) 
a Fanatic.— Ed. 

=====第348页=====
A. Chenu, Les Conspirateurs, de la Hodde, La naissance de la République 325 
We would remind our readers that both these books were written 
at the time of the campaign for elections of March  10.242  Their effect 
is clear from the election result—the brilliant victory of the reds. 
Written in March and April 1850 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English in full for 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue the first time 
No. 4, 1850 

=====第349页=====
326 
in 
LE SOCIALISME ET L'IMPÔT, PAR EMILE DE GIRARDIN, 
PARIS,  1850243 
There are two distinct kinds of socialism, "good" socialism and 
"bad" socialism. 
Bad socialism is "the war of labour against capital"'. At its door are 
laid all the horrors: equal distribution of the land, abolition of the 
family ties, organised plunder, etc. 
Good socialism is "harmony between labour and  capitaV.  In its train 
are found the abolition of ignorance, the elimination of the causes of 
pauperism, the establishment of credit, the multiplication of 
property, the reform of taxation, in a word, 
"the system which most closely approximates to mankind's conception of the 
kingdom of God on earth" [p. 9]. 
This good socialism must be used to stifle the bad variety. 
"Socialism is possessed of a lever; that lever was the  budget.  But it needed a fulcrum 
if it was to turn the world upside down. That fulcrum was supplied by the Revolution 
of February 24: universal suffrage" [p. 12]. 
The source of the budget is taxation. So the effect of universal 
suffrage on the budget must be its effect on taxation. And it is by its 
effect on taxation that "good" socialism is realised. 
"France cannot pay more than 1,200 million francs in taxes annually. How would 
vou set about reducing expenditure to this sum?" 
"You have written into two charters and one constitution in the last thirty-five 
years that every Frenchman shall contribute to the upkeep of the state in proportion 
to his wealth. In the last thirty-five years, this equality of taxation has been a myth.... 
Let us examine the French system of taxation" [pp. 14-15, 17]. 
J. Land-tax. The land-tax does not fall equally on all landowners: 
"If two adjacent plots are given the same assessment in the land-register, the two 
landowners pay the same tax, without any distinction between the apparent and the 
actual owners" [p. 22], 

=====第350页=====
É. de Girardin, Le socialisme et l'impôt 327 
i.e. between the owner who is encumbered with mortgages and the 
one who is not. 
Furthermore, the tax on land bears no relation to the taxes which 
are levied on other kinds of property. When the National Assembly 
introduced it in 1790, it was influenced by the physiocratic school, 
which regarded the soil as the only source of net income and 
therefore placed the full burden of taxation on the landowners. The 
tax on land is therefore based on an error in economics. If taxation 
were distributed equally, the owner of land would be liable for 20 per 
cent of his income, whereas he now pays 53 per cent. 
Finally, according to its original purpose, the tax on land ought 
only to fall on the owner and never on the tenant of the farm-land. 
Instead, according to M. Girardin, it always falls on the tenant of the 
farm-land. 
In this M. Girardin commits an error in economics. Either the 
tenant farmer really is a tenant farmer, in which case it is not he but 
the owner or the consumer on whom the tax falls; or else he is, 
despite the appearance of tenancy, basically merely in the owner's 
employ, as in Ireland and frequently in France, in which case the 
taxes imposed on the owner will always fall on him, whatever name 
they are given. 
II. Tax on persons and movable property. This tax, which was also 
decreed by the National Assembly in 1790, was intended to fall 
directly on liquid assets. The amount of house-rent paid was taken to 
indicate the value of the assets. This tax falls in reality on the 
landowner, the peasant and the manufacturer, whilst it represents 
an insignificant burden or none at all for the rentier. It is therefore 
the complete opposite of what its authors intended. Besides, 
a millionaire may live in a garret with two rickety chairs— 
unjust, etc. 
III. Door and window tax. An attack on the health of the people. A 
fiscal device directed against clean air and daylight. 
"Almost one half of the dwellings in France have either only one door and no 
windows, or at most one door and one window" [p. 38]. 
This tax was adopted on 24th Vendémiaire of the year VII 
(October 14, 1799) because of an urgent need for money, as a 
temporary and extraordinary measure; but in principle it was 
rejected. 
IV. Licence-tax (trades-tax). A tax not on profit but on the exercise 
of industry. A penalty for work. Designed to fall on the manufac­
turer, it falls largely on the consumer. In any case, when this tax was 

=====第351页=====
328 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
imposed in 1791, it was also only a question of satisfying a 
momentary need for money. 
V. Registration and stamp duty. The droit d'enregistrement 244 
originated with Francis I and had initially no fiscal purpose (?). In 
1790 the obligatory registration of contracts concerning property 
was extended and the fee raised. The tax operates in such a way that 
buying and selling cost more than donations and legacies. Stamp 
duty is a purely fiscal device which applies equally to unequal profits. 
VI. Beverage-tax. The quintessence of injustice, an impediment to 
production, an irritant, the most costly to collect. (See moreover 
Issue III: 1848-1849, Consequences of June 13.a) 
VII. Customs-duties. A chaotic historical accumulation of pointless, 
mutually contradictory rates of duty injurious to industry. E. g. raw 
cotton is taxed at 22 frs. 50  cts. per 100 kilos in France.  Passons  outre. h 
VIII.  Octroi.245 Lacks even the excuse of protecting a national 
industry. Internal customs. Originally a local poor-tax, but now 
chiefly a burden upon the poorer classes, resulting in the adultera­
tion of their food. Puts as many obstacles in the way of national 
industry as there are towns. 
So much for what Girardin has to say concerning the individual 
taxes.  The reader will have noticed that his criticism is as shallow as it 
is correct. It is reducible to three arguments: 
1. that no tax ever falls on the class intended by those who imposed 
the tax, but is shifted on to another class; 
2. that every temporary tax takes root and becomes permanent; 
3. that no tax is proportional to wealth, just, equal, or equitable. 
These general economic objections to present taxation are 
repeated in every country. However, the French tax system has one 
characteristic peculiarity. Just as the British are the historic nation 
par excellence  with regard to public and private law, so the French are 
with regard to the system of taxation, although in all other respects 
they have codified, simplified and broken with tradition in 
accordance with universal principles. Girardin says on this point0: 
"In France we live under the rule of almost all the fiscal procedures of the ancien 
régime. Taille, poll-tax, aide, 6 customs, salt-tax, registration fees, tax on legal 
a See this volume, pp.  117-21.—  Ed. 
b Let us proceed.— Ed. 
To support his arguments Girardin cites in the following passage the opinion of 
Eugène Daire, the publisher and commentator of the works of physiocrats and other 
economists.— Ed. 
A direct tax which mainly affected the peasants.— Ed. 
Indirect taxes.— Ed. 

=====第352页=====
É. de Girardin, Le socialisme et l'impôt 329 
submissions, greffe, tobacco monopoly, excessive profits from the postal services and 
the sale of gunpowder, the lottery, parish or state corvée, billetting, octrois, river and 
road tolls, extraordinary levies—all these things may have changed their names, but 
they all persist in essence and have become no less a burden on the people nor any 
more productive for the treasury. The basis of our financial system is totally 
unscientific. It reflects nothing more than the traditions of the Middle Ages, which are 
in turn themselves the legacy of the ignorant and predatory fiscal practice of the 
Romans" [p. 102]. 
Nevertheless, as long ago as the National Assembly of the first 
revolution, our fathers cried out: 
"We have made the revolution only in order to take taxation into our own hands." 
But although this state of affairs was able to persist under the 
Empire, the Restoration and the July monarchy, its hour has now 
struck: 
"The abolition of electoral privilege necessarily entails the abolition of all fiscal 
inequality. [...] There is therefore no time to be lost in coming to grips with the finance 
reform, if science is not to be ousted by violence.... Taxation is virtually the sole 
foundation on which our society rests.... Social, and political reforms are sought in the 
remotest and most elevated places; the most important are to be found in taxation. 
Seek here, and ye shall find" [pp. 103, 105, 108]. 
And what do we find? 
"As we conceive taxation, taxation should be an insurance premium paid by those 
who have property, to insure themselves against all risks which might disturb them in the 
possession and enjoyment of it... This premium must be proportional and strict in its 
exactitude. Every tax which is not a guarantee against a risk, the price for a commodity 
or the equivalent for a service, must be abandoned—we allow but two exceptions: tax 
on foreign countries (douane) and tax on death (enregistrement).... The taxpayer is 
thus replaced by the insured person.... Everyone who has an interest in payment pays, 
and pays only to the extent of his interest.... We go further and say: every tax stands 
condemned by the mere fact that it bears the name of tax or imposition. Every tax must 
be abolished  [...] for the peculiar characteristic of a tax is that it is obligatory, whereas it 
is in the nature of insurance to be voluntary" [pp. 120, 122, 127-28]. 
This insurance premium must not be confused with a tax on 
income; it is rather a tax on capital, in the same way that an insurance 
premium does not guarantee income but capital assets as a whole. 
The state acts in exactly the same way as the insurance companies, 
who do not want to know what revenue the thing insured yields but 
what it is worth. 
"The national wealth of France is estimated at 134 thousand million, from which 
liabilities of 28 thousand million must be subtracted. If the budget expenditure is 
reduced to 1,200 million, only  1 per cent of the capital would need to be levied to raise 
the state to the level of a colossal mutual insurance company" [p. 130]. 
And from that moment onward—"no more revolutions?' [P. 131.] 

=====第353页=====
330 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"The word solidarity will replace the word authority, communal interest will become 
the bond linking the members, of society" [p. 133]. 
M. Girardin does not rest content with this general suggestion but 
at the same time gives us a form for an insurance policy or 
registration such as will be issued to every citizen by the state. 
Each year the former tax-collector gives the insured a policy 
consisting of "four pages of the size of a passport". On the first page 
is the name of the insured with his registration number, as well as the 
form for the receipts of the premium payments. On the second page 
are all the personal particulars of the insured and his family, along 
with a detailed estimate of the value he puts on his total assets, 
certified as correct; on the third page, the budget of the state along 
with a general balance for France, and on the fourth, all sorts of 
more or less useful statistical information. The policy serves as a 
passport, election card and travel record for workers, etc. The 
registers of these policies allow the state in turn to prepare the four 
Great Books: the Great Book of Population, the Great Book of 
Property, the Great Book of the Public Debt, and the Great Book of 
Mortgage Debts, which together contain full statistics of all the assets 
of France. 
Taxation is merely the premium paid by the insured to permit him 
to enjoy the following benefits: 1. the right to public protection, a 
free legal service, free religious practice, free education, credit 
against security and a savings-bank pension; 2. exemption from 
military service in peace time; 3. protection from destitution; 
4. compensation for loss through fire, floods, hail, cattle-disease and 
shipwreck. 
We further observe that M. Girardin intends to raise the compen­
sation sum which the state has to pay, in case of loss by insured per­
sons,  by means of various fines, etc., from the product of the 
nationally-owned estates and the fees from enregistrement and 
customs, which will have been maintained, as well as from the state 
monopolies. 
Tax reform is the hobby-horse of every radical bourgeois, the 
specific element in all bourgeois economic reforms. From the earliest 
medieval philistines to the modern English free-traders, the main 
struggle has revolved around taxation. 
Tax reform has as its aim either the abolition of traditional taxes 
which impede the progress of industry, or less extravagant state 
budgets, or more equal distribution. The further it slips from his 
grasp in practice, the more keenly does the bourgeois pursue the 
chimerical ideal of equal distribution of taxation. 

=====第354页=====
É. de Girardin, Le socialisme et l'impôt 331 
The distribution relations, which rest directly upon bourgeois 
production, the relations between wages and profit, profit and 
interest, rent and profit, may at most be modified in inessentials by 
taxation, but the latter can never threaten their foundations. All 
investigations and discussions about taxation presuppose the ever­
lasting continuance of these bourgeois relations. Even the abolition 
of taxes could only hasten the development of bourgeois property 
and its contradictions. 
Taxation may benefit some classes and oppress others harshly, as 
we observe, for example, under the rule of the financial aristocracy. 
It is ruinous only for those intermediate sections of society between 
the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, whose position does not allow 
them to shift the burden of taxation to another class. 
Every new tax depresses the proletariat one step further; the 
abolition of an old tax increases not wages but profits. In a 
revolution, taxation, swollen to colossal proportions, can be used as a 
form of attack against private property; but even then it must be an 
incentive for new, revolutionary measures or eventually bring about 
a reversion to the old bourgeois relations. 
The reduction of taxes, their more equitable distribution, etc., 
etc., is a banal bourgeois reform. The abolition of taxes is bourgeois 
socialism. This bourgeois socialism appeals especially to the industrial 
and commercial middle sections and to the peasants. The big 
bourgeoisie, who are already living in what is for them the best of 
possible worlds,3 naturally despise the Utopia of a best of worlds. 
M. Girardin abolishes taxes by transforming them into an insur­
ance premium. By paying a certain percentage, the members of 
society insure each other's assets against fire and flood, against hail 
and bankruptcy and against every possible risk which today disturbs 
the peace of bourgeois enjoyment. The annual contribution is not 
merely fixed by the insured persons collectively, but is determined by 
each individual  himself.  He estimates his assets  himself.  The crises of 
trade and agriculture, the torrent of losses and bankruptcies, all the 
fluctuations and vicissitudes of the bourgeois mode of life, which 
have been epidemic since the introduction of modern industry, all 
the poetry of bourgeois society will disappear. Universal security 
and insuranceb will become a reality. The burgher has it in 
writing from the state that he cannot under any circumstances 
a An ironical paraphrase of Pangloss' famous dictum from Voltaire's Candide: "All 
is for the best in the best of possible worlds."—Ed. 
b In the original a pun on the words Sicherheit (security) and Versicherung 
(insurance).— Ed. 

=====第355页=====
332 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
be ruined. All the shady sides have gone from the present world, its 
bright sides live on, their brilliancy enhanced, in short, that system of 
government has become reality "which most closely approximates to 
the bourgeois conception of the kingdom of God on earth". In place 
of authority, solidarity; in place of compulsion, freedom; in place of 
the state, a committee of administrators—and the puzzle of 
Columbus and the egg is solved, the mathematically precise 
contribution of each "insured person", according to his assets. Each 
"insured person" carries a complete constitutional state, a fully 
formed bicameral system, within his breast. The fear of paying the 
state too much, the bourgeois opposition in the Chamber of 
Deputies, impels him to underestimate his assets. His interest in 
preserving his property, the conservative element of the Chamber of 
Peers,  inclines him to overestimate them. The constitutional 
interaction of these opposing tendencies of necessity engenders the 
true balance of powers, the precisely correct valuation of assets, the 
exact proportion of the contribution. 
A certain Roman wished his house might be made of glass so that 
his every action would be visible to all. The bourgeois wishes that not 
his own house but that of his neighbour should be of glass. This wish 
too is fulfilled. For example: a citizen asks me for an advance, 
or wishes to form an association with me. I ask him for his policy, 
and in it I have a confession, entire and in detail, of all his civil 
circumstances, guaranteed by his interest correctly understood and 
countersigned by the insurance board. A beggar knocks at my door 
and begs for alms. Let me see his policy. The burgher must be sure 
that his alms are going to the right man. I engage a servant, I take 
him into my house, I entrust myself to him for good or  ill: let me see 
his policy! 
"How many marriages are concluded without the two parties knowing exactly what 
to rely on concerning the reality of the dowry or their mutually exaggerated 
expectations" [p. 178]. 
Let us see their policies! 
In future the exchange of loving hearts will be reduced to the 
exchange of policies by the two parties. Thus fraud will disappear, 
which today provides the sweetness and the bitterness of life, and the 
Kingdom of Truth in the strict sense of the word will become a 
reality. Nor is that all: 
"Under the present system, the courts cost the state some 7V2 million, under our 
system offences will bring revenue instead of expense, for they will be transmuted into 
fines and compensation—what an idea!" [Pp. 190-91.] 

=====第356页=====
É. de Girard in, Le socialisme et l'impôt 333 
Everything in this best of possible worlds brings in profit: crimes 
disappear and offences yield revenue. 3 Finally, as under this system 
property is protected against all risks and the state is no more than 
the universal insurance for all interests, the workers are always 
employed: "No more revolutions!" 
If that is not what the bourgeois wants, 
Then I don't know what else he wants! 
The bourgeois state is nothing more than the mutual insurance of 
the bourgeois class against its individual members, as well as against 
the exploited class, insurance which will necessarily become increas­
ingly expensive and to all appearances increasingly independent of 
bourgeois society, because the oppression of the exploited class is 
becoming ever more difficult. The change of name changes nothing 
in the nature of this insurance. M. Girardin himself is at once 
obliged to abandon the apparent independence from insurance 
which he for a moment allows individuals to enjoy. Anyone who 
estimates his assets too low is liable to punishment: the insurance 
fund buys his property from him at the price he has set and even 
encourages informers with rewards. Nor is that the worst: anyone 
who prefers not to insure his assets at all is declared outside society 
and simply outlawed. Society of course cannot tolerate the formation 
of a class in its midst which rebels against its very conditions of 
existence. Compulsion, authority, bureaucratic interference which 
are precisely what Girardin wants to eliminate, reappear in society. If 
for a moment he made abstraction of the conditions of bourgeois 
society, he did so only in order to return to them by another route. 
Behind the abolition of taxation lurks the abolition of the state. 
The abolition of the state has meaning with the Communists, only as 
the necessary consequence of the abolition of classes, with which the 
need for the organised might of one class to keep the others down 
automatically disappears. In bourgeois countries the abolition of the 
state means that the power of the state is reduced to the level found 
in North America. There, the class contradictions are but incom­
pletely developed; every clash between the classes is concealed by the 
outflow of the surplus proletarian population to the west; interven­
tion by the power of the state, reduced to a minimum in the east, 
does not exist at all in the west. In feudal countries the abolition of 
the state means the abolition of feudalism and the creation of an 
a In the original a pun on the words vergehen (disappear) and Vergehen 
(offences).— Ed. 

=====第357页=====
334 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
ordinary bourgeois state. In Germany it conceals either a cowardly 
flight from the struggles that lie immediately ahead, a spurious 
inflating of bourgeois freedom into absolute independence and 
autonomy of the individual, or, finally, the indifference of the 
bourgeois towards all forms of state, provided the development 
of bourgeois interests is not obstructed. It is of course not the fault of 
the Berliners Stirner and Faucher that this abolition of the state "in 
the higher sense" is being preached in so fatuous a way. La plus  belle 
fille de la France ne peut donner que ce qu'elle a. 3 
What remains of M. Girardin's insurance company is the tax on 
capital, as opposed to the tax on income, and in place of all other 
taxes.  Capital for M. Girardin is not confined to capital employed in 
production, it embraces all movable and immovable assets. In respect 
of this tax on capital, he boasts: 
"It is like the egg of Columbus, it is a pyramid which must stand on its base and not 
on its apex, [...] it is the stream cutting a course for  itself,  the revolution without 
revolutionaries, progress with never a backward step, movement with neither jar nor 
jolt, finally it is the Idea in all its simplicity and the true Law" [pp. 135-36]. 
There is no denying that of all the costermongering advertise­
ments that M. Girardin has ever produced—and they, as we know, 
are legion—this prospectus for capital-tax represents the master­
piece. 
Incidentally the tax on capital, as the sole form of taxation, has its 
merits. All the economists and Ricardo in particular have demon­
strated the advantages of a single form of taxation. The tax on 
capital, as the sole form of taxation, eliminates at a stroke the 
expense of the numerous staff previously needed to administer 
taxation, interferes least with the regular process of production, 
circulation and consumption and is the only tax to fall on luxury 
capital. 
But M. Girardin's tax on capital is not limited to this. Its effects 
include yet other and very special blessings. 
Capital assets of equal size will be obliged to pay the same rates of 
tax to the state, regardless of whether they bring in 6 per cent, 3 per 
cent or no income at all. The consequence of this is that idle capital 
will be put to work and will increase the volume of productive capital, 
and that capital which is already productive will be put to yet further 
exertions, i. e. it will produce more in less tjme. The consequence of 
these two things will be a fall in profit and in the rate of interest. 
a The most beautiful girl in France can only give what she has.— Ed. 

=====第358页=====
É. de Girardin, Le socialisme et l'impôt 335 
M. Girardin however asserts that profit and the rate of interest will 
then rise—a true economic miracle. The transformation of unpro­
ductive into productive capital and the increasing productivity of 
capital in general have intensified and aggravated the development 
of crises in industry and depressed profits and the rate of interest. 
The tax on capital can only hasten this process, exacerbate crises and 
thereby increase the growth of revolutionary elements.— "No more 
revolutions!" 
A second miraculous effect of the tax on capital, according to 
M. Girardin, is that it would attract capital from the land, where its 
yield is low, to industry, where its yield is higher, bring down land 
prices and transplant to France the concentration of land, Britain's 
large-scale agriculture and therewith all of Britain's advanced 
industry. Quite apart from the fact that this would require a similar 
migration to France of the other conditions of British industry too, 
M. Girardin is here guilty of quite peculiar errors. Farming in France 
is suffering not from a surplus but from a lack of capital. Not by 
withdrawing capital from farming but on the contrary by pouring 
industrial capital into agriculture have British concentration and 
British farming come about. The price of land in Britain is far higher 
than in France; the total value of the land in Britain is almost as 
much as the whole national wealth of France, in Girardin's 
estimation. Concentration in France would therefore not merely not 
cause the price of land to fall, on the contrary it would cause it to rise. 
The concentration of landed property in Britain has furthermore 
totally swept away whole generations of the population. The same 
concentration, to which the tax on capital will of course necessarily 
contribute by hastening the ruin of the peasants, would in France 
drive the great mass of the peasants into the towns and make 
revolution all the more inevitable. And finally, if in France the tide 
has already begun to turn from fragmentation to concentration, in 
Britain the large landed estates are making giant strides towards 
renewed disintegration, conclusively proving that agriculture neces­
sarily proceeds in an incessant cycle of concentration and fragmenta­
tion of the land, as long as bourgeois conditions as a whole continue 
to exist. 
Enough of these miracles. Let us turn to the provision of credit for 
mortgage deposits. 
Credit for mortgage deposits will initially only be available to 
landowners. The state will issue mortgage notes, resembling bank­
notes in all respects except that land is the guarantee instead of 
cash or bullion. These mortgage notes will be advanced by the state 
at 4 per cent to peasants in debt, and will be used to satisfy their 

=====第359页=====
336 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
mortgage creditors; in place of the private creditor, the state now has 
the mortgage on the land and consolidates the debt so that 
repayment can never be demanded. The total of mortgage debts in 
France amounts to 14 thousand million. It is true that Girardin only 
envisages the issue of 5 thousand million mortgage notes, but the 
augmentation of paper money by such a sum would have the effect, 
not of making capital cheaper, but of devaluing paper money 
entirely. Moreover, Girardin lacks the courage to impose a fixed rate 
on this new paper. To obviate devaluation he proposes that the 
holders of these notes should exchange them al pari 3 for 3 per cent 
national debt certificates. The outcome of the transaction is thus as 
follows: the peasant who formerly paid 5 per cent interest and 1 per 
cent conveyancing, and renewal and other fees, now only pays 4 per 
cent and thus gains 2 per cent; the state borrows at 3 per cent and 
lends at 4 per cent, and thus gains 1 per cent; the former mortgage 
creditor, who previously received 5 per cent, is obliged by the 
threatening devaluation of mortgage notes gratefully to accept the 3 
per cent he is offered by the state; he therefore loses 2 per cent. 
Furthermore the peasant does not need to pay his debt and the 
creditor can never realise what the state owes him. What these 
dealings therefore amount to is that behind the thin camouflage of 
the mortgage notes the mortgage creditors are directly robbed of 2 
out of their 5 per cent. On the only occasion, apart from taxation, 
therefore that M. Girardin plans to change social relations them­
selves, he is forced to make a direct attack on private property, he has 
to become a revolutionary and to give up his whole Utopia. And this 
attack is not even of his own invention. He borrowed it from the 
German Communists, who after the February Revolution were the 
first to demand that mortgage debts should be transformed into 
debts to the state,b admittedly in an entirely different fashion from 
M. Girardin, who even publicly opposed it. It is characteristic that on 
the sole occasion when M. Girardin proposes a somewhat revolution­
ary measure he has not the courage to suggest anything but a 
palliative which can only make the development of fragmentation in 
landownership in France the more chronic, and turn the clock back 
in that regard by a few decades, until the present state of affairs is 
finally reached again. 
The only thing the reader will have missed throughout Girardin's 
exposé is the workers. But of course bourgeois socialism always 
a At their nominal value.— Ed. 
See Karl Marx and Frederick Ejjgels, Demands of  the Communist Party in Germany 
(present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 3-7).— Ed. 

=====第360页=====
Ë. de Girardin, Le socialisme et l'impôt 337 
presupposes that society is exclusively  composed  of capitalists,  so as to be 
able then to resolve the issue between capital and wage labour 
according to this point of view. 
Written in the second half of April 1850 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English in full for the 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue first time 
No. 4, 1850 

=====第361页=====
338 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
REVIEW 
[March-April 1850] 246 
(Our monthly review had to be held over from the last issue due to 
lack of space. We print here only that part of the review which 
concerns England.) 
Shortly before the anniversary of the February Revolution, when 
Carlier had the trees of liberty3 cut down, Punch printed a drawing 
of a tree of liberty whose leaves are bayonets and whose fruits are 
bombs, and opposite this French tree of liberty, bristling with its 
bayonets, in a song of its own it sings the praises of the tree of English 
liberty, bearing the only sound fruit: pounds, shillings and pence.b 
But this feeble counting-house joke vanishes beside the immense 
outbursts of rage with which The Times has been foaming since 
March 10 at the triumphs of "anarchy".c The reactionary party in 
England, as in all countries, feels the blow struck in Paris as if it itself 
had been directly hit. 
What threatens "order" in England most at present, however, is 
not the dangers emanating from Paris but a new and quite direct 
consequence of this order, a fruit of that English tree of liberty: a 
trade crisis. 
In our January review (No. 2)d we already referred to the 
approach of the crisis. Several circumstances have hastened it. 
Before the last crisis in 1845, surplus capital found an outlet in 
railway speculation. The over-production and over-speculation in 
See this volume, p. 24.— Ed. 
b Punch, London, March 1850, Vol. 18, p. 92.— Ed. 
c The TimesNo. 20436, March 14, 1850. On March 10, 1850, the Left-wing forces 
in France scored a success in a by-election to the Legislative Assembly.— Ed. 
See this volume, pp. 263-65.— Ed. 

=====第362页=====
Review 339 
railways attained such a level however that the railway business did 
not recover, not even during the boom of 1848-49, and even the 
shares of the soundest enterprises of this kind are still exceptionally 
depressed in price. The low corn prices and the prospects for the 
harvest of 1850 equally provided no opportunity for the investment 
of capital, and the various state bonds were subject to too much of a 
risk to become the object of any large-scale speculation. Thus the 
surplus capital of the period of prosperity found its usual escape 
channels blocked. The only thing left for it to do was to throw itself 
completely into industrial production and into speculation in 
colonial products and in the decisive raw materials of industry, 
cotton and wool. With such a large part of the capital usually 
employed elsewhere flowing directly into industry, industrial 
production was naturally bound to increase with unusual rapidity 
and with it the glutting of the markets, and hence the outbreak of the 
crisis was significantly hastened. Already the first symptoms of the 
crisis are appearing in the most important branches of industry and 
financial speculation. For four weeks now that all-important branch 
of industry, cotton, has been completely depressed, and of its 
components the most important ones are those that are suffering 
most—the spinning and weaving of ordinary cloths. The fall in the 
prices of twist and of ordinary calicoes has already left the fall in the 
prices of raw cotton far behind. Production is being cut back; almost 
without exception the factories are now only working short time. A 
momentary reinvigoration of industrial activity was expected with 
the spring orders from the Continent; but while the orders given 
earlier for the internal market, for East India and China, and for the 
Levant are for the most part being cancelled, the continental orders, 
which always provided two months' work, have hardly come in at all 
as a result of the uncertain political conditions.—Here and there in 
the woollen industry symptoms can be seen which indicate the 
imminent end of the present, still fairly "healthy" state of business. 
The production of iron is similarly suffering. The producers 
consider it inevitable that prices will soon fall, and are trying to stop 
them from falling too rapidly by means of a coalition among 
themselves. So much for the state of industry. Now for financial 
speculation. The fall in cotton prices is due partly to new and 
increased supplies and partly to the depression in the industry. The 
same thing goes for colonial products. Supplies are increasing, 
consumption in the internal market is decreasing. In the last two 
months alone twenty-five shiploads of tea have arrived in Liverpool. 
The consumption of colonial products, held down even during the 
boom by the distress in the agricultural districts, is feeling all the 

=====第363页=====
340 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
more heavily the pressure, which is now spreading to the industrial 
districts too. Already one of the most important colonial import 
houses in Liverpool has succumbed to this recession. 
The effects of the trade crisis now breaking will be more sig­
nificant than those of any crisis hitherto. It coincides with the ag­
ricultural crisis which already began with the repeal of the Corn 
Laws in England247 and was intensified with the recent good har­
vests.  For the first time England is simultaneously experiencing an 
industrial  crisis  and an agricultural  crisis.  This double  crisis,  in England 
is being hastened and extended, and made more inflammable by the 
simultaneously impending convulsions on the Continent, and the 
continental revolutions will assume an incomparably more pro­
nounced socialist character through the recoil of the English crisis 
on the world market. It is common knowledge that no European 
country reacts so directly, so extensively and so intensively to the 
effects of the English crisis as Germany. The reason is simple: 
Germany forms the largest continental market for England's 
exports, and the major German export articles, wool and corn, have 
by far their most significant outlet in England. History seems to have 
a weakness for that epigram to the Friends of Order, according to 
which the working classes revolt from insufficient consumption and 
the upper classes go bankrupt from superfluous production. 
The Whigs will naturally be the first victims of the crisis. As of old 
they will abandon the helm of state as soon as the threatening storm 
breaks out. And this time they will say farewell to the Downing Street 
offices for good. A short-lived Tory ministry may follow them in the 
first instance, but the ground will be quaking under it, all the 
opposition parties will unite against it, with the industrialists in the 
van. These have no such popular panacea to oppose to the crisis as 
they had in the repeal of the Corn Laws. They will be forced to 
advance at least to a reform of Parliament. That is, they will assume 
the political power which cannot be denied them, in conditions which 
open the doors of Parliament to the proletariat, place the demands 
of the latter on the agenda of the House of Commons and hurl 
England into the European revolution. 
* * *• 
We have but little to add to these notes, written a month ago, 
concerning the impending trade crisis. The momentary improve­
ment in business which regularly comes in spring has at last occurred 
this time also, although admittedly to a lesser degree than usual. 
French industry, which for the most part supplies light summer 

=====第364页=====
Review 341 
fabrics, has especially profited from it; but increased orders have also 
come in to Manchester, Glasgow and the West Riding. This mo­
mentary revival of industry in spring occurs every year, inci­
dentally, and only delays a little the development of the crisis. 
Commerce in East India has experienced a momentary improve­
ment as well.- The more favourable rate of exchange in relation to 
England allowed the sellers to get rid of part of their stock below 
former prices, and the Bombay market was thus eased a little. This 
local and momentary improvement of business is also one of those 
border-line cases which occur from time to time, particularly at the 
start of every crisis, and which only have an insignificant influence 
on its general course of development. 
On the other hand, reports have just come in from America which 
depict the market there as completely depressed. The American 
market, however, is the most decisive. With the glutting of the 
American market, with the standstill in business and the fall of prices 
in America the crisis proper will begin—the direct, rapid and 
irresistible reaction upon England will commence. We need only 
refer to the crisis of 1837. Only one article continues to rise in 
America: the United States national debt bonds, the only state bond 
which offers secure asylum to the capital of our European Friends of 
Order. 
Following the entry of America into the recession brought about 
by over-production we may expect the crisis to develop rather more 
rapidly in the coming month than hitherto. Political developments 
on the Continent are likewise pressing daily more urgently towards a 
showdown, and the coincidence of trade crisis and revolution, which 
has already been mentioned several times in this Revue* is becoming 
more and more certain. Que les destins s'accomplissent! b 
London, April 18, 1850 
Written between mid-March and April 18, 
1850 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 4, 
1850 
See this volume, pp.  52-53.—  Ed. 
Let fate take its  course!  — Ed Printed according to the journal 
Published in English for the first 
time 
13-1124 

=====第365页=====
342 
Karl Marx 
LOUIS NAPOLEON AND FOULD248 
Our readers will recall that in our previous issue we showed how 
the finance aristocracy in France regained power. We took the 
opportunity to refer to the association of Louis Napoleon and Fould 
in the execution of profitable coups on the Stock Exchange.3 It has 
already been noted that since Fould joined the Cabinet Louis 
Napoleon's unceasing demands on the Legislative Assembly for 
money have suddenly stopped. Since the recent elections, however, 
facts have been divulged which shed a glaring light on President 
Bonaparte's sources of income. Just one instance. 
In our account we shall be drawing mainly on La Patrie, the 
respectable newspaper of the Union  électorale, 249 whose owner, the 
banker Delamarre, is himself one of the most important stock-
exchange gamblers in Paris. 
A large-scale speculative operation à la hausse 6 was organised with 
an eye to the elections of March 10. M. Fould was the ringleader of 
the plot, the most prominent of the Friends of Order participated in 
it, and M. Bonaparte's camarilla had large cash interests in it, as did 
he himself. 
On March 7 the 3 per cent bonds rose 5 centimes and the 5 per 
cent, 15 centimes; you see, La Patrie had made known the result of 
the preliminary election of the Friends of Order. This rise was too 
small for our speculators, however; a "boost" was needed. So La 
Patrie of March 8, which came out the previous evening, indicates in 
its stock-exchange bulletin that there is not the remotest doubt 
See this volume, pp. 114-18.— Ed. 
b On a rising market.— Ed. 

=====第366页=====
Louis Napoleon and Fould 343 
about the victory of the party of Order. It states among other 
things: 
"We will certainly not blame the capitalists for their restraint; if, however, there 
ever existed situations in which scepticism was inadmissible, this is one of them, after 
the results obtained in the primary election." 
In order to evaluate the influence of the stock-exchange bulletin 
and the information in La Patrie in general on the Stock Exchange, 
one must know that it is the de facto 'official' gazette of the present 
government and receives official news before the Moniteur  itself. 
Nevertheless, the coup failed this time. 
On the 8th several army votes favourable to the red party became 
known and share prices immediately fell. A panic terror appeared to 
seize the speculators; it was now necessary to mobilise every means 
available. La Patries stock-exchange bulletin stuck to its guns; every 
one of the Union électorales newspapers was ordered to the firing 
line;  a few irregularities in connection with insignificant votes were 
discussed with great emphasis; one paper headlined the votes of a 
regiment which had voted monarchist; the republican papers were 
finally forced to publish some official denials, which a few days later 
proved to be just so many lies. 
On the 9th these united endeavours succeeded in producing a 
small rise in state bonds at the opening of the Exchange, which did 
not last long, however. Until a quarter past two prices were rather 
low, but from that moment on they rose steadily until the close of 
business.250  The causes of this sudden reversal were blurted out by 
La Patrie itself as follows: 
"We are assured that some speculators with a large stake in an upswing made 
considerable purchases towards the close of business in order to create a positive mood 
in the provinces at the time of the election, and by the confidence roused in the 
provinces to bring about new purchases which would lead to a still higher rise."3 
This operation amounted to several millions, its success lay in the 
rise of the 3 per cent bonds by 40 centimes and of the 5 per cent by 
60 centimes. 
This much is clear: there were speculators with a stake in the 
upswing who therefore made new purchases of a significant size at 
the critical moment in order to bring about a new rise. Who were 
these speculators? Let the facts provide the answer. 
On the 11th there was a fall in prices on the Exchange. All the 
endeavours of the speculators were powerless against the uncertainty 
of the election results. 
On the 12th a new, significant fall, since the result of the election 
a La Patrie No. 69, March 10, 1850.— Ed. 
13* 

=====第367页=====
344 Karl Marx 
was practically known, and it was as good as certain that the three 
socialist candidates 3 had an imposing majority. The speculating bulls 
now made a desperate effort. La Patrie and the Moniteur du Soir 
published, under the heading of official telegraphic despatches, 
election results from the provinces which were pure inventions. The 
manoeuvre succeeded. In the evening, at Tortoni's, 251 there was a 
slight rise. So it was only a matter of still further "boosting". The 
following news item was printed in La Patrie: 
"According to the votes known so far, Citizen de Flotte only has a lead of 341 votes 
on Citizen F. Foy. This election result can still be decided in favour of our candidate by 
the votes of the mobile gendarmerie.—We are assured that the government will 
tomorrow  lay before the Assembly two laws, on the press and on electoral assemblies, 
and demand that they be treated as a matter of urgency." 
The second item was false; only after long hesitation, after lengthy 
discussions with the leaders of the party of Order and a change in the 
Cabinet did the government decide to propose these laws. The first 
item was an even more brazen lie; at the very moment it was being 
published in La Patrie, the government sent a telegram to the 
départements stating that de Flotte had been elected. 
Nonetheless, the stratagem succeeded; the bonds rose by 1 fr. 
35 cts., and our gentlemen speculators realised between 3 and 4 
millions. Surely, one cannot take it amiss of the "Friends of 
Property" if they seek to gain possession of as much of their fetish as 
possible in the interests of order and society. 
As a result of this successful dodgec  the speculators became so 
bold that they immediately made new purchases on the grandest 
scale, thus inducing a number of other capitalists to buy also. The 
rise was so pronounced that even the conjectural profits on this 
transaction were already being traded yet again. Then, on the 
morning of the 15th, came the crushing blow of the proclamation of 
Carnot, de Flotte and Vidal as representatives of the people; stock 
prices fell suddenly and irresistibly, and the defeat of our speculators 
could not be avoided by any further lying news reports or tel­
egraphic fictions. 
Written between late March and mid-April Printed according to the journal 
1850 
Published in English for the first 
First published in the Neue Rheinische time 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 4, 
1850 
Lazare Hippolyte Carnot, Paul de Flotte and François Vidal. — Ed. 
La Patrie No. 74, March 15, 1850. The italics are Marx's.— Ed. 
The English word is used in the original.— Ed. 

=====第368页=====
345 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
GOTTFRIED KINKEL252 
The slackness in the German allegedly revolutionary party is so 
great that things which would arouse a universal storm in France or 
England blow over in Germany without anybody even being amazed 
that such things actually find general favour here. Herr Waldeck 
gives the jurymen a detailed witness's testimony that he was always a 
good constitutionalist, and is driven home in triumph by the Berlin 
democrats. In Trier, Herr Grün denies the revolution in a public 
court in the silliest fashion, and the people turn their backs on the 
condemned proletarians in the court-room to acclaim the acquitted 
industrialist. 253 
A fresh example of what is possible in Germany is provided by the 
defence speech made by Herr Gottfried Kinkel before the military 
court in Rastatt on August 4, 1849, and published in the Berlin 
Abend-Post of April 6 and 7 this year. 
We know in advance that we shall provoke the general wrath of the 
sentimental swindlers and democratic spouters by denouncing this 
speech of the "captured" Kinkel to our party. To this we are 
completely indifferent. Our task is that of ruthless criticism, and 
much more against ostensible friends than against open enemies; 
and in maintaining this our position we gladly forego cheap dem­
ocratic popularity. Our attack will by no means worsen Herr Kin-
kel's position; we denounce his amnesty by confirming his confession 
that he is not the man people allege to hold him for, and by declaring 
that he is worthy, not only of being amnestied, but even of entering 
the service of the Prussian state. Moreover, the speech has been 
published. We denounce the whole document to our party, and only 
reproduce the most striking passages here. 

=====第369页=====
346 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"Also,  I was never in command, so that I am not responsible for the actions of others 
either. For I wish to guard against any identification of my actions with the dirt and 
filth which recently, I know, unfortunately tagged on to this revolution." 
Since Herr Kinkel "joined the Besançon company as a private", 
and since he here casts suspicion on all commanders, was it not his 
duty at this juncture to exempt at least his immediate superior, 
Willich? 
"I have never served in the army, and have therefore also never  broken  any oath to  the 
flag, nor used against my fatherland any military  knowledge  which I might have obtained in the 
service of my fatherland." 
Was this not a direct denunciation of the captured former Prussian 
soldiers, of Jansen and Bernigau, who were shot soon after­
wards; was it not a complete endorsement of the death sentence 
against Dortu, who had already been shot? 
Herr Kinkel further denounces his own party to the military court 
in speaking of plans for ceding the left bank of the Rhine to France, 
and declaring himself to be innocent in relation to this criminal 
project. Herr Kinkel knows very well that there was only talk of a 
union of the Rhine Province with France in the sense that in the 
decisive battle between revolution and counter-revolution the Rhine 
Province would unfailingly fight on the revolutionary side, whether 
it was represented by Frenchmen or Chinamen. Just as little does he 
omit a reference to the mildness of his character, in contrast to the 
wild revolutionaries, which made it possible for him to have a good 
relationship with an Arndt and other conservatives as a human being, 
if not as a party man. 
"My guilt is that in the summer I still wanted the same thing that you all wanted in 
March, that the whole German people wanted in March!" 
Here he declares himself to be nothing but a fighter for the 
Imperial Constitution, who never wanted anything beyond the 
Imperial Constitution. We take note of this declaration. 
Herr Kinkel comes to speak of an article which he wrote about a 
riot of the Prussian soldiers in Mainz, 254 and says: 
"And what happened to me because of this? During this my absence from home I 
received a second summons to appear in court, and since I was unable to appear to 
defend myself I was deprived, as I have recently been informed, of the franchise for 
five years. Five  years  deprivation of the franchise was pronounced over me: for a man who 
has already once had the honour of being a deputy, this is an exceedingly harsh 
punishment" (!). 
"How often have I heard it said that I am a 'bad Prussian'; these words have 
wounded me.... Well then! My party has for the present lost the game in our 
fatherland. If the Prussian Crown now at last pursues a bold and strong policy, if His 

=====第370页=====
Gottfried Kinkel 347 
Royal Highness our Crown Prince,  the Prince of Prussia, succeeds in forging Germany into 
one by the sword, for no other way is possible, and giving it a great arid respected place 
in relation to our neighbours, and ensuring real and lasting internal freedom, raising 
trade and intercourse again, sharing the military burden, now weighing too heavily on 
Prussia, equally over the whole of Germany, and above all providing bread for the 
poor of my nation, whose representative I feel myself to be:—if your party succeeds in 
this, well, upon my oath! The honour and greatness of my fatherland are dearer to me 
than my ideals of state, and I know how to appreciate the French republicans of 1793" 
(Fouché and Talleyrand?) "who afterwards voluntarily bowed to the greatness of 
Napoleon for the sake of France; now should this happen, and then my people once 
again do me the honour of choosing me as their representative, I should be the first 
deputy to cry with a glad heart: Long live the German Empire! Long live the Hohenzollern 
Empire!* If one is a bad Prussian with such opinions, well! Then I really have no desire 
to be a good Prussian." 
"Gentlemen, think a little also of wife and child at homewhen you pronounce sentence 
upon a man who stands before you today in such deep misfortune as a result of the 
changing tides of human destiny!" 
Herr Kinkel made this speech at a time when twenty-six of his 
comrades were being sentenced to death and shot by the same 
military courts, men who faced the bullet in a quite different fashion 
from that in which Herr Kinkel faced his judges. When, incidentally, 
he presents himself as a quite harmless person, he is completely 
right. He only happened to join his party through a misunderstand­
ing, and it would be a quite senseless piece of cruelty if the Prussian 
Government wished to keep him in the penitentiary any longer. 
Written in mid-April 1850 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 4, time 
1850 
Kinkel's italics.— Ed. 

=====第371页=====
348 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
[EDITORIAL NOTE] 
We have received the following report from Washington: "Herr 
Didier, editor of the New-Yorker Schnellpost, claims that he was 
formerly on the editorial staff of the Neue Rheinische  Zeitung.''''  We 
hereby declare that this is untrue. 
Written in the second half of April 1850 Printed according to the journal 
Published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Published in English for the first 
Politischrökonomische Revue No. 4, 1850 time 

=====第372页=====
349 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
STATEMENT255 
The Berlin Abend-Post of April 14 contains the following report, 
date-lined Stettin, 3 April 11. 
"With reference to the London refugees it has been arranged that contributions 
should be sent to Bücher, who will contact Schramm (of Striegau ), since the other two 
committees live in dissension and share out contributions in a partial way." 
In actual fact there is only one refugee committee256 here in 
London, the undersigned, which was established in September last 
year with the commencement of emigration to London. Subsequent­
ly attempts have been made to set up other refugee committees; 
they have remained unsuccessful. The undersigned committee has 
hitherto been able—at least to prevent them dying from hunger—to 
aid the refugees arriving here in need of help—who all, except four 
or five, applied to us. The masses of refugees pouring in here now as 
a result of the Swiss expulsions have at last, it is true, almost 
exhausted the funds of this committee too. These funds have been 
shared out  absolutely  equally to all those who have been able to show 
that they participated in the revolutionary movements in Germany 
and were in need of help, regardless of whichever party faction they 
belonged to. If the undersigned committee has adopted the title 
"social-democratic", it is not because it has only supported refugees 
of this party, but because it has principally had recourse to the 
money available from this party—as was also made clear already in 
its Appeal of November last year.257 
The rumour that heaps of money lay waiting for the refugees here 
in London—a rumour evidently provoked by the refugee lottery 
a The Polish name is Szczecin.— Ed. 
The Polish name is Strzegom.— Ed. 

=====第373页=====
350 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
suggested in Switzerland—led to demands being made on our 
committee which could not be fulfilled. On the other hand the 
simultaneous deliberate spreading of rumours in the newspapers 
about dissensions between competing committees has hindered the 
sending of sufficient contributions to London. The undersigned 
committee, in order to obtain information about the existence of 
other means and other committees for the support of the refugees, 
invited the refugees to send deputations to Citizens Struve, Rudolf 
Schramm, and Louis Bauer (from Stolpe). This was done. The 
refugees brought back the following answers: 
Citizen Schramm (Striegau) declared that he belonged to no 
refugee committee, but had received a number of lottery tickets 
from.Galeer in Geneva with instructions to send the money to 
Geneva. The other committee only figures as such. 
Citizen Struve declared that he had no money, but only a number 
of lottery tickets, which he had not yet sold. 
Citizen Bauer made the following written statement: 
"Upon the request of refugee Kleiner it is hereby attested that the Refugee 
Committee of the Democratic Association in this country is not in a position to 
support even a single political refugee, and that the funds of the society, after having 
donated £2.15.0 for this purpose, are similarly incapable of providing such assistance 
in future. 
London, April 8, 1850 
Dr. Bauer, President of the Support Committee 
of the Democratic Association" 
Messrs. Struve and Schramm had advised the refugees to form a 
refugee committee from among themselves or from politically 
neutral persons. The undersigned committee left it to the discretion 
of the refugees to take a decision on this themselves. The answer was 
the following statement by the refugees: 
"To the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee. 
"London, April 7, 1850.—The undersigned refugees find cause, after the 
negotiations which have taken place on delegating the task of providing for us to a 
committee which might perhaps be formed from among ourselves, to express on the 
basis of the firm conviction of both the earlier and the more recently arrived refugees 
our deepest gratitude to the members of the presently existing committee for their 
activities and their painstaking assiduity in connection with this responsibility, since 
these have constantly shared out to our satisfaction the moneys to be administered. It 
only remains for us to wish that only these members may take care of us until the 
imminent revolution we all desire relieves them of this responsibility-
"Greetings and fraternity!" (The signatures follow.) 
This document, drawn up by the refugees themselves, is the best 
answer to the above article and to other similar insinuations in the 

=====第374页=====
Statement 351 
press.  Incidentally, we should not have replied were it not necessary 
in the interests of the refugees themselves, in need of support as they 
are, to enlighten the public concerning such statements. 
London, April 20, 1850 
The Social-Democratic Refugee Committee: 
K. Marx, Chairman 
Fr. Engels, August Willich, K.Pfänder, H.Bauer* 
Published in the Neue Deutsche Zeitung Printed according to the newspaper 
No. 102, April 28, 1850 and checked with the manuscript 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a The editors attached the following note: "All democratic newspapers are 
requested to reproduce this Statement."—Ed. 

=====第375页=====
352 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE TIMES 
Sir,— In your number of Friday last 3 we perceive, among the 
police reports, an account of an interview of Messrs. Fothergill, 
Struve, and others, at the Mansion-house, with Mr. Alderman 
Gibbs, on behalf of the German refugees.259 We beg to declare that 
neither any of the members of the undersigned committee, nor any 
of the German refugees supported by that committee, have had any 
connexion with this affair. 
We request you, Sir, to publish this declaration in your next, as, in 
the interest of our nationality, we must protest against the numerous 
German refugees residing in London being made responsible for a 
step taken by some of them upon their own authority. 
We are, Sir, your most obedient servants 
The Democratic Socialist Committee for German 
Political Refugees— 
Ch. Marx 
Ch. Pfaender 
F. Engels 
H. Bauer 
A. Willich 
20 Great Windmill Street, Haymarket, 
May 27, 1850 b 
Published in The Times No. 20500, 
May 28, 1850 Reprinted from the newspaper and 
checked with the rough draft by 
Engels 
a The Times No. 20497, May 24, 1850.— Ed. 
The rough draft has "May 24, 1850" written in an unknown hand.— Ed. 

=====第376页=====
353 
Frederick Engels 
TWO YEARS OF A REVOLUTION; 
1848 AND 1849260 
[The Democratic Review, April 1850] 
In the years 1848 and '49, there was published, in Cologne, a 
German daily paper, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (New Rhenish 
Gazette).  This paper, edited by Charles Marx, chief editor, Fred­
erick Engels, George Weerth, Freiligrath the celebrated poet, 
F. and  W.Wolff,  and others, very soon acquired an extraordinary 
degree of popularity, from the spirited and fearless manner in 
which it advocated the most advanced revolutionary principles, and 
the interests of the proletarians, of which it was the only organ in 
Germany. The Prussian government took advantage of the unsuc­
cessful insurrections in the Rhenish provinces in May last, to stop the 
paper by various persecutions directed against the editors. They, 
in consequence, left the country, in order to seek new fields of ac­
tivity in the various movements which at the time were either in 
preparation or taking place. Several of them went to Paris, 261 where a 
decisive turn of affairs (the 13th of June) was near at hand, and 
where they represented the German revolutionary party at the 
centre of French democracy; another3 took his seat in the German 
National Assembly, which, at that moment, was being driven into 
insurrection; another,0 again, went to Baden, and fought in the 
revolutionary army against the Prussians. After the defeats of these 
insurrections, they found themselves exiles in this country, in 
Switzerland, and France. Having no chance, for the moment, to 
re-establish a daily paper, they have got up a monthly magazine, 
to serve as their organ until circumstances shall allow them to 
re-assume their old position in the daily press of. their country. 
a Wilhelm  Wolff.—  Ed. 
b Frederick Engels. — Ed. 

=====第377页=====
354 Frederick Engels 
The first number of this publication has just come to hand. It 
bears the same title as the daily paper did — New Rhenish Gazette, a 
Political and Economical Review, edited by Charles Marx.* 
This first number contains three articles only. It opens with the 
first of a series of papers upon the two past years of revolutions, by 
the chief editor, Charles Marx. Then follows a relation of the 
insurrectionary campaign in Western and Southern Germany, 
during May, June, and July last, by Frederick Engelsb; and, lastly, an 
article from the pen of Charles Blind (ex-ambassador at Paris of the 
Baden Provisional Government) upon the state of parties in Baden. 
These latter articles, although containing many important disclo­
sures,  are of interest chiefly to the German reader. The first article 
is devoted to a subject of primary interest to the readers of all 
countries, particularly the working classes. The subject, too, has 
found in Citizen Marx a writer every way able to do it justice. For 
these reasons, we deem it a duty to give as much in the shape of 
extract as our limited space will allow. 
The article under notice treats of the Revolution of February; its 
causes and effects, and the succeeding events up to the great 
insurrection of June, 1848.° 
"With the exception of very few chapters indeed, every important section of the 
revolutionary annals of 1848 and '49 bears upon its title page—Defeat of Revolution! 
But, what was really defeated in all these defeats was not revolution  itself.  It was, on 
the contrary, nothing but the unrevolutionary elements of the revolutionary party that 
were defeated ; individuals, delusions, ideas, plans, and projects of a more or less 
unrevolutionary character; elementse from which the subversive party* was not free 
before February, and of which it could not be freed by the victory of February, but by 
a series of defeats only. In other words: It was not by the immediate tragical or comical 
results of the first victory that the revolutionising progress made its way; this progress, 
on the contrary, was occasioned chiefly by the formation of a mighty and united 
counter-revolutionary interest, in the procreation of a foe, in grappling with whom 
the subversive party could alone develop itself to a really revolutionary party." 
This is the general theme which Citizen Marx develops in the 
course of his article. He begins with exposing the causes of the 
Engels gives the title of the journal in English.— Ed. 
See this volume, pp. 147-239.— Ed. 
Here and below Engels supplied his own translations of passages quoted from 
Marx's The Class Struggles in France. These differ in wording from the translation of 
the complete work in this volume of the Collected Works.—Ed. 
Marx has: "It was the pre-revolutionary traditional appendages, results of social 
relationships which had not yet come to the point of sharp class antagonisms" that 
were defeated (see p. 47 of this volume).— Ed. 
The words "of a more or less unrevolutionary character; elements" are added 
by Engels. — Ed. 
Marx wrote "the revolutionary party".— Ed. 

=====第378页=====
(426) 
TWO YEARS OF A REVOLUTION; 
1848 AND 1849. 
IN the years 1848 and '49, there was published, in Cologne, a 
German daily paper, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, (Nerv 
Rhenish Gazette). This paper, edited by Charles Marx, chief 
editor, Frederick Engels, George Weerth, Freiligrath the cele­
brated poet, F. and W.  Wolff,  and others, very soon acquired 
an extraordinary degree of popularity, from the spirited and 
fearless manner in which it advocated the most advanced revolu­
tionary principles, and the interests of the proletarians, of which 
it was the only organ in Germany. The Prussian government 
took advantage oi the unsuccessful insurrections in the Rhenish 
provinces in May last, to stop the paper by various persecutions 
directed against the editors. They, in consequence, left the 
country, in order to seek new fields of activity in the various 
movements which at the time were either in preparation or 
taking place. Several of them went to Paris, where a decisive 
turn of affairs, (the 13th of June,) was near at hand, and where 
they represented the German revolutionary party at the centre 
of French democracy ; another took his seat in the German Na­
tional Assembly, which, at that moment, was being driven into 
insurrection ; another, again, went to Baden, and fought in the 
revolutionary army against the Prussians. After the defeats of 
these insurrections, they found themselves exiles in this country, 
in Switzerland, and France. Having no chance, for the mo­
ment, to re-establish a daily paper, they have got up a monthly 
magazine, to serve as their organ until circumstances shall allow 
them to re-assume their old position in the daily press of their 
country. 
The first number of this publication has just come to hand. 
It bears the same title as the daily paper did—New Rhenish 
Gazette  y a Political and Economical Review, edited by Charles 
Marx. 
This first number contains three articles only. It opens with 
the first of a series of papers upon the two past years of revolu­
tions,  by the chief editor, Charles Marx. Then follows a rela­
tion of the insurrectionary campaign in Western and Southern 
Germany, during May, June, and July last, by Frederick 
Engels  ; and, lastly, an article from the pen of Charles Blind, 
(ex-ambassador at Paris of the Baden Provisional Government), 
upon the state of parties in Baden. These latter articles, al-
The first page of Frederick Engels' article "Two Years of a Revolution; 1848 and 
1849",  published by The Democratic Review 

=====第379页=====

=====第380页=====
Two Years of a Revolution 357 
revolution of February, and shews those causes to be far deeper 
rooted than any of the previous writers upon the subject ever have 
been able to do. With all historians of the last twenty years' events 
in France, it has been a thing generally agreed upon, that under 
Louis Philippe, the bourgeoisie, as a whole, was the ruling power, in 
France; that the scandalous disclosures of 1847 were the chief cause 
of the revolution, and that this revolution was a direct struggle of the 
proletarians against the bourgeoisie. Under Citizen Marx's pen, 
these assertions, although not directly and absolutely denied, yet 
undergo important modifications. 
The German historian proves, that, under Louis Philippe, political 
power was concentrated in the hands, not of the entire bourgeois 
class,  but of one fraction only of that class, that which is called in 
France the financial aristocracy, and, in England, the banking, 
funded, railway, etc., interests, or the moneyed interest, as opposed 
to the manufacturing interest. 
"Not the entire bourgeois class of France lorded it over the country under Louis 
Philippe, but only one fraction of that class: bankers, stock-jobbers, railway kings, 
mining kings, and a part of the 'rallied' landlords—the so-called financial  aristocracy.  It 
was they who sat on the throne, who dictated laws in the Chambers, who disposed of 
government patronage, from the minister down to the licensed dealer in tobacco. The 
manufacturing portion of the bourgeoisie formed a part of the official opposition; they 
were represented by a minority only of the Chambers. Their opposition became more 
obstinate in the same measure as the exclusive sway of the financial aristocracy turned 
more and more exclusive; and as they themselves, after the fruitless insurrections3 of 
the working people in 1832, 1834, and 1839,262 deemed their dominion over the 
proletarians more firmly established.... The petty capitalists, the shopocracyb in all its 
various gradations, and the farming class, were entirely excluded from political 
power." 
The necessary consequences of this exclusive dominion of the 
financial aristocracy were, that all public interest was made 
subservient to theirs; that the State was considered by them as a mere 
means to increase their fortunes at its expense. Citizen Marx depicts 
in a very forcible manner how this scandalous system was carried on 
in France for eighteen years; how the running up of the public debt, 
the increase in the public expenses, the never-ending financial 
difficulties and defects of the public purse, were so many souices 
from which new wealth flowed into the pockets of the money-lords, 
sources which every year were made to flow more freely, and to 
exhaust so much the quicker the resources of the"country; how the 
expense of the government, the army and navy, the railways, and 
a Marx wrote "mutinies ... which had been drowned in blood".— Ed: 
b This word is added by Engels. — Ed. 

=====第381页=====
358 Frederick Engels 
other public works, offered hundreds of opportunities, eagerly 
seized upon by the financiers, to cheat the public by fraudulent 
contracts, &c. In short— 
"The monarchy of July was nothing else than a joint-stock company for working up 
the national wealth of France; the dividends of which society were shared amongst 
ministers, Chambers, 240,000 Parliamentary voters, and their more or less numerous3 
tail. Louis Philippe was the George Hudson b of this company—Robert Macaire on the 
throne. Trade, manufactures, agriculture, shipping, the interests of the manufactur­
ing middle-classes, were necessarily and constantly damaged and endangered under 
this system  [....] 
"And while the jobbing interest made laws, directed the public administration, 
disposed of every organised public power, dominated public opinion by the press and 
by the power of facts, there was imitated in all spheres of society, from the court down 
to the café-borgne, that very same prostitution, that same shameless imposition, that 
same avidity of accumulating wealth, not by production, but by cheating others out of 
produce already existing. There was let loose—particularly in the most elevated 
regions of society, and coming, at every moment, into collision with bourgeois law 
itself—an universal outburst of those disorderly, unsound lusts and appetites, in 
which wealth acquired by gambling very naturally looks for satisfaction, where 
enjoyment uecomes crapuleux, where gold, mud, and blood flow mixing together. The 
financial aristocracy, in its mode both of appropriating and of enjoying, is nothing but 
the reproduction of 'Mob' in the elevated spheres of  bourgeois  society." 
The scandalous disclosures of 1847, the Teste, Praslin, Gudin, 
Dujarrier affairs, brought this state of things to the broad light of 
day. The infamous behaviour of the government in the Cracow, and 
Swiss Sonderbund affairs, violated the national pride to the utmost; 
while the victory of the Swiss liberals, and the revolution at Palermo, 
in January, '48 exalted the spirits of the opposition. 263 
"At last, the outbreak of the universal unsettled feeling was ripened into revolt by 
two great and general economical events. The first of these events was the potatoe 
disease, and the bad harvests of 1845 and '46.e The all but famine of 1847 provoked in 
France and other continental countries numerous bloody conflicts. Here the orgies of 
the financial aristocracy,  there  the people struggling for the first necessaries of life! At 
Buzançais the mutineers of hunger beheaded, at Paris aristocratic thimble-riggers 
saved from the law by the royal family! The second great economical event f was an 
a The words "more or less numerous" are added by Engels. — Ed. 
Marx wrote "the director" (see p. 50 of this volume). Engels gives the name of a 
big English businessman.— Ed. 
Marx wrote "lumpenproletariat" (see p. 51 of this volume).— Ed. 
See Engels' note to the 1895 edition of Marx's The Class Struggles in France 
(p. 117 of this volume).— Ed. 
e In Marx's work this sentence reads: "The potatoe blight and the  crop  failures of 
1845 and 1846 increased the general ferment among the people" (see p. 52 of this 
volume).— Ed. 
In Marx's work there follows: "which hastened the outbreak of the revolu­
tion".— Ed. 

=====第382页=====
Two Years of a Revolution 359 
universal commercial and industrial revulsion. Announced in England already in 
autumn 1845 by the wholesale breakdown of railway speculation, interrupted during 
1846 by a series of incidents, and particularly the repeal of the Corn-laws—at last, in 
autumn 1847, it broke out in the failures of the large London colonial firms, followed 
up by the failures of country bankers, and the shutting up of the factories in the 
English manufacturing districts. The reaction of this crisis upon continental trade was 
not exhausted at the time the revolution broke out. This devastation of tradea made 
still more insupportable, in France, the exclusive rule of the monied interest. The 
opposing fractions of the bourgeoisie united in the banquet agitation for a reform in 
Parliament, which should secure the majority to them. The commercial revulsion in 
Paris threw a number of manufacturers and wholesale dealers upon the home trade, 
as the foreign market offered for the moment no chance of profit. These capitalists set 
up large retail concerns, the competition of which ruined hundreds of smaller 
shopkeepers. Thence the numerous failures in this section of the Paris bourgeoisie, 
thence its revolutionary spirit in February." 
The united action of these causes made the revolution of February 
break out. The provisional government was established. All oppos­
ing parties were represented in this government: the monarchical 
opposition265  (Crémieux and even Dupont de l'Eure), the republican 
bourgeoisie (Marrast, Marie, Garnier-Pagès), the republican small 
trading class (Ledru-Rollin and Flocon), and the proletarians (Louis 
Blanc and Albert). Lamartine, lastly, represented the revolution of 
February  itself,  the common insurrection of bourgeois and pro­
letarians, with its imaginary results, its delusions, its poetry, and its 
big words. By his position and his views he belonged to the 
bourgeoisie, the representatives of whom, therefore, formed the 
large majority of the new government. 
"If in consequence of political centralisation Paris governs France, the working 
class in moments of revolutionary earthquakes govern Paris. The first act of the 
provisional government was directed against this overwhelming influence; it was an 
appeal from 'revolution-intoxicated Paris' to 'sober France'. Lamartine contested the 
right of the combatants 0 to proclaim the republic; 'the majority of the French people 
alone were competent to do so ; the working men had better not stain their victory by 
an usurpation', etc. The bourgeoisie permitted to the working men one usurpation 
only: that of the combat." 
The proletarians forced the government to proclaim the republic. 
Raspail acted as their speaker. He declared that, if in two hours this 
a In Marx's work this phrase reads: "The devastation of trade and industry caused 
by the economic epidemic", etc.— Ed. 
b Marx wrote "Throughout the whole of France the bourgeois opposition 
agitated at banquets", etc.— Ed. 
c Marx wrote "barricade fighters" (see p. 53 of this volume).— Ed. 
d In Marx's work there follows: "they must await the majority vote".— Ed. 
e From Lamartine's speech made in the Chamber of Deputies on February 24, 
1848.  Marx gives a summary of this speech.— Ed. 

=====第383页=====
360 Frederick Engels 
was not done, he should call again at the head of 200,000 armed 
working men. Before the term had elapsed the republic was 
proclaimed. 
"The working class, in dictating the republic to the government and to France, all 
at once stepped forward into the foreground as an independent party, but at the same 
time provoked against itself all the bourgeois interest of France. What the proletarians 
had conquered, was not their emancipation, but the battle-field, upon which they 
could fight for their emancipation. The republic of February, in the beginning, could 
do nothing but  complete  the government of the middle-classes, in opening the circle of 
political action to all the propertied classes of France. The majority of the large 
landlords, the Legitimists, were emancipated from the political nullity to which they 
had been doomed by the revolution of 1830.a [...] By universal suffrage, that vast class 
of mere nominal landed proprietors (the real proprietors are the capitalists, to whom 
the property is mortgaged), that class which forms the large majority of 
Frenchmen—the peasantry—was called upon to arbitrate the destinies of France. 
And lastly, the republic of February made openly manifest the rule of the bourgeoisie 
by setting aside the crown behind which capital had hitherto hid  itself.  The working 
men had established, in July 1830, the bourgeois monarchy—in February 1848,c they 
established the bourgeois republic. But as the monarchy of 1830 was forced to 
announce itself a 'monarchy surrounded with republican institutions', the republic of 
1848 announced itself 'a republic surrounded with social institutions'. This concession, 
too, was forced from the republic by the Parisian working men." 
The "right to work" and the commission of the Luxembourg (by 
which Louis Blanc and Albert were virtually excluded from the 
government, the bourgeois majority of which retained the actual 
power) were the most conspicuous of these social institutions. The 
working men saw themselves reduced to work out their salvation, not 
against the bourgeoisie, but independent of, and side-to-side with the 
bourgeoisie. The Bourse and the Bank continued to exist; only 
the Socialist church of the Luxembourg was set up by the side of 
these two great bourgeois churches; and as the working men 
believed they could emancipate themselves without interfering with 
the interests of the bourgeoisie, they also believed they could do so 
without interfering with the remaining bourgeois nations of Europe. 
"The development of the industrial working class is entirely dependent upon the 
development of the industrial capitalist class. It is only under the government of this 
latter class, that the industrial proletarians attain that importance which alone can 
a Marx wrote "by the July monarchy" (see p. 54 of this volume).— Ed. 
b The phrase in parenthesis is added by Engels. — Ed 
c References to 1830 and 1848 are added by Engels. — Ed 
d Marx wrote "the July monarchy".— Ed 
e Marx wrote "the February republic".— Ed 
f In Marx's work this sentence reads: "The development of the industrial 
proletariat is, in general, conditioned by the development of the industrial 
bourgeoisie" (see p. 56 of this volume).— Ed. 

=====第384页=====
Two Years of a Revolution 361 
make their revolution a national one; that they create those immense productive 
powers of modern industry, which will become the means of their revolutionary 
emancipation; that the last roots3 of feudalism are torn up, and thus the field 
prepared upon which alone a proletarian revolution is possible. Now, manufacturing 
industry, in France, is more advanced than in any other country of the continent. But 
the fact, that the revolution of February was directed, before all, against the financial 
aristocracy—this fact proves clearly that the industrial bourgeoisie, before February, 
did not govern France. Indeed, the industrial bourgeoisie can govern in a country 
only, whose manufacturing industry commands, for its produce, the universal market; 
the limits of the home market are too narrow for its development.0 The 
manufacturing industry of France, however, in a great measure commands even the 
home markets, by the protective duties only. Therefore, if in Paris the proletarians, 
at the moment of a revolution, possess a real power, and an influence which lead them 
to outrun their ultimate6  means of action—in the remainder of France they are 
concentrated in a few industrial centres, such as Lyons, Lille, Mulhouse, Rouen, and 
almost disappear under the vast majority of surrounding peasants and small 
tradesmen. Therefore, the struggle against capital in its most developed and decisive 
form, the struggle of the industrial salaried working man against the industrial 
working capitalist, in France, is a mere local fact, which, after February, could not 
form the prominent national feature of the revolution. And it could do so the less, as 
the struggle against the more subordinate modes of action of capital, the struggle of 
the peasant against usury and the mortgaging system, of the small tradesman against 
the wholesale dealer, the banker, and manufacturer, in one word, against bankruptcy, 
were as yet enveloped in the general rising against the financial aristocracy. [...] The 
French proletarians could not take a single step in advance, could destroy not a single 
atom of the existing bourgeois institutions^ until the march of the revolution had 
aroused against the rule of capital, had forced to join the proletarians, all those 
intermediate classes, the peasants and the small tradesmen, who are neither bourgeois 
nor proletarians, and who, in France, form the large mass of the nation. Then, and 
then only, the proletarians, instead of pursuing their interests without interfering with 
those of the bourgeoisie, could proclaim the proletarian interests to be the 
revolutionary interests of the nation, and assert them in direct opposition to those of 
the bourgeoisie. And it was only by their immense defeat in June, '48, that the 
proletarians could approach that victory.... 
"Thus the government of the bourgeoisie was abolished by the establishment of 
the republic; it was abolished, not in reality, but in the imagination of the working 
men, who took the financial aristocracy for the entire bourgeoisie; in the imagination 
Marx wrote "the material roots" (see p. 56 of this volume).— Ed. 
In Marx's work there follows: "and the French bourgeoisie more revolution­
ary".— Ed. 
c In Marx's work the end of the sentence reads as follows: "where modern 
industry shapes all property relations to suit  itself,  and industry can win this power 
only where it has conquered the world market, for national bounds are inadequate for 
its development".— Ed 
d Marx wrote "through a more or less modified system of prohibitive 
tariffs".— Ed. 
e The word "ultimate" is added by Engels. — Ed 
The names of the industrial centres are added by Engels. — Ed 
g Marx wrote "a hair of the bourgeois order".— Ed. 
The words "not in reality, but" are added by Engels. — Ed. 

=====第385页=====
362 Frederick Engels 
of republican worthies who denied the existence of hostile classes, or who, at the very 
utmost, admitted it as a consequence of monarchy. Thus every royalist all at once 
called himself a republican, and every millionaire a working man. The word which 
corresponded to this imaginary abolition of classes and class interests0  was the word 
Fraternity, the universal brotherhood. This very pleasant abstraction from all existing 
antagonism of classes, this sentimental adjustment of opposed class interests, this 
enthusiastic elevation into those sublime regions where no earthly class struggles exist, 
this fraternity was the great word of the revolution of February. The struggling classes 
were divided by a mere mistake, and Lamartine, on the 24th of February, called for a 
government which should put an end to that 'dreadful misunderstanding', which had 
sprung up between the several classes of society." 
We shall continue these extracts in our next. The acts of the 
provisional government, the convocation of the National Assembly, 
and the insurrection of June will then be passed in review. 
[The Democratic Review, May 1850] 
In our number for April we followed up Citizen Marx's remarks 
upon the revolution of February, up to the establishment and first 
acts of the provisional government. We had, already, more than one 
occasion to see that the middle-class elements of that government 
were powerful enough to subserve the interests of their order, and to 
profit by the ignorance of the proletarians of Paris as to their real 
interests, and to the means for advancing them. We continue our 
extracts: — 
"The republic found no resistance, neither at home nor abroad. By this single fact 
it was disarmed. Its aim was no longer to revolutionise the world, its aim was to adapt 
itself to the exigences of existing bourgeois society. And the fanaticism with which the 
provisional government followed up this aim, is proved especially in its financial 
measures. 
"Public and private credit, of course, were shaken. Public credit is based on the 
certainty that the State allows the Jews of finance to fatten upon it. But the old State 
was gone, and the revolution had been directed, before all, against these financial 
Jews.  Besides, that oscillations of the last European commercial crisis had not yet 
subsided. There were, as yet, failures following upon failures. Private credit had been 
paralysed, circulation stopped, and production obstructed, before even the revolution 
of February broke out. The revolutionary crisis, of course, augmented the commercial 
one. And if private credit is based upon the certitude, that the bourgeois mode of 
The word "hostile" is added by Engels. — Ed. 
Marx has here "as a result of the constitutional monarchy", and after a 
semicolon one more phrase which reads: "in the hypocritical phrases of the factions of 
the bourgeoisie which until then had been excluded from power" (see p. 57 of this 
volume).— Ed. 
Marx has "class relations" instead of "classes and class interests".— Ed. 

=====第386页=====
Two Years of a Revolution 363 
producing wealth,3 that the whole bourgeois order of things, is intact and inviolable, 
what must have been the effect of a revolution which called into question the very 
foundation of the bourgeois mode of producing the economical slavery of the 
proletarian class; and which, in opposition to the Bourse, set up the Sphinx of the 
Luxembourg? The emancipation of the proletarian class, means the repeal of 
bourgeois credit, for it is the abolition of bourgeois production and of the social state 
consistent with it. Public and private credit are the thermometers by which you may 
measure the intensity of a revolution. In the same degree in which credit falls rises the 
ardour and the potency of revolution. 
"The provisional government was anxious to free the republic from its 
anti-bourgeois appearance. It had, therefore, in the first instance to ensure its 
exchangeable value, its current price on 'Change. And with the current price of the 
republic on 'Change, private credit, of course, was sure to rise again. 
"In order to destroy even the slightest suspicion, that the republic would or could 
not fulfil the engagements inherited from monarchy—in order to restore faith in its 
bourgeois morality and solvency, the provisional government had recourse to a puff 
quite as childish as it was devoid of dignity. It paid to the public creditors the interest 
of the debt even  before  it was legally due. The bourgeois a-plomb, the self-reliance of the 
capitalists awoke suddenly again when they saw the anxiety with which the 
government sought to buy up their confidence. [...] 
"The financial aristocracy who ruled under Louis Philippe,c had their cathedral 
church in the Bank. As the Exchange governs public credit, the Bank governs private 
credit.** 
"Directly menaced by the revolution,6 not only in its dominion but in its very 
existence, the Bank tried at once to discredit the republic by destroying credit 
everywhere. The Bank at once refused credit to the private bankers, to the 
manufacturers and merchants. This manoeuvre, as it did not succeed in producing a 
counter-revolution, recoiled, in its consequences, upon the Bank  itself.  Capitalists 
withdrew the coin they had deposited in its vaults. Holders of notes ran upon the Bank 
to have them changed for coin. 
"Without any forcible interference, in a strictly legal manner, the provisional 
government could have forced the Bank into bankruptcy, they had only to remain 
passive and to abandon it to its fate. The failure of  the Bank—that was the deluge which 
would have swept away from the soil of France in an instant the financial aristocracy, 
that most powerful and most dangerous enemy of the republic—that golden pedestal 
of the monarchy of July. And the Bank once bankrupt, must not even the bourgeoisie 
have regarded it as a last effort on the part of the government if it had created a 
national bank and subjected national credit to the control of the nation? 
"But on the contrary: the provisional government acted as Pitt in 1797 had done, 
suspended cash payments and made the notes of the bank a legal tender. Still more, 
it made all provincial banks branch banks of the Bank of France, and allowed it, thus, 
to spread its net all over the country. Later on, the government mortgaged to the 
Bank, for a loan, the national woods and forests. Thus the revolution of February 
Marx wrote "that bourgeois production in the entire scope of its relations", etc. 
(see p. 59 of this volume).— Ed. 
Marx wrote "the economic thermometer".— Ed. 
Marx wrote "under the July monarchy" (see p. 60 of this volume).— Ed. 
d Marx wrote "commercial credit".— Ed. 
e Marx wrote "the February Revolution".— Ed. 
The phrase "acted as Pitt in 1797 had done, suspended cash payments and" is 
added by Engels. — Ed, 

=====第387页=====
364 Frederick Engels 
fortified and enlarged the> power of the financial aristocracy* which it had been its aim 
to destroy!" 
It is generally known what the government, so merciful to the 
money-lords of the Exchange and the Bank, gave to the classes 
forming the opposite extremity of society: to the working men and 
small tradespeople it gave the confiscation of the money in the 
savings' banks, to the peasantry the tax of the 45 centimes upon 
every franc of the four direct taxes. 
"The sums deposited in the savings' bank were seized and declared a consolidated 
public debt. By this the small trader was exasperated against the republic.0 By 
receiving, instead of his money, mere government securities, which he was obliged to 
sell on 'Change, he fell utterly a prey to the Jews of the Bourse, against whom he had 
made the revolution of February!! [...] 
"The tax of the 45 centimes fell most heavily upon the peasantry, who formed the 
large majority of the French people. They had to pay the expenses of the revolution 
of February, and naturally they henceforth formed the chief material for the 
counter-revolution. The tax of the 45 centimes was a vital question for the peasant, 
and he made it a vital question for the republic. The republic, for him, was 
henceforth identical with that obnoxious tax,e and the proletarian of Paris appeared to 
him in the light of the lazy prodigal who feasted at his expense. If the revolution of 
1789 had set in with the freeing of the peasantry from all feudal charges, the 
revolution of 1848 announced itself to that class8 by a new tax!! 
"There was only one means for the government to weather all these inconven­
iences and to throw the State out of the old track: and that was a declaration 
of national bankruptcy. The Jew banker Fould, the present minister of finance, 
proposed this remedy to Ledru-Rollin, and the virtuous indignation is not yet 
forgotten with which this citizen, as he himself stated in the National Assembly, 
protested against such a proposal. M. Fould had offered to him the apple from the 
tree of knowledge!!! 
"The provisional government, in accepting the bills of exchange drawn by old 
bourgeois society upon the State, had surrendered into its hands. It had become the 
persecuted debtor of bourgeois society, instead of standing up against it as its 
threatening creditor, who had to enforce payment of revolutionary debts of many 
years'  standing. It had to refortify bourgeois society,1 in order to be enabled to fulfil 
Marx wrote "enlarged the bankocracy".— Ed. 
Marx wrote "and by decree transformed into an irredeemable state debt" (see p. 
60 of this volume).— Ed. 
In Marx's work this sentence reads as follows: "This embittered the already 
hard pressed petty bourgeois against the republic" (see p. 60 of this volume).— Ed. 
Marx wrote "in place of his savings bank books" (see p. 60 of this volume).— Ed. 
e Marx wrote "the 45 centimes tax" (see p. 61 of this volume).— Ed. 
f In Marx's work there follows: "in order not to endanger capital and to keep its 
state machine going".— Ed. 
g Marx wrote "to the rural population".— Ed. 
This refers to the speech which Ledru-Rollin made in the Constituent Assembly 
on April 21, 1849. The words "this remedy" are added by Engels. — Ed. 
Marx wrote "to consolidate the shaky bourgeois relationships" (see p. 62 of this 
volume).— Ed. 

=====第388页=====
Two Years of a Revolution 365 
engagements which can be fulfilled within the pale of bourgeois society only. Credit 
was its very first condition of existence, and the concessions and promises made to the 
proletarians were turned into as many fetters, which it had to throw off. The 
emancipation of the proletarians, even as a mere word, became an insupportable 
danger for the republic, for it was a never-ending protest against the restoration of 
credit, which is based upon the undisturbed and inviolate acknowledgement of the 
existing antagonism of classes.3 There was a necessity, then, to put down,  once  for all, 
the proletarians." 
[The Democratic Review, June 1850] 
The army had been exiled from Paris since February; the national 
guard, i.e., the armed bourgeoisie, the only armed force in Paris, 
had never been strong enough to fight, by  itself,  the proletarians. It 
had, in spite of all resistance, been adulterated by the admixture of 
working men. There was no chance left but that of opposing working 
men to working men. 
"For this purpose the provisional government formed twenty-four battalions of 
gardes mobile, each numbering 1.00Q men, mostly from 15 to 20 years of age. They 
were recruits, almost exclusively from the mob,c  which in all large towns, forms a 
mass entirely distinct from the industrial working class, recruiting class for thieves 
and criminals of all sorts, living upon the offal of society, people without any fixed 
trade, vagrants, gens sans feu et sans aveu, differing according to the character of the 
nation to which they belong 6; and in the early age at which the government recruited 
them, capable as well of the greatest heroism and the most exalted self-sacrifice, as of 
the lowest degree of villainy and the dirtiest corruptibility. The provisional 
government bought them up for one and a half francs daily. They gave them a 
regimental dress to distinguish them in every respect from the working men in the 
blouse, 'their officers were either taken from the army or from the sons of the 
bourgeoisie, whose splendid speeches about dying for the republic deceived them. 
And the people took these 24,000 vigorous and daring young soldiers, who had just 
left the barricades, for their own armv, for the real proletarian guards, in opposition 
to the old bourgeois national guard.8 Their error was excusable. 
Marx wrote "existing economic class relations" (ibid.). — Ed. 
The words "once for all" are added by Engels. — Ed. 
c Marx wrote " lumpenproletariat" (ibid.).— Ed. 
Marx wrote "the industrial proletariat".— Ed. 
Marx wrote "according to the degree of civilisation of the nation to which they 
belong, but never renouncing their lazzaroni character".— Ed. 
f In Marx's work the corresponding passage reads: "And so the Paris proletariat 
officers from the standing army äs leaders; in part they themselves elected young sons 
of the bourgeoisie", etc.—£<i 
8 In Marx's work the corresponding passage reads: "And so the Paris proletariat 
was confronted with an army, drawn from its own midst, of 24,000 young, strong, 
foolhardy men. It gave cheers for the Mobile Guard on its marches through Paris. It 
acknowledged it to be its foremost fighters on the barricades. It regarded it as the 
proletarian guard in contradistinction to the bourgeois National Guard." — Ed. 

=====第389页=====
366 Frederick Engels 
"The government, besides, resolved to surround themselves with an industrial 
army. Minister Marie enlisted a hundred thousand working men (thrown into the 
street by the crisis and the revolution), into ateliers nationaux. Under this 
high-sounding name there was hidden nothing but the application of these working 
men to tedious, monotonous, unproductive labour on embankments, &c, &c, for 
wages of 23 sous (11 /2d) a daily. English workhouses in the open air—the ateliers 
nationaux were nothing but that. The provisional government hoped they had thus 
formed by them a second proletarian army to be used against the working class at 
large. But the bourgeoisie were deceived in the ateliers nationaux, as the people were 
deceived in the garde mobile. They had created an army for insurrection. 
"But one end was obtained: ateliers nationaux was the name for the public 
workshops which Louis Blanc had asked for in the Luxembourg. The  ateliers  of Marie 
had been created in direct opposition to the Luxembourg. [...] The rumour was 
spread that Louis Blanc had invented the ateliers nationaux; and this appeared the 
more credible as Louis Blanc, the prophet of national workshops, was himself a 
member of the provisional government. And thus in the opinion, artificially kept up, 
of the Paris bourgeoisie, of France and Europe,' those workhouses were the first 
realisation of Socialism which, in them, was nailed to the pillory. 
"Not by their reality, but by their name, the  ateliers  nationaux were the incorporated 
protest of the proletarian order against bourgeois industry, bourgeois credit, and the 
bourgeois republic. Upon them, then, fell the whole hatred of the bourgeoisie. This 
class,  at the same time, had found in them the object against which to direct the first 
attack, as soon as it had recovered the necessary strength for declaring against the 
illusions of February. All the hatred and grumbling of the small trading class was at 
once directed against these ateliers nationaux. They, with unfeigned anger, calculated 
the sums devoured by these proletarian unproductives, while their own position got 
worse every day. [...] The national workshops, the declarations of the Luxembourg, 
the proletarian processions through Paris, these were, in their estimation, the causes 
of their own critical situation. And no one fanaticised himself more against the 
pretended plottings of the Communists, than the petty tradesman, the shopkeeper of 
Paris,  who himself was on the verge of the abyss of bankruptcy. 
"Thus,  while every day brought the stirring news of a new revolution to the 
victory-intoxicated people, the bourgeoisie concentrated more and more in their 
hands all the advantages, all the decisive positions for the ensuing struggle between 
them and the proletarians—all the control over the intermediate classes of society."e 
The necessary consequence was a series of moral victories of the 
bourgeoisie. If the proletarians, on the 17th of March, had 
apparently the upper hand, yet the real end of the manifestation, the 
This is added by Engels. — Ed. 
Marx wrote "against the workers themselves" (see p. 63 of this volume).— Ed 
In Marx's work the beginning of this sentence reads: "And in the half naive, half 
intentional confusion of the Paris bourgeoisie, in the artificially moulded opinion of 
France, of Europe", etc. (ibid.). — Ed 
In Marx's work the end of the sentence reads as follows: "than the petty 
bourgeoisie, who hovered hopelessly on the brink of bankruptcy" (see p. 64 of this 
volume). The words "the shopkeeper of Paris" are added by Engels. — Ed 
In Marx's work this passage reads: "Thus in the approaching skirmish between 
bourgeoisie and proletariat, all the advantages, all the decisive posts, all the middle 

=====第390页=====
Two Years of a Revolution 367 
subjection of the provisional government to the will of the 
proletarians, was defeated. The 16th of April, however, was a 
decided defeat of the proletarians, and was followed by the return of 
the army into Paris.267 The election for the National Assembly, 
shortly after, gave a decided majority to the bourgeoisie. 
"Universal suffrage did not possess that magic power which the old republican 
party had attributed to it. They saw in all France, at least in the majority of 
Frenchmen, only citizens with identical interests, identical ideas and intelligences.3 
They worshipped what they called the people. But, instead of this imaginary French 
people, universal suffrage brought to light the real people, that is to say, 
representatives of the different classes of which it is composed. And we have seen why 
the peasantry and the small trading class were obliged to vote under the direction of 
the now again warlike bourgeoisie, and of the large landlords, who ardendy strove for 
a restoration. But if universal suffrage was not the magic wand, which credulous, 
self-deceiving republicans believed it to be, it had the far higher merit of causing the 
struggle of the classes to make the different intermediate sections of bourgeois society 
pass rapidly through the different stages of illusions and disillusionings, to force all 
the factions of the capitalist class at once into political power, and thus to tear off from 
a portion of them the delusive mask of opposition which they had worn under the 
monarchy. 
"In the Constituent National Assembly, which met on the 4th of May, the 
bourgeois republicans, the men of the National, had the majority. Legitimists and 
Orleanists, in the beginning, dared to show themselves only under the mask of 
bourgeois republicanism. It was in the name of the republic only that the struggle 
against the proletarians could be commenced.... The republic, as proclaimed by the 
National Assembly, was not a revolutionary weapon against bourgeois society, but, on 
the contrary, [...] was the bourgeois republic. In the National Assembly all France 
sat in judgment on the Parisian working men. That assembly at once did away with the 
social delusions of February, it proclaimed plainly and unmistakably the bourgeois 
republic,e it excluded from the Executive Commission the representatives of the 
proletarians, Louis Blanc and Albert; it rejected the motion for a separate Ministry of 
strata of society were in the hands of the bourgeoisie, at the same time as the waves of 
the February Revolution rose high over the whole Continent, and each new post 
brought a new bulletin of revolution, now from Italy, now from Germany, now from 
the remotest parts of South-Eastern Europe, and maintained the general ecstasy of the 
people, giving it constant testimony of a victory that it had already forfeited." — Ed. 
d The word "intelligences" is added by Engels. — Ed. 
The words "the different stages of" are added by Engels. — Ed. 
c In Marx's work the end of the sentence reads as follows: "of tossing all the 
sections of the exploiting class at one throw to the apex of the state, and thus tearing 
from them their deceptive mask, whereas the monarchy with its property 
qualifications only let certain factions of the bourgeoisie compromise themselves, 
allowing the others to lie hidden behind the scenes and surrounding them with the 
halo of a common opposition" (see p. 65 of this volume).— Ed. 
Marx wrote "The republic proclaimed by the National Assembly, the sole 
legitimate republic", etc.— Ed. 
e In Marx's work there follows: "nothing but the bourgeois republic".— Ed. 

=====第391页=====
368 Frederick Engels 
Labour; it received with storms of applause the announcement of its minister, Trélat, 
that the only thing to be done was, to reduce labour to its former conditions? 
"But all this was insufficient. The republic of February had been founded by the 
working men with the passive assistance of the bourgeoisie. The proletarians 
considered themselves, righdy, as the conquerors, and made the haughty pretensions 
of conquerors. It was necessary, therefore, to combat and vanquish them in the 
streets.0 And as the republic of February, with its socialist concessions, had been 
brought about by a battle of the proletarian class, then united with the bourgeoisie 
against royalty, another battle was necessary to separate the republic from.the socialist 
concessions, to set up the bourgeois republic officially. [...] The real birth of the 
bourgeois republic is not the victory of February, it is the defeat of June." 
The collision of the 15th of May, and the battle of the 23rd, 24th, 
25th, and 26th of June,268 are known enough in their immediate 
causes, and in the events connected with them. The defeat of June 
decided, for a time, the conflict between the two contending classes. 
"The Paris proletarians had been forced into the insurrection of June by the 
bourgeoisie. This circumstance already contains in it its condemnatory judgment. 
Neither were the proletarians pushed by immediate and recognised necessity to 
overthrow the bourgeoisie; nor were they strong enough for the task. The Moniteur 
informed them officially that the time was past when the republic could feel inclined 
to bow before their 'illusions'; and their defeat could alone convince them that even 
the very least amelioration of their condition was hopeless if looked for within the 
limits of the bourgeois republic. And now, in the place of the seemingly extravagant, 
but in reality very petty and even middle-class measures which the workman would 
force upon the républic of February, now was proclaimed the daring, revolutionary 
battle-cry: Down with the bourgeoisie! Dictatorship of the Working Class! 
"The bourgeois republic, created from the blood of the working people, was 
compelled to come out at once in its true character as the state, the openly proclaimed 
end of which is to eternalise the ascendancy of capital and the slavery of labour. 
Bourgeois ascendancy, freed from all fetters, but never losing sight of its implacable 
and invincible enemy, could not but immediately turn into bourgeois terrorism. The 
proletarians for the moment removed from the stage; the dictatorship of the 
bourgeoisie once acknowledged; the intermediate strata of bourgeois society, 
shopocracy, and peasantry, the more their own condition got insupportable, and the 
more their antagonism against the bourgeoisie became pronounced, were obliged to 
associate with the proletarians." 
From Trélat's speech made in the Constituent Assembly on June 20, 1848.— Ed. 
Marx wrote "was won" (see p. 66 of this volume).— Ed. 
Marx goes on to say: "they had to be shown that they were worsted as soon as 
they did not fight with the bourgeoisie, but against the bourgeoisie.— Ed. 
Marx has one more phrase which reads: "a Utopia that becomes a crime as soon 
as it wants to become a reality" (see p. 69 of this volume).— Ed. 
In Marx's work the beginning of the sentence reads as follows: "By making its 
burial place the birthplace of the  bourgeois  republic,  the proletariat compelled the latter 
to come out", etc. (ibid.). — Ed. 
Marx has one more phrase which reads: "invincible because his existence is the 
condition of its own life".— Ed. 

=====第392页=====
Two Years of a Revolution 369 
If the defeat of June, in France, fortified the political power of the 
bourgeoisie, it destroyed it in the other continental countries. The 
open alliance of the bourgeoisie with feudal royalty, which 
everywhere, after June, was entered into, was profited of by royalty 
to break the power of the bourgeoisie. 
"The defeat of June revealed to the despotic powers of Europe the secret that 
France could not do without external peace in order to carry on the internal war. Thus 
the nations that had risen for national independence were sacrificed to Russia, 
Austria, and Prussia. These national revolutions were subjected to the fate of the 
proletarian revolution.2 The Hungarian shall not be free, nor the Pole, nor the Italian, 
as long as the working man remains a slave! 
"Lastly, by the victories of the Holy Alliance, Europe took a direction which 
necessarily will cause any new proletarian revolution in France to give birth to 
universal war. The next French revolution will be forced to extend itself beyond the 
limits of the national territory, and to conquer that European surface which alone will 
allow free development to the social revolution of the nineteenth century. 
"Thus it was by the defeat of June only that all the conditions were created under 
which France is enabled to take the initiative of the European revolution. Thus, only 
after its having been dyed in the blood of the insurgents of June, the Tricolour 
became the banner of European revolution — the Red Flag!!" 
Written in the spring of 1850 Reprinted from the journal 
First published in The Democratic Review, 
April-June 1850 
a Marx goes on to say: "and they were robbed of their apparent autonomy, their 
independence of the great social revolution" (see p. 70 of this volume).— Ed. 
In Marx's work the end of the sentence reads as follows: "and conquer the 
European terrain, on which alone the social revolution of the nineteenth century can be 
accomplished"  (ibid.). — Ed. 
Marx ends the first article of his series with the following words: "And we 
exclaim: The revolution is dead!—Long live the revolution!"—Ed. 

=====第393页=====
370 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
[A LETTER TO THE PRUSSIAN AMBASSADOR IN LONDON, 
BARON BUNSEN] 269 
64 Dean Street, Soho Square, 
May 30th, 1850 
Sir, 
We learn from the public papers, that the Neue  Preussische  Zeitung 
has, of late, published a series of revelations concerning that part of 
the German and particularly the Prussian emigration which, at the 
present moment, resides in London; that the above-named paper 
has spoken of certain relations existing between London and Berlin, 
and that it has brought the name of one of the undersigned in 
connexion with this subject. 
The Society of which we are members3  does not take in the Neue 
Preussische Zeitung. We therefore take the liberty of addressing 
ourselves to you, and we expect from your loyalty, that you, Sir, the 
official representative in this country, of our nationality, will have the 
courtoisie to furnish us with the numbers in question of the Neue 
Preussische Zeitung. 
We have the honour to be, Sir, your obedient servants 
Charles Marx 
August Willich 
Frederick Engels 
First published in German translation Printed according to the original 
in: Marx/Engels, Werke, Bd. 39, in Engels' hand 
Berlin, 1968 , ,. , , ,. , r , „ 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a German Workers' Educational Society in London.— Ed. 

=====第394页=====
371 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
ADDRESS OF THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY 
TO THE LEAGUE 270 
June 1850 
CENTRAL AUTHORITY TO THE LEAGUE 
Brothers! 
In our last circular letter,3 brought to you by the emissary of the 
League,b we gave you an account of the position of the workers' party 
and, in particular, the League, both at the present time and in the 
event of a revolution. 
The chief purpose of this letter is to report on the present state of 
the League. 
The defeats of the revolutionary party last summer brought for a 
moment the League to the point of almost total disorganisation. The 
most active League members who had taken part in the various 
movements were scattered; contact was lost, addresses were unreli­
able,  and this together with the danger of letters being opened made 
correspondence impossible for a time. So until towards the end of 
last year the Central Authority was condemned to complete 
inactivity. 
As the first effects of the defeat suffered wore off, the need for a 
strong secret organisation of the revolutionary party throughout 
Germany made itself felt. In the Central Authority this need gave 
rise to the decision to send an emissary to Germany and Switzerland. 
On the other hand it led to an attempt to organise a new clandestine 
group in Switzerland and to an attempt by the Cologne community 
to reorganise the League in Germany on their own initiative. 
In Switzerland, early in the year, a number of refugees who had 
made a more or less distinguished name for themselves in the 
various movements formed themselves into a group whose aim was 
a See this volume, pp. 277-87.—Ed. 
Heinrich Bauer. — Ed. 

=====第395页=====
372 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
when the opportunity arose to participate in the overthrow of the 
governments and to keep men in readiness to lead the movement 
and even take over the government.271 The group did not belong to 
any particular party—the motley character of its adherents did not 
permit this. For they represented every political shade of the 
movement and ranged from resolute Communists and even former 
League members to the most timorous petty-bourgeois democrats 
and ex-members of the Palatinate Government. 
At the time a large number of people from Baden and the 
Palatinate seeking positions or with lesser ambitions were in 
Switzerland. For them this group offered desirable opportunities for 
self-advancement. 
Nor were the instructions which the group sent to its agents and 
which are in the possession of the Central Authority of a kind to 
inspire confidence. The.absence of a definite party point of view as 
well as the attempt to bring all the available oppositional elements 
into a specious unity were poorly concealed under a mass of detail 
about industrial, agricultural, political and military conditions in 
the different localities. The strength of this group was likewise very 
insignificant. According to the complete list of members in our 
possession the whole society at its zenith consisted of barely 30 
members in Switzerland. It is noteworthy that among these there 
were hardly any workers. From the start it was an army consisting 
exclusively of N.C.O.s and officers without soldiers. It included 
people like P. Fries and Greiner from the Palatinate, Körner from 
Elberfeld, Sigel, etc. 
They sent two agents to Germany. The first, Bruhn, was a League 
member from Holstein. He contrived by false pretences to induce a 
number of League members and communities to join the new group 
for a time, in the belief that it was the resurrected League. At the 
same time he sent a report on the League to the Swiss Central 
Authority in Zurich and another on the Swiss group to us. Not 
content with this ambiguous position, while he was still in 
correspondence with us, he wrote direct libels to the above-named 
people in Frankfurt, who had been won for the Swiss affairs, and 
instructed them to have nothing to do with London. Because of this 
he was at once expelled from the League. The matter in Frankfurt 
was settled by the League emissary. For the re§t Bruhn's labour on 
behalf of the Swiss Central Authority remained without effect. The 
second agent was a student named Schurz from Bonn. He too 
achieved nothing because, as he wrote to Zurich, "he found that the 
League already controlled all useful forces". He then left Germany 
suddenly and is now drifting around Brussels and Paris, where the 

=====第396页=====
Address of the Central Authority to the League 373 
League keeps an eye on him. That the Central Authority did not 
regard the new group as a danger to the League was due to the fact 
that a quite trustworthy League member3 belonged to its central 
committee and had been instructed to watch and keep us informed 
about the plans and measures resolved upon by these people insofar 
as they were directed against the League. The Central Authority has 
also sent an emissary to Switzerland to assist the above-mentioned 
League member to attract useful people to the League and in 
general* to organise the League in Switzerland. All this information is 
based on quite reliable documentary evidence. 
Another attempt of the same sort was made earlier by Struve, Sigel 
and others, who were united in Geneva at the time. These people 
were impertinent enough to pretend that the organisation they had 
tried to form actually was the League and to misuse the names of the 
League members for this purpose. Of course, their lies deceived no 
one. Their attempt was so futile in all respects that the few remaining 
members of this abortive organisation in Switzerland were finally 
forced to join the group already mentioned. But the more impotent 
this coterie became the more imposing were the titles they gave to 
themselves—like "Central Committee of European Democracy", 
etc. Here in London, too, Struve continued his efforts in this 
direction together with other disillusioned great men. Manifestos 
and invitations to join the "Central Bureau of the United German 
Emigration" and the "Central Committee of European Democra­
cy"2  2 were sent all over Germany, but once more without the 
slightest response. 
The alleged connections between this coterie and French and 
other non-German revolutionaries simply do not exist. All its 
activities are confined to a number of petty intrigues among the local 
German refugees. They have no direct effect on the League and 
represent no threat. It is easy to keep an eye on them. 
All attempts of this sort either have the same goal as the League, 
i. e. the revolutionary organisation of the workers' party. In this 
case they destroy the centralisation and strength of the party by 
fragmenting it and so they are definitely to be regarded as harmful 
separatism. Or they can only aim at misusing the workers' party for 
purposes alien or directly opposed to it. The workers' party can use 
other parties and party factions for its own purposes on occasion but 
must never subordinate itself to any other party. But those people 
who were in the government during the last movement0 and who 
a Wilhelm  Wolff.—  Ed. 
b Ernst Dronke.— Ed. 
c The reference is to the insurgent movement for the Imperial Constitution in 
Germany in the spring and summer of 1849.— Ed. 
14-1124 

=====第397页=====
374 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
used their position to betray the movement and to suppress the 
workers' party wherever it wanted to act independently must be kept 
at a distance under all circumstances. 
We have the following to report about the state of the League. 
I. Belgium 
The organisation of the League as it existed among the Belgian 
workers in 1846 and 1847 has, of course, disappeared since 1848, 
when the chief members were arrested, condemned to death and 
had their sentences commuted to imprisonment for life.273 In 
general the League in Belgium has lost much of its strength since the 
February Revolution and the expulsion of most of the members of 
the German Workers' Society274 from Brussels. The present policy 
of the police has not permitted it to reorganise. Despite this a 
community has managed to survive in Brussels to this day and it 
functions to the best of its ability. 
II. Germany 
It had been the intention of the Central Authority to give in this 
circular a special report on the situation of the League in Germany. 
But this is not possible at the present time as the Prussian police is 
investigating a widespread organisation among the revolutionary 
party.3 This circular will be sent to Germany by a safe route but 
copies may possibly fall into the hands of the police here and there in 
the course of distribution within Germany. It must therefore be so 
formulated that its content will not give the police any evidence that 
could be used against the League. For the moment then the Central 
Authority confines itself to the following remarks. 
The chief centres of the League in Germany are Cologne, 
Frankfurt am Main, Hanau, Mainz, Wiesbaden, Hamburg, Schwe­
rin, Berlin, Breslau, Liegnitz, Glogau, b Leipzig, Nuremberg, 
Munich, Bamberg, Würzburg, Stuttgart and Baden. 
The following are appointed leading districts: Hamburg for 
Schleswig-Holstein; Schwerin for Mecklenburg; Breslau for Silesia; 
Leipzig for Saxony and Berlin; Nuremberg for Bavaria; Cologne for 
Rhineland and Westphalia. 
For the time being the communities in Göttingen, Stuttgart and 
Brussels shall remain in direct communication with the Central 
a See this volume, pp. 378 and  382-83.—  Ed. 
The Polish names are Wroclaw, Legnica, Glogow.— Ed. 

=====第398页=====
Address of the Central Authority to the League 3/5 
Authority until they have extended their influence to the point 
where new leading districts can be formed. 
The position of the League in Baden will not be determined until 
receipt of the report from the emissary sent there and to Swit­
zerland.3 
Where, as in Schleswig-Holstein and Mecklenburg, there are 
peasants' and labourers' associations, League members have been 
able directly to influence them and in part to gain complete control. 
The workers' and labourers' associations in Saxony, Franconia, 
Hesse and Nassau are also for the most part under the leadership of 
the League. The most influential members of the Workers' 
Fraternity 275 also belong to the League. The Central Authority 
would point out to all communities and League members that such 
influence on the workers', sport, peasants' and labourers' associa­
tions,  etc., is of the very greatest importance and should be achieved 
wherever possible. The Central Authority requests the leading 
districts and the communities which correspond directly with it to 
make special mention of what has happened in this respect in their 
next reports. 
The emissary to Germany,b who has received a commendation 
from the Central Authority for his efforts, has everywhere admitted 
only the most reliable people as members to the League and has left 
the further expansion of the League in their hands, relying on their 
greater knowledge of local conditions. Whether it will be possible to 
recruit resolute revolutionaries to the League will depend on the 
situation in the various localities. Where this is not possible a 
second class of League members should be formed from among 
people who do not yet understand the communist consequences of 
the present movement but who are useful and reliable. This second 
class must be told that their organisation is purely local or provincial 
and it must constantly be under the supervision of the actual League 
members and authorities. For with the aid of these additional 
contacts it will be possible to gain a firm grip on the peasants' and 
sport associations. The detailed organisation can be left to the 
leading districts and the Central Authority looks forward to their 
reports on these matters as soon as possible. 
One community has proposed to the Central Authority that a 
League congress be convened immediately on German soil. The 
communities and districts will realise themselves that in the present 
circumstances it is not advisable to convene even provincial 
a Ernst Dronke.— Ed. 
Heinrich Bauer.— Ed. 
14* 

=====第399页=====
376 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
congresses of the leading districts everywhere. A general League 
congress is quite out of the question at the present time. But as soon 
as circumstances permit the Central Authority will convene a 
congress of the League in a suitable place.—Prussian Rhineland 
and Westphalia have recently been visited by an emissary3  of the 
Cologne leading district. The report on this tour has not yet been re­
ceived in Cologne. We request all leading districts likewise to 
send out emissaries to tour their regions as soon as possible and to 
report back on the results. Lastly, we report that in Schleswig-Hol­
stein contacts have been established with the army; we are awaiting 
an account of what influence the League may hope to gain there. 
III. Switzerland 
We are still awaiting the report of our emissary13 and so we shall 
return to this in greater detail in our next circular. 
IV. France 
Contacts with the German workers in Besançon and other places 
in the Jura will be re-established from Switzerland. In Paris, 
Ewerbeck, the League member who has been the leader of the 
communities there, has announced his resignation from the League 
as he thinks that his literary activities are more important. In 
consequence, contact has been disrupted for the time being and must 
be re-established with all the more caution as the Parisians have 
admitted a number of people who are quite useless and who in the 
past have even been directly hostile to the League. 
V. England 
The London district is the strongest in the whole League. It has 
distinguished itself above all by the fact that for some years now it has 
financed the League and in particular the emissaries' journeys 
almost unaided. It recently strengthened itself still further by 
admitting new elements and it continually provides leadership for 
the local German Workers' Society276 as well as the most energetic 
section of German refugees here. 
The Central Authority maintains contact with the resolutely 
revolutionary parties among the French, English and Hungarians 
through a few members delegated for the purpose. 
Peter Nothjung.— Ed. 
Ernst Dronke's first report to the Central Authority was sent on July 3, 1850. 
Dronke wrote to Engels about the League's affairs on July 10, 1850.— Ed. 

=====第400页=====
Address of the Central Authority to the League 377 
Of the French revolutionaries the really proletarian party, led by 
Blanqui, has joined forces with us. The delegates of the Blanquist 
secret societies are in regular and official contact with the League 
delegates whom they have entrusted with important tasks in 
preparation for the next French revolution. 
The leaders of the revolutionary Chartist party are also in regular 
close contact with the delegates of the Central Authority.277 Their 
journals are at our disposal. The breach between this revolutionary 
. independent workers' party and the more conciliatory faction led by 
O'Connor was substantially hastened thanks to League delegates. 
Similarly the Central Authority is in contact with the most 
progressive party of the Hungarian refugees. This party is important 
as it boasts a number of excellent military leaders whose services 
would be available to the League in a revolution. 
The Central Authority requests the leading districts to distribute 
this circular among their members as quickly as possible and to 
report soon. All members are urged to make the greatest possible 
efforts, especially at this moment when the situation is so critical that 
the outbreak of a new revolution can no longer be very far away. 
Written in June 1850 Printed according to the book 
Distributed in manuscript copies 
Published by Engels in the Appendices 
to the book: K. Marx, Enthüllungen über 
den Kommunisten-prozess zu Köln, 
Hottingen-Zürich, 1885 

=====第401页=====
378 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
THE PRUSSIAN REFUGEES 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE SUN£'° 
Sir, 
For some time past we, the undersigned German political refugees 
residing in London, have had occasion to admire the attention paid 
to us not only by the Prussian Embassy but also by the British 
Government. We should not have taken much notice of this, as we 
should be at a loss to conceive in what respect we might possibly come 
into collision with what the Alien Bill279 calls "the preservation of the 
peace and tranquillity of these realms", but we have of late read so 
much in the public papers about orders given to the Prussian 
Ambassador3 to insist upon the removal from England of the most 
dangerous refugees, and we have been for about a week past so 
closely watched by English police agents, that we really think we must 
lay the case before the public. 
No doubt the Prussian Government exert themselves to have the 
Alien Bill enforced against us. But why? Because we interfere in 
English politics? It would be impossible to prove that we had done so. 
Why, then? Because the Prussian Government must pretend that the 
shot fired at the Kingb in Berlin was the result of the wide-spread 
conspiracy, the centre of which is to be sought in London. 
Now, let us look to the facts of the case. Can the Prussian Gov­
ernment deny that Sefeloge, the author of the attempt, besides be­
ing a notorious madman, is a member of the ultra-Royalist Society 
the Treubund? 280 Can they deny that he is registered in the books of 
that society as member No. 133, section No. 2, in Berlin? Can they 
deny that he has received, not long ago, pecuniary aid from that 
society? Can they deny that his papers were deposited at the house of 
a Bunsen. — Ed. ; 
b Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
^ 

=====第402页=====
The Prussian Refugees 379 
a Major Kunowski, an ultra-Royalist, employed at the Royal War 
Office? 
It is really ridiculous to pretend, in the face of such facts, that the 
revolutionary party had anything to do with that attempt. The 
revolutionary party have no interest in seeing the Prince of Prussia 
arrive speedily at the throne, but the ultra-Royalists have. And yet 
the Prussian Government is making the Radical Opposition pay for 
the attempt, as is shown by the new law against the liberty of the 
press,3  and by the activity of the Prussian Embassy in London. 
We may state, at the same time, that about a fortnight before the 
attempt, persons whom we have the conviction to be Prussian agents, 
presented themselves to us, trying to entrap us into regicidal 
conspiracies. We were, of course, not to be made the dupes of such 
attempts. 
If the British Government desires any information respecting us, 
we shall always be ready to give it. What it can hope to learn by 
sending spies after us we are at a loss to conceive. 
The Holy Alliance, now re-constructing under the egis of Russia, 
would be too glad if they could succeed in making England, the only 
stumbling-block in their way, adopt a reactionary policy at home. 
What would become of the anti-Russian feeling of England, of the 
diplomatic notes and Parliamentary assertions of her Government, if 
commented upon by an enforcement of the Alien Bill, called forth by 
nothing but the revenge of the Holy Alliance, of which Prussia forms 
part and parcel? 
The Governments of the Holy Alliance, we hope, will not succeed 
in deceiving the British Government to such an extent as would call 
forth from the Home Office measures which would seriously affect 
the long-established reputation of England as safest asylum for 
refugees of all parties and of all countries. 
We remain, Sir, your most obedient servants, 
Charles Marx,  l 
Fred.  Engels, J 
Aug. Willich, 
64 Dean Street, Soho Square, 
June 14, 1850 
Published in The Sun, June 15, 1850 
and in The Northern Star No. 660, 
June 15, 1850 Editors of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung of Cologne 
Colonel in the Insurrectionary 
Army in Baden 
Reprinted from The Sun and 
checked with The Northern Star 
a Of June 8, 1850,— Ed. 

=====第403页=====
380 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE SPECTATOR 
(Private) 
Sir, 
We take the liberty of requesting you to insert the enclosed letter 
in your next.8 We have every reason to believe, that there exists, on 
the part of the government, an inclination to enforce the Alien Bill 
and to have it then renewed by Parliament. We are, it seems, to be 
the first victims. We think that the honour of the English nation is 
somewhat interested in preventing the execution of such a plan; we 
think, too, we cannot do better but appeal frankly from the British 
Government to public opinion. And, therefore, hope you will not 
refuse to our letter the publicity which your widely-circulated paper 
is sure to give it. 
In case you should wish any further information, we shall be glad 
to give it, if you will only be kind enough to let us know when and 
where we can meet you. 
We are, Sir, yours most respectfully. 
Written on June 14, 1850 Printed according to the original 
in Engels' hand 
First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, 
Works, first Russ. ed., Vol. XXV, Moscow, 
1934 Published in English for the first 
time 
a The following sentence is crossed out in the manuscript: "The spy system 
exercised upon us, by the British Government, to an almost incredible extent, is a 
sufficient  proof,  that the reiterated requests of the Prussian Ambassador...."—Ed. 

=====第404页=====
381 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
PRUSSIAN SPIES IN LONDON 282 
64 Dean Street, Soho Square, 
14th June, 1850 
Sir, 
For some time past, we, the undersigned German refugees 
residing in this country, have had occasion to admire the attention 
paid to us by the British Government. We were accustomed to meet, 
from time to time, some obscure servant of the Prussian Ambas­
sador, not being "registered as such according to law"; we were 
accustomed to the ferocious spouting and to the rabid proposals of 
such agents  provocateurs,  and we knew how to treat them. What we 
admire is, not the attention the Prussian Embassy pay us—we are 
proud to have merited it; it is the entente  cordiale  which seems to be 
established, as far as we are concerned, between Prussian spies and 
English informers. 
Really, Sir, we should have never thought that there existed in this 
country so many police-spies as we have had the good fortune of 
making the acquaintance of in the short space of a week. Not only 
that the doors of the houses where we live are closely watched by 
individuals of a more than doubtful look, who take down their notes 
very coolly every time any one enters the house or leaves it; we 
cannot make a single step without being followed by them wherever 
we go. We cannot get into an omnibus or enter a coffee-house 
without being favoured with the company of at least one of these 
unknown friends. We do not know whether the gentlemen engaged 
in this grateful occupation are so "on her Majesty's service"; but we 
know this, that the majority of them look anything but clean and 
respectable. 
Now, of what use can be, to any one, the scanty information thus 
scratched together at our doors by a lot of miserable spies, male 

=====第405页=====
382 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
prostitutes of the lowest order, who mostly seem to be drawn from 
the class of common informers, and paid by the job? Will this, no 
doubt exceedingly trustworthy information, be of such value as to 
entitle any one to sacrifice, for its sake, the old-established boast of 
Englishmen, that in their country there is no chance of introducing 
that spy system from which not one country of the Continent is free? 
Besides, we always have been, and are now, ready to give any 
information respecting ourselves the Government may desire, as far 
as this will be in our power. 
We know, however, very well what is at the bottom of all this. The 
Prussian Government have taken occasion of the late attempt on the 
life of Frederick William IVa to open another campaign against their 
political enemies in Prussia and out of Prussia. And because a 
notorious madman has fired a shot at the King of Prussia, the 
English Government are to be entrapped into enforcing the Alien 
Bill against us; although we are at a loss to conceive in what respect 
our presence in London can possibly come into collision with "the 
preservation of the peace and tranquillity of these realms". 
Some eight years ago, when we, in Prussia, attacked the existing 
system of government, the official functionaries and press replied, 
why, if these gentlemen do not like the Prussian system, they are 
perfectly at liberty to leave the country. We left the country, and we 
knew the reason why. But after leaving it, we found Prussia 
everywhere; in France, in Belgium, in Switzerland, we felt the 
influence of the Prussian Ambassador. If, through his influence, we 
are to be made to leave this last refuge left to us in Europe, why,then 
Prussia will think herself the ruling power of the world. 
England has hitherto been the only obstacle in the way of the Holy 
Alliance, now reconstructing under the protection of Russia; and the 
Holy Alliance, of which Prussia forms part and parcel, aim at 
nothing more than at entrapping anti-Russian England into a home 
policy of a more or less Russian cast. What, indeed, would Europe 
think of the late diplomatic notes and Parliamentary assertions of the 
British Government, if commented by an enforcement of the Alien 
Bill called forth by nothing but the revengeful instances of foreign 
reactionary governments? 
The Prussian Government declare the shot fired at their King to 
be the result of widespread revolutionary conspiracies, the centre of 
which is to be sought in London. In accordance with this, they firstly 
destroy the liberty of the press at home, and secondly demand the 
a See this volume, pp.  378-79.—  Ed. 

=====第406页=====
Prussian Spies in London 383 
English Government to remove from this country the pretended 
chiefs of the pretended conspiracy. 
Considering the personal character and qualities of the present 
King of Prussia, and those of his brother, the heir to the throne,3 
which party has a greater interest in the speedy succession of the 
latter—the Revolutionary party or the ultra-Royalists? 
Allow us to state, that a fortnight before the attempt was made at 
Berlin, persons whom we have every reason to consider as agents 
either of the Prussian Government or the ultra-Royalists, presented 
themselves to us, and almost directly engaged us to enter into 
conspiracies for organising regicide in Berlin and elsewhere. We 
need not add, that these persons found no chance of making their 
dupes of us. 
Allow us to state, that, after the attempt, other persons of a similar 
character have tried to force themselves upon us, and spoken in a 
similar manner. 
Allow us to state, that Sefeloge, the sergeant who shot at the King, 
was not a Revolutionist, but an ultra-Royalist. He belonged to section 
No. 2 of the ultra-Royalist society, the Treubund. He is registered 
under number 133 on the list of members. He has been for a time 
supported with money by this society: his papers were deposited at 
the house of an ultra-Royalist Major 6 employed at the War Office. 
If ever this affair should come to be tried in open court, which we 
doubt, the public will see clear enough whether there have been any 
instigators to the attempt, and who they have been. 
The ultra-Royalist Neue Preussische Zeitung was the first to 
denounce the refugees in London as the real authors of the attempt. 0 
It even named one of the undersigned,0  whom already before it had 
stated to have been in Berlin during a fortnight, while, as scores of 
witnesses can prove, he never for a moment left London. We wrote 
to M. Bunsen, the Prussian Ambassador, requesting him to furnish 
us with the numbers in question of that paper. 6 The attention paid to 
us by that gentleman did not go so far as to cause him to comply with 
what we had expected from the courtoisie of the Chevalier/ 
a William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed. 
b Kunowski.— Ed. 
° The Neue Preussische Zeitung No. 117, May 25, 1850.— Ed. 
d Karl Marx.—Ed. 
e See this volume, p.  370.—Ed. 
An ironical allusion to Bunsen's title of a baron. Further the following paragraph 
is crossed out in the rough copy: "We now write to the Home Secretary, stating the 
willingness of furnishing him, as far as we shall be able to do so, with any information 
he may desire, respecting our persons, but at the same time we deem it our duty as 

=====第407页=====
384 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
We believe, Sir, that under these circumstances, we cannot do 
better than bring the whole case before the public. We believe that 
Englishmen are interested in anything by which the old-established 
reputation of England, as the safest asylum for refugees of all parties 
and of all countries, may be more or less affected. 
We are, Sir, your most obedient servants, 
Charles Marx, 1 Editors of the Neue Rheinische 
Fred.  Engels, \ Zeitung of Cologne 
Aug. Willich, Colonel in the Insurrectionary 
Army of Baden 
Written on June 14, 1850 Reprinted from the newspaper and 
checked with Engels' manuscript Published in The Spectator No. 1146, 
June 15, 1850 
public characters, to bring the case at once before the public, so that it might not 
afterwards be said, that we had, secretly, committed our honour and that of our party 
by a compromise with any government, in order to be permitted to continue our stay 
in this country."—Ed. 

=====第408页=====
385 
Karl Marx 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE GLOBE 283 
Sir, 
Allow me to call, through the medium of your paper, the attention 
of the public to a fact in which the honour of the British nation is, 
perhaps, more or less interested. 
You are aware that the different continental governments, after 
the defeats of the movement party in 1849, succeeded in driving the 
numerous political refugees, more particularly the Germans, the 
Hungarians, the Italians and the Poles, from one place of asylum to 
another, until they found protection and tranquillity in this country. 
There are certain governments on the Continent, whose animosity 
against their political opponents seems not to be satisfied with this 
result. The Prussian government is of this number. After having 
succeeded in concentrating most of the Prussian refugees in this 
country the Berlin Cabinet is evidently trying to make them, 
somehow or other, depart for America. The same parties who at 
home, in their own newspapers (witness the Neue  Preussische  Zeitung* 
and the Assemblée nationale), represent the English government as a 
committee of Jacobins and of conspirators against the conservatives 
of all Europe—these same parties affect a most suspicious anxiety 
for the tranquillity of this country, by denouncing to the British 
government the foreign refugees as interfering with English politics 
and as being connected with the attempt at assassinating the King of 
Prussia. 1" 
I have the honour of belonging to those, whom the persecution of 
the Prussian government has followed everywhere they went. Editor 
of the Rheinische Zeitung (of Cologne) in 1842, and of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung in 1848 and 1849, both of which papers were 
directly or indirectly stopped by the forcible interference of the 
Prussian government, I have been expelled from France in 1845 and 
The Neue Preussische Zeitung Nos. 116, 117, May 24 and 25,  1850.—  Ed. 
b Frederick William IV.— Ed. 

=====第409页=====
386 Karl Marx 
1849,  from Belgium in 1848, upon the direct request and by the 
influence of the Prussian embassy; and during my stay in Prussia, in 
1848 and 1849, I had about a dozen political actions brought against 
me, the whole of which were, however, abandoned after my having 
been twice acquitted by the jury.284 
That even in this country, I am not lost sight of by the Prussian 
government, is proved to me by numerous warnings which I 
received of late, stating that the English government, upon the 
ground of similar denunciations, intended to take steps against me; 
and by the fact that for several days past some individuals place 
themselves at my very door, taking down notes every time any one 
comes or leaves the house. It is further proved by the Neue  Preussische 
Zeitung, 3 which stated, some time ago, that I was travelling through 
Germany and had stayed a fortnight in Berlin, whilst I can prove by 
my landlords and other Englishmen that I never for a moment left 
London since I arrived here last year. This same ultra-royalist paper, 
after the attempt of the madman Sefeloge, brought my pretended 
journey to Berlin into connexion with that attempt; and yet this 
paper ought to know best who, if anyone, is connected with this 
affair, inasmuch as Sefeloge is a member of Section No. 2 of the 
ultra-royalist society the Treubund, and never was connected with any 
but staff-officers employed in the Berlin War Office. It is moreover 
proved by the presence, here in London, of Prussian agents 
provocateurs who, a fortnight before Sefeloge's attempt, presented 
themselves to me and some of my friends, preaching the necessity of 
such an attempt and hinting even at the existence of a conspiracy got 
up, in Berlin, for this purpose; and who, after having found it 
impossible to make their dupes of us, now frequent Chartist 
meetings, in order to induce the public to believe that the foreign 
refugees take an active part in the English Chartist movement. 
In conclusion allow me to ask you, Sir, and through you the public, 
whether it would be desirable that, upon such authority, the British 
government should be induced to take steps which might more or 
less interfere with the conviction, universally spread, that the British 
laws afford equal protection to whosoever puts his foot upon British 
soil? 
I am, etc. 
Written in mid-June 1850 
First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, 
Works, first Russ. ed., Vol. XXV, Moscow, 
1934 Printed according to the original in 
Engels' hand 
Published in English for the first 
time 
The Neue Preussische Zeitung No. 117, May 25,  1850.—  Ed. 

=====第410页=====
387 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
STATEMENT 
TO THE EDITOR 
OF THE NEUE DEUTSCHE ZEITUNG 265 
Sir, 
In your newspaper's article of June 22 this year you reproached 
me for advocating the rule and the dictatorship of the working class, 
while you propose, in opposition to  myself,  the abolition of class 
distinctions in general. I do not understand this correction. 
You know very well that on p. 16 of the Manifesto of  the Communist 
Party (published before the February Revolution of 1848) it is stated 
that: 
"If the proletariat during its contest with the bourgeoisie is 
compelled, by the force of circumstances, to organise itself as a class, 
if, by means of a revolution, it makes itself the ruling class, and, as 
such, sweeps away by force the old conditions of production, then it 
will, along with these conditions, have swept away the conditions for 
the existence of class antagonisms and of classes generally, and will 
thereby have abolished its own supremacy as a class."3 
You know that I defended the same point of view in my Misere de la 
philosophie 6 against Proudhon, before February 1848. 
Finally, in the very article you criticise, p. 32, No. 3, the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung  [.Politisch-ökonomische  Revue], c it is stated: 
"This Socialism" (i. e. communism) "is the declaration of the 
permanence of the revolution, the class dictatorship of the 
proletariat as the necessary transit point to the abolition of class 
distinctions generally, to the abolition of all the relations of 
See present edition, Vol. 6, pp.  505-06.—  Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 212.—Ed. 
See this volume, p.  127.—Ed. 

=====第411页=====
388 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
production on which they rest, to the abolition of all the social 
relations that correspond to these relations of production, to the 
revolutionising of all the ideas that result from these social 
relations." 
June 1850 
K. Marx 
In your newspaper's article of June 22 you very kindly acknowl­
edge that a "noticeable gap" arose in the German daily press as a 
result of the suppression of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, but you 
protest against "Herr Engels' claim" that the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
was the only organ of the press to represent the proletariat not 
merely in words or out of benevolence. 
It is true that in my article on the campaign for the German 
Imperial Constitution, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 1, I declared 
that the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was the only paper in which the 
German proletariat was supported not merely out of benevolence or 
in words. 3 Should you be of the opinion that this statement is in any 
way detrimental to the Neue Deutsche Zeitung, the former official 
organ of the extreme Left in Frankfurt, then you will doubtless earn 
the gratitude of the workers by showing when, where and how the 
Neue Deutsche Zeitung has represented the German proletariat or its 
class interests. 
London, June 25, 1850 
F. Engels 
Published in the Neue Deutsche Zeitung Printed according to the newspaper 
No. 158, July 4, 1850 
Published m English for the first 
time 
See this volume, p.  156.—  Ed. 

=====第412页=====
389 
Karl Marx 
TO THE CHAIRMAN OF A REFUGEE MEETING 
IN LONDON 
[Rough copy] 
[London,] June 30  [,1850] 
Citizen Chairman, 
While the June Revolution was attacked by all the watchdogs of the 
bourgeois class, I publicly defended those terrible days, which for me 
are the greatest manifestation of the struggle which the working class 
is pursuing against the capitalist class. 
If I am absent from this refugee celebration today, it is because I 
am completely prevented by illness from being in your midst; my 
heart is with you. 
Greetings and fraternity, 
Karl Marx 
First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, Printed according to the original 
Works, second Russ. ed., Vol. 27, Moscow, 
1962 Translated from the French 

=====第413页=====
390 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
TO THE EDITORS 
OF THE WESER-ZEITUNG 286 
In your issue of June 22 this year there is a dispatch from London 
in which the following passage occurs: 
"Karl Marx, Frederick Engels and August Willich ... have written to The Spectator 
that spies from the Prussian embassy are following every step they take, etc. The 
Spectator  comments briefly upon their long letter of complaint, as follows: 'This class of 
people (namely political refugees) errs very frequently in such matters, and in fact 
their error springs from two sources: vanity, which deludes them into thinking that 
they are much more important than is really the case, and secondly the consciousness 
of their own guilt. The suspicions expressed by the refugees against the liberal-
minded and hospitable English Government are nothing more and nothing less 
than an impertinence.'" 
One does not have to be intimately acquainted with the general 
attitude and the firmly established conventional forms of the English 
daily press to discover immediately that no English paper, and least 
of all the accomplished and witty  Spectator,  could make a comment so 
clumsily Prussian in both content and form. The whole of the above 
"comment" from The Spectator is a  shameless  forgery by the  correspon­
dent. Not only does not a word of it appear in The  Spectator,  but on the 
contrary, the editors of this newspaper make the following remark in 
the same issue that contains our statement. 
"A letter in another page makes an extraordinary charge against our own 
Government. We know nothing more than is to be obtained from a perusal of the 
letter  itself;  but a charge publicly made, in so circumstantial a manner with so much 
verisimilitude of particulars, ought not to be unregarded. The charge is that of 
a Italicised by the authors of the statement.— Ed, 

=====第414页=====
To the Editors of the Weser-Zeitung 391 
favouring the operations of Prussian bloodmen3 in London, in order to [obtain] an 
application of the Alien Act against German patriots." (The  Spectator,  June 15, p. 554.) 
The praises accorded to Herr Bunsen in the same article give 
sufficient indication of the interests in which your correspondent 
perpetrated this forgery. Incidentally, Prussian cunning deserves the 
highest marks for this manoeuvre. 
We expect that by publishing this statement in your next issue you 
will leave to your correspondent alone the honour of the authorship 
of this ingenious stratagem. 
London, July 2, 1850 
Karl Marx, Frederick Engels 
Published in the Tages-Chronik No. 314, 
July 10, 1850 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a The authors translate this word as Blutmenschen and give the English equivalent 
in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第415页=====
392 
Frederick Engels 
LETTER FROM GERMANY. 287 
THE WAR IN SCHLESWIG-HOLSTEIN 
Cologne, July 21, 1850 
The all-engrossing topic now in Germany is, of course, the 
Schleswig-Holstein affair. As this affair is in your country, as well as 
in France, very little understood, you will allow me to give a rapid 
view of it. 
It has been shown clearly enough that the small independent states 
by which Germany is surrounded are, under a more or less liberal 
form, the chief seats of reaction. Thus Belgium, the model state of 
Constitutionalism, was the first to resist the shock of February,3 the 
first to proclaim martial law and to pass sentences of death upon 
patriots.288 Thus Switzerland shifted herself in a far from honoura­
ble way through the revolutionary storm, hiding behind the Chinese 
wall of neutrality as long as revolution was in the ascendant, and 
playing the subservient tool of the Holy Alliance against disarmed 
refugees, when reaction was again rife throughout Europe. It is 
evident that the petty national egotism of those impotent states must 
induce them to rely upon the support principally of old-established, 
i.e. reactionary governments, the more so as they cannot but be 
aware that every European revolution puts their own national 
independence in question, an independence which to uphold none 
are interested but the supporters of the old political system. 
Denmark is another of these petty states sharing this pride of a 
national independence and this exorbitant desire to aggrandise 
The Revolution of February 1848 in France.— Ed. 

=====第416页=====
Letter from Germany 393 
themselves.* The independence and power of Denmark, a state 
living only upon the plunder of universal commerce by the Sound 
Dues,289  is of interest to none but Russia and a certain fraction of 
English politicians. Denmark is literally the slave of Russia, by a series 
of treaties agreed to in the last century290; and through Denmark 
Russia lays hold upon the Dardanelles of the Baltic. The old school 
of English politicians, too, take an interest in the aggrandisement of 
Denmark, according to their old policy of cutting up central Europe 
into a set of small states quarrelling with each other, and thus leaving 
England to apply to them the principle "Divide and conquer". 
The policy of the revolutionary party in all countries has, on the 
contrary, always been to strongly unite the great nationalities 
hitherto cut up in small states, and to ensure independence and 
power, not to those small wrecks of nationalities—such as Danes, 
Croats, Czechs, Slovaks, &c.,&c, counting from one to three millions 
each at the very outset, or to those mongrel would-be nations, such as 
the Swiss and Belgians—but to the large and healthy nationalities 
now oppressed by the ruling European system. An European 
confederacy of republics can only be formed by great and equally 
powerful nations; such as the French, English, German, Italian, 
Hungarian, and Polish nations, but never by such miserably 
powerless so-called nations as the Danes, the Dutch, the Belgians, 
Swiss, &c. 
Besides, will the revolutionary party allow the most important 
maritime position of the north, the inlet of the Baltic, to remain for 
ever at the mercy of Danish egotism? Will they allow the Danes to 
make up the interest of their national debt by imposing heavy tolls 
upon every vessel trading across the Sound and Belt? Certainly not. 
Denmark, by that precious hereditary right which treats a people 
as so many chattels, became united with two German countries, 
Schleswig and Holstein. They had separate constitutions, common to 
both of them, and old-established rights granted by their princes, 
"that these countries should for ever remain together and undi­
vided". The law of succession, besides, is different in Denmark to 
what it is in the two duchies. In 1815, at the infamous congress of 
Vienna, where nations were cut up and sold by auction, Holstein was 
incorporated with the German confederacy, but Schleswig was not. 
From that day the Danish national party tried, but in vain, to 
incorporate Schleswig into Denmark. At last 1848 arrived. In March 
* It is a fact not generally known that the annexation of Savoy to Switzerland was 
in 1848-49 much discussed in the latter country, and that the Swiss hoped to see this 
realised by the defeat of the Italian revolution.— Note by Engels. 

=====第417页=====
394 Frederick Engels 
a popular movement took place in Copenhagen, and the national 
and liberal party got into office. They instantly decreed a 
constitution, and the incorporation of Schleswig into Denmark. The 
consequence was the insurrection of the duchies, and the war 
between Germany and Denmark. 291 
While German soldiers in Posen, in Italy, and in Hungary, fought 
against the revolution, this war in Schleswig was the only revolu­
tionary war Germany ever carried on. The question was whether the 
Schleswigers were to be forced to follow the fate of small, impotent, 
half-civilised Denmark, and to be the slaves of Russia for ever, or 
whether they should be allowed to re-unite themselves to a nation of 
forty millions, which was then just engaged in the struggle for its 
freedom, unity, and consequent recovery of its strength. And the 
German princes, particularly the royal drunkard of Prussia, 3 knew 
the revolutionary signification of this war too well. The noteb  is well 
known by which the Prussian embassy, Major Wildenbruch, 
proposed to the king of Denmark 0 to carry on the war for show, just 
as much as was necessary to allow the Danish and German revolutionary 
enthusiasts who engaged on  both  sides as volunteers, to devour  each  other. 
Consequently the war was, on the German side, one continued series 
of treasons, down to the battle of Fredericia, where the republican 
Schleswig-Holstein corps, 10,000 men, were surprised and cut up by 
three times their number of Danes, while 40,000 Prussians and 
others were only a few miles off and left them in the scrape; and 
down to the treacherous peace concocted at Berlin, 293 a peace which 
allows Russia to land troops in Schleswig, and Prussia to march into 
Holstein to put down the rebellion, she herself has aided and abetted 
at least officially. 
If there was any doubt as to which side was the revolutionary, or 
which the reactionary interest, there can be none now. Russia sends 
her fleet to fraternise with the Danes and to blockade, in common 
with them, the shores of Schleswig-Holstein. All the "powers that be" 
are arrayed against this small German tribe of not more than 
850,000 souls; and nothing but the sympathies of the revolutionists 
of all countries is there to assist this small but brave people. They will 
fall no doubt; they may resist a time, and even overthrow the 
treacherous bourgeois government which Prussia has forced upon 
them, they may beat Danes and Russians, but at last they will be 
crushed, unless the Prussian army, which is sure to march into 
a Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
b Handed by Ludwig Wildenbruch on April 8,  1848.—  Ed. 
c Frederick  VII,—  Ed. 

=====第418页=====
Letter from Germany 395 
Holstein, refuses to act. And if this, which is not at all impossible, 
should come to pass, you would see things in Germany take another 
turn. Then there would be a general outbreak, and such a one that 
1848 would be nothing compared to it; for the acts of the Holy 
Alliance have told well upon the German people; and if in '48 even 
the federative republic was impossible, now nothing would be 
accepted short of the German republic, one and indivisible, democratic 
and—within six months—Social. 
Written on July 21, 1850 Reprinted from the journal 
First published in The Democratic Review, 
August 1850 

=====第419页=====

=====第420页=====
FREDERICK ENGELS 
THE PEASANT WAR IN GERMANY 

=====第421页=====
Written in the summer and autumn of Printed according to the 1875 
1850 edition and checked with the 
journal and the 1870 edition First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 5-6, 
1850 
Signed: Frederick Engels 

=====第422页=====
399 
The German people, too, have their revolutionary tradition. 
There was a time when Germany produced characters that could 
match the best men in the revolutions of other countries, when the 
German people displayed an endurance and vigour which would in a 
more centralised nation have yielded the most magnificent results, 
and when the German peasants and plebeians were full of ideas and 
plans that often make their descendants shudder. 
In face of the slackening that has now ensued almost everywhere 
after two years of struggle, it is high time to remind the German 
people of the clumsy yet powerful and tenacious figures of the Great 
Peasant War. Three centuries have passed and many a thing has 
changed; still the Peasant War is not so impossibly far removed from 
our present struggle, and the opponents who have to be fought are 
still essentially the same. We shall see the classes and fractions of 
classes which everywhere betrayed 1848 and 1849 in the role of 
traitors, though on a lower level of development, already in 1525. In 
any case, it is no credit to the modern insurrection that the robust 
vandalism of the Peasant War was seen only here and there in the 
movement of the past few years—at Odenwald, in the Black Forest, 
and in Silesia. 

=====第423页=====
400 
i 
To begin with, let us briefly review the situation in Germany at the 
beginning of the sixteenth century. 
German industry had made considerable progress in the four­
teenth and fifteenth centuries. The local village industry of the 
feudal type was superseded by the guild system of industry in the 
towns, which produced for wider circles, and even for remoter 
markets. The weaving of coarse woollen fabrics and linens had 
become a permanent and widespread branch of industry, and even 
finer woollen and linen fabrics and silks were manufactured in 
Augsburg. Along with the art of weaving especial growth was 
witnessed in industries which were nurtured by the ecclesiastic and 
secular luxury of the late medieval epoch and verged on the fine 
arts:  those of the gold- and silver-smith, the sculptor and engraver, 
etcher and wood-carver, armourer,3 engraver of medals, wood­
turner, etc. A succession of more or less important discoveries, the 
most prominent of which were the invention of gunpowder* and 
printing, had contributed substantially to the development of the 
crafts.  Commerce kept pace with industry. By its century-long 
monopoly of sea navigation the Hanseatic League295 ensured the 
elevation of all Northern Germany from medieval barbarism. Even 
though since the end of the fifteenth century the League had quickly 
begun to succumb to the competition of the English and Dutch, the 
great trade route from India to the north still lay through Germany, 
* As has now been shown beyond doubt, gunpowder came to the Arabs through 
India from China, and they brought it through Spain to Europe along with 
fire-arms.— Note by Engels to the 1875 edition. 
a This word is missing in the 1850 edition.— Ed. 

=====第424页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 401 
Vasco da Gama's discoveries notwithstanding, and Augsburg still 
remained the great market of Italian silks, Indian spices, and all 
Levantine products. The towns of Upper Germany, particularly 
Augsburg and Nuremberg, were centres of an opulence and luxury 
quite remarkable for that time. The production of raw materials had 
also considerably increased. The German miners of the fifteenth 
century were the most skilful in the world and the flowering of the 
towns had also elevated agriculture from its early medieval crudity. 
Not only had large stretches of land been put to the plough, but dye 
crops and other imported plants were introduced, whose careful 
cultivation had favourable influence on farming in general. 
Still, the progress of Germany's national production had not kept 
pace with the progress in other countries. Agriculture lagged far 
behind that of England and the Netherlands, and industry far 
behind that of Italy, Flanders and England, while the English, and 
especially the Dutch, had already begun ousting the Germans from 
the sea trade. The population was still very sparse. Civilisation 
existed only here and there, concentrated round the several centres 
of industry and commerce; but the interests of even these centres 
were highly divergent, with hardly any point of contact. The trade 
relations and export markets of the South differed totally from those 
of the North; the East and the West stood outside almost all  traf­
fic. Not a single city was in a position to be the industrial and 
commercial centre of the whole country, such, for instance, as 
London had already become for England. All internal communi­
cations were almost exclusively confined to coastal and river 
navigation and to the few large trade routes from Augsburg and 
Nuremberg via Cologne to the Netherlands, and via Erfurt to the 
North. Away from the rivers and trade routes there was a number of 
smaller towns which lay outside the major traffic and continued to 
vegetate undisturbed in the conditions of the late Middle Ages, 
needing only few foreign goods and providing few products for 
export. Of the rural population only the nobility came in contact with 
wider circles and with new needs; in their relations, the peasant 
masses never went beyond their immediate locality and its hori­
zons. 
While in England and France the rise of commerce and industry 
had the effect of intertwining the interests of the entire country and 
thereby brought about political centralisation, Germany had not got 
any further than grouping interests by provinces, around merely 
local centres, which led to political division, a division that was soon 
made all the more final by Germany's exclusion from world 
commerce. In step with the disintegration of the purely feudal 

=====第425页=====
402 Frederick Engels 
Empire, the bonds of imperial unity became completely dissolved, 
the major vassals of the Empire became almost independent 
sovereigns, and the cities of the Empire, on the one hand, and the 
knights of the Empire, on the other, began entering into alliances 
either against each other or against the princes or the Emperor. 
Uncertain of its own position, the imperial government vacillated 
between the various elements comprising the Empire, and thereby 
lost more and more authority; in spite of all its intrigues and 
violence, the attempt at centralisation in the manner of Louis XI was 
only just able to hold together the Austrian hereditary lands. Who 
finally won and were bound to win in this confusion, in these 
countless and interrelated conflicts, were the bearers of centralisa­
tion amidst the disunity, the bearers of local and provincial 
centralisation—the princes, at whose side the Emperor himself 
became more and more of a prince like the others. 
In these circumstances, the position of the classes inherited from 
the Middle Ages had changed considerably, and new classes had 
emerged beside the old. 
The princes came from the high nobility. They were already almost 
independent of the Emperor and possessed most of the sovereign 
rights.  They made war and peace on their own, maintained standing 
armies, convened Diets, and levied taxes. They had brought a large 
part of the lesser nobility and most of the towns under their sway, 
and resorted continuously to all possible means of incorporating in 
their dominion all the remaining imperial towns and baronial estates. 
They were centralisers in respect to these towns and estates, while 
acting as a decentralising force in respect to the imperial power. 
Internally, their government was already highly autocratic. They 
convened the estates only when they could not do without them. 
They imposed taxes and borrowed money whenever it suited them; 
the right of the estates to ratify taxes was seldom recognised and still 
more seldom practised. And even when practised, the prince usually 
had the majority by virtue of the knights and prelates, the two 
tax-exempted estates that participated in the benefits enjoyed from 
taxes.  The princes' need for money grew with their taste for luxury, 
the expansion of their courts, the standing armies, and the mounting 
costs of government. The taxes became ever more oppressive. The 
towns were mostly protected from them by their privileges, and the 
full impact of the tax burden fell upon the peasants, the subjects of 
the princes, as well as upon the serfs, bondsmen and tithe-paying 
peasants [ZinsbauernY of their vassal knights. Where direct taxation 
a This word is missing in the 1850 and 1870 editions.— Ed. 

=====第426页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 403 
proved insufficient, indirect taxes were introduced. The most 
refined devices of the art of finance were called into play to fill the 
anaemic treasury. When nothing availed, when there was nothing to 
pawn and no free imperial city was willing to grant any more credit, 
the princes resorted to currency operations of the basest kind, coined 
depreciated money, and set high or low compulsory exchange rates 
at the convenience of their treasuries. Furthermore, trade in urban 
and other privileges, later forcibly withdrawn only to be resold at a 
high price, and the use of every attempt at opposition as an excuse 
for all kinds of extortion and robbery, etc., etc., were common and 
lucrative sources of income for the princes of the day. Justice, too, 
was a perpetual and not unimportant merchandise. In  brief,  the 
subjects of that time, who, in addition, had to satisfy the private 
avarice of the princely bailiffs and officials, had a full taste of all the 
blessings of the "paternal" system of government. 
The middle nobility of the medieval feudal hierarchy had almost 
entirely disappeared; it had either risen to acquire the independence 
of petty princes, or sunk into the ranks of the lesser nobility. The 
lesser  nobility,  or knighthood, was fast moving towards extinction. Much 
of it was already totally impoverished and lived in the service of the 
princes, holding military or civil offices; another part of it was in the 
vassalage and under the sway of the princes; and a small part was 
directly subject to the Emperor.The development of military science, 
the growing importance of the infantry, and the improvement of 
fire-arms dwarfed the knighthood's military merits as heavy cavalry, 
and also put an end to the invincibility of its castles. Like the 
Nuremberg artisans, the knights were made redundant by the 
progress of industry. The knights' need for money considerably 
hastened their ruin. The luxury of their palaces, rivalry in the 
magnificence of tournaments and feasts, the price of armaments and 
horses—all increased with the development of society,3 while the 
sources of income of the knights and barons increased but little, if at 
all. As time went on, feuds with their attendant plunder arid 
extortion, highway robbery and similar noble occupations became 
too dangerous. The payments and services of their subjects yielded 
the knights hardly more than before. To satisfy their growing 
requirements, the gracious knights had to resort to the same means 
as the princes. The peasantry was plundered by the nobility with a 
dexterity that increased every year. The serfs were sucked dry, and 
the bondsmen were burdened with ever new payments and services 
on a great variety of pretexts and on all possible occasions. Statute 
a The 1850 and 1870 editions have "civilisation" instead of "society".— Ed. 

=====第427页=====
404 Frederick Engels 
labour, tributes, rents, land-sale taxes, death taxes, protection 
moneys,296 etc., were raised at will, in spite of all the old agreements. 
Justice was denied or sold for money, and when the knight could not 
get at the peasant's money in any other way, he threw him into the 
tower without further ado and forced him to pay a ransom. 
The relations between the lesser nobility and the other estates 
were also anything but friendly. The knights bound by vassalage to 
the princes strove to become vassals of the Empire, the imperial 
knights strove to retain their independence; this led to incessant 
conflicts with the princes. The knight regarded the arrogant clergy 
of those days as an entirely superfluous estate, and envied them 
their large possessions and the wealth held secure by their celibacy 
and the church statutes. He was continually at loggerheads with the 
towns, he was always in debt to them, he made his living by 
plundering their territory, robbing their merchants, and by holding 
for ransom prisoners captured in the feuds. And the knights' 
struggle with all these estates became the more violent the more the 
money question became to them as well a question of life. 
The clergy, that bearer of the medieval feudal ideology, felt the 
influence of historic change just as acutely. Book-printing and the 
claims of growing commerce robbed it of its monopoly not only 
in reading and writing, but also in higher education. The division of 
labour also made inroads into the intellectual realm. The newly 
rising juridical estate drove the clergy from a number of the most 
influential offices. The clergy was also on its way to becoming largely 
superfluous, and demonstrated this by its ever greater laziness and 
ignorance. But the more superfluous it became, the more it grew in 
numbers, due to the enormous riches that it still continuously 
augmented by all possible means. 
There were two entirely distinct classes among the clergy. The 
clerical feudal hierarchy formed the aristocratic  class:  the bishops and 
archbishops, abbots, priors, and other prelates. These high church 
dignitaries were either imperial princes or reigned as feudal lords 
under the sovereignty of other princes over extensive lands with 
numerous serfs and bondsmen. They exploited their dependants as 
ruthlessly as the knights and princes, and went at it even more 
wantonly. In addition to brute force they applied all the subterfuges 
of religion; in addition to the fear of the rack they applied the fear of 
ex-communication and denial of absolution; they made use of all the 
intrigues of the confessional to wring the last penny from their 
subjects or to augment the portion of the church. Forgery of 
documents was for these worthies a common and favourite means of 
swindling. But although they received tithes from their subjects in 

=====第428页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 405 
addition to the usual feudal services and quitrents, these incomes 
were not enough for them. They fabricated miracle-working sacred 
images and relics, set up sanctifying prayer-houses, and traded in 
indulgences in order to squeeze more money out of the people, and 
for quite some time with eminent success. 
It was these prelates and their numerous gendarmerie of monks, 
which grew constantly with the spread of political and religious 
witch-hunts, on whom the priest-hatred not only of the people, but 
also of the nobility, was concentrated. Being directly subject to the 
Emperor,3 they were a nuisance for the princes. The life of 
luxurious pleasure led by the corpulent bishops and abbots, and 
their army of monks excited the envy of the nobility, and the more 
flagrantly it contradicted their preaching, the more it inflamed the 
people, who had to bear its cost. 
The plebeian part of the clergy consisted of rural and urban 
preachers. These stood outside the feudal church hierarchy and had 
no part in its riches. Their work was less controlled, and, important 
though it was for the church, it was for the moment far less 
indispensable than the police services of the barracked monks. They 
were, therefore, the worse paid by far, and their prebends were 
mostly very meagre. Of burgher or plebeian origin, they were close 
enough to the life of the masses to retain their burgher and plebeian 
sympathies in spite of their clerical status. For them participation in 
the movements of the time was the rule, whereas for monks it was an 
exception. They provided the movement with theorists and ideolo­
gists,  and many of them, representatives of the plebeians and 
peasants, died on the scaffold as a result. The people's hatred of the 
clergy turned against them only in isolated cases. 
What the Emperor was to the princes and nobility, the  Pope  was to 
the higher and lower clergy. Where the Emperor received the 
"general pfennig"297 or the imperial taxes, the Pope received the 
universal church taxes, out of which he paid for the luxury of the 
Roman court. And in no country were these church taxes collected 
more conscientiously and exactingly than in Germany—thanks to 
the power and number of the clergy. Particularly the annates,298 
collected on the bestowal of bishoprics. The growing needs led to the 
invention of new means of raising revenues, such as trade in relics 
and indulgences, jubilee collections, etc. Large sums of money 
flowed yearly from Germany to Rome in this way, and the 
consequent increased oppression not only heightened the hatred for 
a Instead of reichsunmittelbar (directly subject to the Emperor) the 1850 
edition has souverän (sovereign).— Ed. 
15-1124 

=====第429页=====
406 Frederick Engels 
the clergy, but also roused the national sentiments, particularly of 
the nobility, the then most nationalistic estate. 
In the medieval towns three distinct groups developed from the 
original citizenry with the growth of commerce and the handicrafts. 
The urban society was headed by the patriciate, the so-called 
honourables. They were the richest families. They alone sat in the 
town council, and held all town offices. Hence, they not only 
administered but also consumed all the town revenues. Strong by 
virtue of their wealth and time-honoured aristocratic status recog­
nised by Emperor and Empire, they exploited the town community 
and the peasants belonging to the town in every possible way. They 
practised usury in grain and money, seized monopolies of all kinds, 
gradually deprived the community of all rights to communal use of 
town forests and meadows and used them exclusively for their own 
private benefit, exacted arbitrary road-, bridge- and gate-tolls and 
other imposts, and trafficked in trade, guild, and burgher privileges, 
and in justice. They treated the peasants of the town precincts with 
no more consideration than did the nobility and clergy. On the 
contrary, town bailiffs and village officials, patricians all, added a 
certain bureaucratic punctiliousness to aristocratic rigidity and 
avarice in collecting imposts. The town revenues thus collected were 
administered in a most arbitrary fashion; the accounts in the town 
books, a mere formality, were neglected and confused in the 
extreme; embezzlement and deficit were the order of the day. How 
easy it was at that time for a comparatively small, privileged caste 
bound by family ties and common interests, to enrich itself 
enormously out of the town revenues, is easily seen from the many 
embezzlements and swindles3 which 1848 brought to light in so many 
town administrations. 
The patricians took pains everywhere to let the rights of the town 
community fall into disuse, particularly in matters of finance. Only 
later, when their machinations transcended all bounds, the com­
munities came into motion again to at least gain control over the 
town administration. In most towns they actually regained their 
rights,  but due to the eternal squabbles between the guilds, the 
tenacity of the patricians, and the protection the latter enjoyed from 
the Empire and the governments of the allied towns, the patrician 
council members soon in effect regained their former undivided 
dominance, be it by cunning or force. At the beginning of the 
The 1850 and 1870 editions have Tripotagen (knavery) instead of Schwinde­
leien (swindles).— Ed. 

=====第430页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 407 
sixteenth century the communities in all the towns were again in the 
opposition. 
The town opposition to the patricians broke up into two factions 
which took quite distinct stands in the Peasant War. 
The burgher opposition, forerunners of our present-day liberals, 
included the richer and middle burghers, and, depending on local 
conditions, a more or less appreciable section of the petty burghers. 
Their demands did not overstep purely constitutional limits. They 
wanted control over the town administration and a share in 
legislative power, to be exercised either by an assembly of the 
community itself or by its representatives (big council, community 
committee); further restriction of the patrician nepotism and the 
oligarchy of a few families which was coming to the fore ever more 
distinctly within the patriciate  itself.  At best, they also demanded 
several council seats for burghers from their own midst. This party, 
joined here and there by the dissatisfied and impoverished part of 
the patriciate, had a large majority in all the ordinary community 
assemblies and in the guilds. The adherents of the council and the 
more radical part of the opposition together formed only a small 
minority among the real burghers. 
We shall see how this "moderate", "law-abiding", "well-to-do" 
and "intelligent" opposition played exactly the same role, with 
exactly the same effect, in the movement of the sixteenth century, as 
its successor, the constitutional party, played in the movement of 
1848 and 1849.2" 
Beyond that, the burgher opposition declaimed zealously against 
the clergy, whose idle luxury and loose morals roused its bitter scorn. 
It urged measures against the scandalous life of those worthy men. It 
demanded the abolition of the clergy's special jurisdiction and tax 
exemption, and particularly a reduction in the number of monks. 
The plebeian opposition consisted of ruined burghers and the mass 
of townsmen without civic rights—journeymen, day labourers, and 
the numerous precursors of the lumpenproletariat, who existed even 
in the lowest stages of urban development. The lumpenproletariat is, 
generally speaking, a phenomenon that occurs in a more or less 
developed form in all the so far known phases of society. The 
number of people without a definite occupation and permanent 
domicile increased greatly at that time due to the decay of feudalism 
in a society in which every occupation, every sphere of life, was still 
fenced in by countless privileges. In all the developed countries 
vagabonds had never been so numerous as in the first half of the 
sixteenth century. In war time some of these tramps joined the 
armies, others begged their way across the countryside, and still 

=====第431页=====
408 Frederick Engels 
others eked out a meagre living in the towns as day labourers or from 
whatever other occupation that was not under guild jurisdiction. All 
three groups played a part in the Peasant War—the first in the 
armies of princes which overpowered the peasants, the second in the 
peasant conspiracies and in peasant gangs where its demoralising 
influence was felt at all times, and the third in the clashes of the 
urban parties. It will be recalled, however, that a great many, namely 
those living in the towns, still had a substantial share of sound 
peasant nature and had not as yet been possessed by the venality and 
depravity of the present "civilised" lumpenproletariat. 
As we see, the plebeian opposition in the towns of that day was a 
very mixed lot. It brought together the depraved parts of the old 
feudal and guild society with the undeveloped, budding proletarian 
elements of the germinating modern bourgeois society. There were 
impoverished guild burghers, on the one hand, who still clung to the 
existing burgher system by virtue of their privileges, and the 
dispossessed peasants and discharged vassals as yet unable to become 
proletarians, on the other. Between these two groups were the 
journeymen, who still stood outside official society and whose 
condition was as close to that of the proletariat as this could be with 
the contemporary state of industry and the guild privileges; but due 
to these privileges they were, at the same time, almost all prospective 
burgher artisans. The party affiliation of this conglomeration was 
therefore highly uncertain, and varied from locality to locality. 
Before the Peasant War the plebeian opposition took part in the 
political struggles not as a party, but as a noisy marauding tagtail of 
the burgher opposition, a mob that could be bought and sold for a 
few barrels of wine. The peasant revolts turned it into a party, and 
even then it remained almost everywhere dependent on the peasants 
in its demands and actions—a striking proof of how much the town 
of that time still depended on the countryside. In their independent 
actions, the plebeians demanded extension of the monopoly in urban 
handicrafts to the countryside, and had no wish to see a curtailment 
of town revenues come about through the abolition of feudal 
burdens within the town precincts, etc.; in  brief,  they were 
reactionary in their independent actions, and delivered themselves 
up to their own petty-bourgeois elements—a typical prelude to the 
tragicomedy staged in the past three years by the modern petty 
bourgeoisie under the trade mark of democracy. 
Only in Thuringia under the direct influence of Münzer, and in a 
few other localities under that of his pupils, was the plebeian faction 
of the towns carried away by the general storm to such an extent that 
the embryonic proletarian element in it gained the upper hand for a 

=====第432页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 409 
time over all the other factions2  of the movement. This episode 
grouped round the magnificent figure of Thomas Münzer, was the 
culmination point and also the briefest episode, of the Peasant War. 
It stands to reason that the plebeian factions were the quickest to 
collapse, that they had a predominantly fantastic outlook, and that 
the expression of their demands was necessarily extremely uncer­
tain; in the existing conditions they found the least firm ground to 
stand on. 
Beneath all these classes, save the last one, was the exploited bulk 
of the nation, the peasants. It was on the peasant that the whole 
arrangement of social strata reposed: princes, officials, nobles, 
clergymen, patricians and burghers. No matter whose subject the 
peasant was—a prince's, an imperial baron's, a bishop's, a monas­
tery's or a town's—he was treated by all as a thing, a beast of burden, 
and worse. If a  serf,  he was entirely at the mercy of his master. If a 
bondsman, the legal levies stipulated in the agreement were enough 
to crush him; yet they were daily increased. He had to work on his 
lord's estate most of his time; out of what he earned in his few free 
hours he had to pay tithes, tributes, the quitrent, princely levies 
[Bede], road (war) tolls, and local and imperial taxes. He could 
neither marry nor die without paying something to the lord. Besides 
his statute labour he had to gather litter, pick strawberries and 
bilberries, collect snail-shells, drive the game in the hunt, and chop 
wood, etc., for his gracious lord. The right to fish and hunt belonged 
to the master; the peasant had to look on quietly as his crop was 
destroyed by wild game. The common pastures and woods of the 
peasants were almost everywhere forcibly appropriated by the lords. 
The lord did as he pleased with the peasant's own person, his wife 
and daughters, just as he did with the peasant's property. He had the 
right of the first night. He threw the peasant into the tower when he 
wished, and the rack awaited the peasant there just as surely as the 
investigating attorney awaits the arrested in our day. He killed the 
peasant or had him beheaded when he pleased. There was none out 
of the edifying chapters of the Carolina500 dealing with "ear 
clipping", "nose cutting", "eye gouging", "chopping of fingers and 
hands",  "beheading", "breaking on the wheel", "burning", "hot 
irons",  "quartering", etc., that the gracious lord and patron would 
not apply at will. Who would defend the peasant? It was the barons, 
clergymen, patricians or jurists who sat in the courts, and they knew 
The 1850 edition has Faktoren (agents) instead of Fraktionen (fac­
tions).—  Ed. 

=====第433页=====
410 Frederick Engels 
perfectly well what they were being paid for. After all, every official 
estate of the Empire lived by sucking the peasants dry. 
Though gnashing their teeth under the terrible burden, the 
peasants were still difficult to rouse to revolt. They were scattered 
over large areas, and this made collusion between them extremely 
difficult. The old habit of submission inherited by generation from 
generation, lack of practice in the use of arms in many regions, and 
the varying degree of exploitation depending on the personality of 
the lord, all combined to keep the peasant quiet. For this reason we 
find so many local peasant insurrections in the Middle Ages but, 
prior to the Peasant War, not a single general national peasant revolt, 
at least in Germany. Moreover, the peasants were unable to make 
revolution on their own as long as they were confronted by the 
united and organised power of the princes, the nobility and the 
towns. Their only chance of winning lay in an alliance with other 
estates. But how could they join with other estates if they were 
exploited to the same degree by all of them? 
As we see, in the early sixteenth century the various estates of the 
Empire—princes, nobles, prelates, patricians, burghers, plebeians 
and peasants—formed an extremely confusing mass with their 
varied and highly conflicting needs. The estates stood in each other's 
way, and each was continually in overt or covert conflict with all the 
others. The division of the nation into two large camps, as seen in 
France at the outbreak of the first Revolution and as witnessed today 
on a higher level of development in the most advanced countries, 
was thus a rank impossibility. Anything like it could only come about 
if the lowest stratum of the nation, the one exploited by all the other 
estates, the peasants and plebeians, would rise up. The entangle­
ment of interests, views and aspirations of that time will be easily 
understood from the confusion brought about in the last two years 
by the present far less complicated structure of the German nation, 
consisting of the feudal nobility, the bourgeoisie, the petty 
bourgeoisie, the peasants and the proletariat. 

=====第434页=====
411 
il 
The grouping of the then numerous and different estates into 
bigger entities was made virtually impossible by decentralisation, 
local and provincial independence, the industrial and commercial 
isolation of the provinces from each other, and poor communica­
tions.  It came about only with the general spread of revolutionary 
political and religious ideas during the Reformation. The various 
estates that either embraced or opposed those ideas, concentrated 
the nation—only very laboriously, to be sure, and only approximate­
ly—into three large camps: the Catholic or reactionary, the 
Lutheran bourgeois reformist, and the revolutionary. If we discover 
little logic in this great division of the nation, and if we find partly the 
same elements in the first two camps, this is explained by the 
dissolution of most of the official estates handed down from the 
Middle Ages, and by the decentralisation which, for the moment, 
imparted to these estates in different localities opposing tendencies. 
In recent years we have so often encountered similar facts in 
Germany that this apparent jumble of estates and classes in the much 
more complicated environment of the sixteenth century cannot 
surprise us. 
In spite of the latest experiences, German ideology still sees 
nothing except violent theological bickering in the struggles that 
brought the Middle Ages to an end. Should the people of that time, 
say our home-bred historians and political sages, have only come to 
an understanding concerning divine matters, there would have been 
no reason whatever for quarrelling over the earthly affairs. These 
ideologists are so gullible that they accept unquestioningly all the 
illusions that an epoch makes about itself or that ideologists of an 
epoch make about that epoch. People of that kind see in, say, the 

=====第435页=====
412 Frederick Engels 
Revolution of 1789 nothing but a somewhat heated debate over the 
advantages a constitutional monarchy has over absolutism, in the 
July Revolution3 a practical controversy over the untenability of 
justice "by the grace of God", and in the February Revolutionb an 
attempt at solving the problem: "republic or monarchy?", etc. To 
this day our ideologists have hardly any idea of the class struggles 
fought out in these upheavals, of which the political slogan on the 
banner is every time a bare expression, although the tidings about 
them are carried discernibly enough not only from abroad, but also 
by the rumble and grumble of many thousands of native pro­
letarians. 
Even the so-called religious wars of the sixteenth century mainly 
concerned very positive material class interests; those wars were class 
wars,  too, just as the later internal collisions in England and France. 
Although the class struggles of those days were clothed in religious 
shibboleths, and though the interests, requirements, and demands of 
the various classes were concealed behind a religious screen, this 
changed nothing at all and is easily explained by the conditions of the 
times. 
The Middle Ages had developed altogether from the raw. They 
wiped the old civilisation, the old philosophy, politics and jurispru­
dence off the slate, to begin anew in everything. The only thing they 
kept from the shattered old world was Christianity and a number of 
half-ruined towns divested of all civilisation. As a consequence, just 
as in every primitive stage of development, the clergy obtained a 
monopoly in intellectual education and education itself became 
essentially theological. In the hands of the clergy politics and 
jurisprudence, much like all other sciences, remained mere branches 
of theology, and were treated in accordance with the principles 
prevailing in the latter. Church dogmas were also political axioms, 
and Bible quotations had the validity of law in any court. Even when 
a special estate of jurists had begun to take shape, jurisprudence 
long remained under the patronage of theology. This supremacy of 
theology in the entire realm of intellectual activity was at the same 
time an inevitable consequence of the fact that the church was the 
all-embracing synthesis and the most general sanction of the existing 
feudal order. 
It is clear that under the circumstances all the generally voiced 
attacks against feudalism, above all the attacks against the church, 
and all revolutionary social and political doctrines were necessarily 
a Of 1830.— Ed. 
b Of 1848.—Ed. 

=====第436页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 413 
also mostly theological heresies. The existing social relations had to 
be stripped of their halo of sanctity before they could be attacked. 
The revolutionary opposition to feudalism was alive throughout 
the Middle Ages. It took the shape of mysticism,301  open heresy, or 
armed insurrection, depending on the conditions of the time. It is 
well known how much sixteenth-century reformers depended on 
mysticism. Münzer himself was indebted to it. The heresies gave 
expression partly to the patriarchal Alpine shepherds' reaction to the 
feudalism advancing upon them (Waldenses 302), partly to the, 
opposition of the towns that had outgrown feudalism (the Al-
bigenses,303 Arnold of Brescia, etc.), and partly to direct peasant 
insurrections (John Ball and, among others, the Hungarian teacher 
in Picardy304). We can here leave aside the patriarchal heresy of the 
Waldenses and the Swiss insurrection, which was in form and 
content a reactionary, purely local attempt at stemming the tide of 
history. In the two remaining forms of medieval heresy we find 
already in the twelfth century the precursors of the great antithesis 
between the burgher and peasant-plebeian oppositions, which 
caused the defeat of the Peasant War. This antithesis is seen 
throughout the later Middle Ages. 
The town heresies—and those are the actual official heresies of 
the Middle Ages—were directed primarily against the clergy, whose 
wealth and political station they attacked. Just as the present-day 
bourgeoisie demands a gouvernement à bon marché (cheap govern­
ment),  the medieval burghers chiefly demanded an église à bon 
marché (cheap church). Reactionary in form like any heresy that sees 
only degeneration in the further development of church and dogma, 
the burgher heresy demanded the revival of the simple early 
Christian Church constitution and abolition of exclusive priesthood. 
This cheap arrangement would eliminate monks, prelates, and the 
court in Rome; in short, all the expensive element of the church. 
The towns, which were republics themselves, albeit under the 
protection of monarchs, were the first to enunciate in general terms 
through their attacks upon the Papacy that a republic was the normal 
form of bourgeois rule. Their hostility to some of the dogmas and 
church laws is explained partly by the foregoing, and partly by their 
living conditions. Their bitter opposition to celibacy, for instance, has 
never been better explained than by Boccaccio. Arnold of Brescia in 
Italy and Germany, the Albigenses in Southern France, John 
Wycliffe in England, Hus and the Calixtines 305 in Bohemia, were the 
principal exponents of this trend. The towns were then already a 
recognised estate sufficiently capable of fighting secular feudalism 
with its privileges by force of arms or in the assemblies of the estates. 

=====第437页=====
414 Frederick Engels 
This explains quite simply why here the opposition to feudalism 
amounted only to opposition to  ecclesiastical  feudalism. 
We also find in Southern France and in England and Bohemia that 
most of the lesser nobility joined the towns in their struggle against 
the clergy and in their heresies—which is explained by the 
dependence of the lesser nobility on the towns, and by their common 
interests as opposed to the princes and prelates. We shall encounter 
the same thing in the Peasant War. 
The heresy that lent direct expression to peasant and plebeian 
needs and was almost invariably associated with an insurrection was 
of a totally different nature. Though it shared all the demands of the 
burgher heresy in relation to the clergy, the Papacy and the revival of 
the early Christian Church constitution, it went infinitely further. It 
demanded the restoration of early Christian equality among 
members of the community and recognition of this equality also as a 
prescript for the burgher world. It invoked the "equality of the 
children of God" to infer civil equality, and partly even equality of 
property. Equality of nobleman to peasant, of patrician and 
privileged burgher to the plebeian, abolition of statute labour, 
quitrents, taxes, privileges, and at least the most crying differences in 
property—those were the demands advanced with more or less 
determination as naturally consistent with the early Christian 
doctrine. At the time when feudalism was at its zenith there was little 
to choose between this peasant-plebeian heresy of the Albigenses, for 
example, and the burgher heresy, but in the fourteenth and 
fifteenth centuries it developed into a clearly distinctive party 
opinion and usually occupied an independent place alongside the 
heresy of the burghers. This was so in the case of John Ball, 
preacher of Wat Tyler's rebellion in England, and the Wycliffe 
movement, and of the Taborites306 and the Calixtines in Bohemia. In 
the case of the Taborites there was even already a republican 
tendency under the theocratic cloak, a view further developed by the 
plebeians in Germany in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth 
centuries. 
The fanaticism of mystically-minded sects, the Flagellants and 
Lollards,307 etc., which continued the revolutionary tradition in times 
of suppression, was contiguous with this form of heresy. 
At that time the plebeians were the only class that stood outside the 
existing official society. They had no access to either the feudal or 
the burgher association. They had neither privileges nor property; 
they did not even have the kind of heavily-taxed property possessed 
by the peasant or petty burgher. They were propertyless and 
rightless in every respect; their living conditions never even brought 

=====第438页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 415 
them into direct contact with the existing institutions, which ignored 
them completely. They were a living symptom of the decay of the 
feudal and guild-burgher society, and at the same time the first 
precursors of the modern bourgeois society. 
This explains why even then the plebeian faction could not confine 
itself to fighting only feudalism and the privileged burghers; why, in 
fantasy at least, it reached beyond the then scarcely dawning modern 
bourgeois society; why, an absolutely propertyless faction, it 
questioned the institutions, views and conceptions common to all 
societies based on class antagonisms. In this respect, the chiliastic 
dream-visions308 of early Christianity offered a very convenient 
starting point. On the other hand, this sally beyond the present and 
even the future could be nothing but violent and fantastic, and was 
bound to slide back at its first practical application to within the 
narrow limits set by the contemporary situation. The attack on 
private property and the demand for community of property was 
bound to dissolve into a primitive organisation of charity; vague 
Christian equality could at best dissolve into civic "equality before 
the law"; elimination of all authority would finally end in the 
establishment of republican governments elected by the people. The 
anticipation of communism in fantasy became in reality an 
anticipation of modern bourgeois conditions. 
This violent anticipation of coming historical developments, easily 
explained by the living conditions of the plebeians, is first seen in 
Germany, with Thomas Münzer and his party. True, the Taborites had 
a kind of chiliastic community of property, but that was a purely 
military measure. Only in the teachings of Münzer did these 
communist notions express the aspirations of a real section of society. 
He was the first to formulate them with a certain definiteness, and 
only after him do we find them in every great popular upheaval, 
until they gradually merge with the modern proletarian movement; 
just as the struggles of free peasants in the Middle Ages against the 
increasing feudal domination merged with the struggles of serfs and 
bondsmen for the complete abolition of the feudal system. 
The first of the three large camps, the conservative. Catholic, 
embraced all the elements interested in maintaining the existing 
conditions, i.e. the imperial authorities, the ecclesiastical and a 
section of the lay princes, the richer nobility, the prelates and the city 
patricians,while the camp of Lutheran reform, moderate in the burgher 
manner, attracted all the propertied elements of the opposition, the 
mass of the lesser nobility, the burghers, and even some of the lay 
princes who hoped to enrich themselves through confiscation of 
church estates and wanted to seize the opportunity of gaining 

=====第439页=====
416 Frederick Engels 
greater independence from the Empire. As for the peasants and 
plebeians, they formed a revolutionary party whose demands and 
doctrines were most forcefully set out by Münzer. 
Luther and Münzer each fully represented his party by his 
doctrine, as well as by his character and behaviour. 
Between 1517 and 1525 Luther changed just as much as the 
present-day German constitutionalists did between 1846 and 1849, 
and as every bourgeois party does when, placed for a time at the 
head of the movement, it is overwhelmed by the plebeian or 
proletarian party standing behind it. 
When in 1517 Luther first opposed the dogmas and statutes of the 
Catholic Church his opposition was by no means of a definite 
character. Though it did not overstep the demands of the earlier 
burgher heresy, it did not and could not rule out any trend which 
went further. At that early stage it was necessary that all the 
opposition elements should be united, the most resolute revolu­
tionary energy should be displayed, and the sum of the existing 
heresies against the Catholic orthodoxy should be represented. In 
exactly the same way our liberal bourgeoisie of 1847 was still 
revolutionary, called itself socialist and communist, and clamoured 
for the emancipation of the working class. Luther's sturdy peasant 
nature asserted itself in the stormiest fashion in that first period of 
his activity. 
"If the raging madness" (of the Roman churchmen) "were to continue, it seems to 
me no better counsel and remedy could be found against it than that kings and princes 
apply force, arm themselves, attack those evil people who have poisoned the entire 
world, and put an end to this game once and for all, with arms, not with words. a Since we 
punish thieves with the sword, murderers with the halter, and heretics with fire, why 
do we not turn on all those evil teachers of perdition, those popes, cardinals and 
bishops, and the entire swarm of the Roman Sodom with arms in  hand,  and wash our 
hands in their blood?"c 
But this initial revolutionary zeal was short-lived. Luther's 
lightning struck home. The entire German people was set in motion. 
On the one hand, peasants and plebeians saw the signal to revolt in 
his appeals against the clergy, and in his sermon of Christian 
freedom; on the other, he was joined by the moderate burghers and 
a large section of the lesser nobility. Even princes were drawn into 
the maelstrom. The former believed the day had come to settle 
a The last three words are italicised by Engels. — Ed. 
b Luther wrote:"punish thieves with the halter, murderers with the sword".— Ed. 
Epitoma responsionis ad Martinum Luther [1520]. Engels quotes according to 
W. Zimmermann, Allgemeine Geschjchte des grossen Bauernkrieges, Th. 1, S. 364-
65.— Ed. 

=====第440页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 417 
scores with all their oppressors, the latter only wished to break the 
power of the clergy, the dependence upon Rome, to abolish the 
Catholic hierarchy and to enrich themselves on the confiscation of 
church property. The parties stood aloof from each other, and each 
had its spokesmen. Luther had to choose between them. He, the 
protégé of the Elector of Saxony, 3 the revered professor of 
Wittenberg who had become powerful and famous overnight, the 
great man with his coterie of servile creatures and flatterers, did not 
hesitate for a single moment. He dropped the popular elements of 
the movement and took the side of the burghers, the nobility, and 
the princes. His appeals for a war of extermination15  against Rome 
resounded no more. Luther now preached peaceful progress and 
passive  resistance  (cf., for example, An den Adel  teutscher  Nation, 1520, 
etc.).  Invited by Hütten to visit him and Sickingen in the castle of 
Ebern, where the nobility conspired against the clergy and the 
princes, Luther replied: 
"I do not wish the Gospel defended  by force and  bloodshed.  The World was conquered 
by the Word, the Church is maintained by the Word, the Word will also put the 
Church back into its own, and Antichrist, who gained his own without violence, will 
fall without violence."6 
From this reversal or, to be more exact, from this more definite 
explication of Luther's policy sprang that bartering and haggling 
over institutions and dogmas to be retained or reformed, that 
disgusting diplomatising, conciliating, intriguing and compromising, 
which resulted in the Confession of Augsburg, the finally impor­
tuned articles of a reformed burgher church.309 It was quite the same 
kind of petty bargaining as was recently repeated in political form ad 
nauseam at the German national assemblies, agreement assemblies, 
chambers of revision, and Erfurt parliament.310 The philistine nature 
of the official Reformation was most distinctly on display at these 
negotiations. 
There were good reasons for Luther, henceforth the recognised 
representative of the burgher reform, to preach lawful progress. 
The bulk of the towns espoused the cause of moderate reform, the 
lesser nobility became more and more devoted to it, and a section of 
the princes joined in, while another section vacillated. Success was as 
a Frederick III.— £d. 
The 1850 edition has Vertilgungsrufe (appeals for extermination) instead of 
Aufrufe zum Vertilgungskampfe (appeals for a war of extermination).— Ed. 
A passage from Luther's letter to Hütten quoted in his letter to Spalatin dated 
January 16, 1521. Intalicised by Engels. (See W.Zimmermann, op. cit., Th. l, S. 
366.)— Ed. 

=====第441页=====
418 Frederick Engels 
good as won, at least in a large part of Germany. The remaining 
regions could not in the long run withstand the pressure of moderate 
opposition in the event of continued peaceful development. On the 
other hand, any violent upheaval was bound to bring the moderate 
party into conflict with the extremist plebeian and peasant party, to 
alienate the princes, the nobility, and many towns from the 
movement, leaving the alternative of either the burgher party being 
overshadowed by the peasants and plebeians or all the parties to the 
movement being crushed by a Catholic restoration. We have seen 
examples enough of late of how, after gaining the slightest victory, 
bourgeois parties sought to steer a lawful course between the Scylla 
of revolution and the Charybdis of restoration. 
Since in the social and political conditions of that time the results 
of every change were bound to benefit the princes and inevitably 
increased their power, it came about that the burgher reform fell the 
more completely under the control of the reformed princes, the 
more sharply it broke away from the plebeian and peasant elements. 
Luther himself became more and more their vassal, and the people 
knew perfectly well what they were doing when they accused him of 
having become just another flunkey of the princes, and when they 
stoned him in Orlamünde. 
When the Peasant War broke out, and this in regions where the 
nobility and the princes were mostly Catholic, Luther tried to strike a 
mediatory pose. He resolutely attacked the authorities. He said it was 
their oppression that was to blame for the rebellion, that it was not 
the peasants but God himself who had risen against them. Yet, on the 
other hand, he said, the revolt was ungodly and contrary to the 
Gospel. In the end he advised both parties to yield and reach an 
amicable understanding.3 
But in spite of these well-meaning mediatory offers, the revolt 
spread swiftly and even involved Protestant regions dominated 
by Lutheran princes, lords and towns, rapidly outgrowing the "cir­
cumspect" burgher reform. The most determined faction of the 
insurgents under Münzer made its headquarters in Luther's 
immediate proximity in Thuringia. A few more successes and the 
whole of Germany would be in flames, Luther surrounded and 
perhaps piked as a traitor, and the burgher reform swept away by 
the tide of a peasant-plebeian revolution. This was no time for 
circumspection. All the old animosities were forgotten in the face of 
the revolution. Compared with the hordes of peasants, the servants 
a M. Luther, Ermanunge zum fride auff die zwelff artikel der Bawrschafft ynn Schwaben, 
Wittemberg,  1525.—  Ed. 

=====第442页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 419 
of the Roman Sodom were innocent lambs, sweet-tempered children 
of God. Burgher and prince, noble and clergyman, Luther and the 
Pope, all joined hands "against the murderous and plundering 
peasant hordes".3 
"They must be knocked to pieces, strangled and stabbed, covertly and overtly, by 
everyone who can, just as one must kill a mad dog\" Luther cried. "Therefore, dear 
sirs, help here, save there, stab, knock, strangle them everyone who can, and should 
you lose your life, bless you, no better death can you ever attain." There should be no 
false mercy for the peasant. Whoever hath pity on those whom God pities not, whom 
He wishes punished and destroyed, belongs among the rebels  himself.  Later the 
peasants themselves would learn to thank God when they had to give up one cow in 
order to enjoy the other in peace, and the princes would learn through the upheaval 
the spirit of the mob that must be ruled by force only. "The wise man says: cibus, onus 
et virga asino. c The peasants must have nothing but  chaff.  They do not hearken to the 
Word, and are foolish, so they must hearken to the rod and the gun, and that serves 
them right. We must pray for them that they obey. Where they do not there should be 
little mercy. Let the guns roar among them, or else they will do it a thousand times 
worse." 
Our late socialist and philanthropic bourgeoisie said the same 
things when the proletariat claimed its share of the fruits of victory-
after the March events. 
Luther had put a powerful tool into the hands of the plebeian 
movement by translating the Bible. Through the Bible he contrasted 
the feudalised Christianity of his day with the moderate Christianity 
of the first centuries, and the decaying feudal society with a picture 
of a society that knew nothing of the ramified and artificial feudal 
hierarchy. The peasants had made extensive use of this instrument 
against the princes, the nobility, and the clergy. Now Luther turned 
it against the peasants, extracting from the Bible such a veritable 
hymn to the God-ordained authorities as no bootlicker of absolute 
monarchy had ever been able to match. Princedom by the grace of 
God, resigned obedience, even serfdom, were sanctioned with the 
aid of the Bible. Not the peasant revolt alone, but Luther's own 
mutiny against religious and lay authority were thereby disavowed; 
not only the popular movement, but the burgher movement as well, 
were betrayed to the princes. 
a Part of the title of the pamphlet: M. Luther, Wyder die mördische unnd reubischenn 
Rottenn der Paurenn [Wittemberg, 1525]. The passage that follows is quoted according 
to the text given by W. Zimmermann (op. cit., Th. 3, S. 370). Italics by Engels.— Ed. 
An indirect quotation from M. Luther, Ein Sendbrief von dem harten Büchlein 
wider die Bauern [1525].— Ed. 
Latin for "food, pack, and lash to the ass".— Ed. 
M. Luthers Schreiben an Johann Rühel, May 30, 1525. Italics by Engels. Quoted 
according to W.Zimmermann, op. cit., Th. 3, S. 714.— Ed. 

=====第443页=====
420 Frederick Engels 
Need we name the bourgeois who recently provided examples of 
the same disavowal of their own past? 
Let us now compare the plebeian revolutionary, Münzer, with 
Luther, the burgher reformer. 
Thomas Münzer was born in Stolberg, in the Harz, somewhere 
around 1498. 3U His father is said to have died on the scaffold, a 
victim of the obduracy of the Count of Stolberg. In his fifteenth year 
Münzer organised a secret union at the Halle school against the 
Archbishop of Magdeburg 3 and the Roman Church in general. His 
learning in the theology of his time brought him an early doctor's 
degree and the position of chaplain in a Halle nunnery. Here he 
treated the church dogmas and rites with the greatest contempt. At 
mass he omitted the words of the transubstantiation and, as Luther 
said, devoured the almighty gods unconsecrated.b  The medieval 
mystics, and particularly the chiliastic works of Joachim the Cala-
brese, were the main subject of his studies. The millennium and 
the Day of Judgment of the degenerated church and corrupted 
world propounded and described by that mystic seemed to Münzer 
imminently close, what with the Reformation and the general unrest 
of his time. He preached in his neighbourhood with great success. In 
1520 he went to Zwickau as the first evangelist preacher. There he 
found one of those fanatical chiliastic sects that continued their 
existence on the quiet in many localities, whose momentary humility 
and detachment concealed the increasingly rampant opposition to 
the prevailing conditions of the lowest strata of society, and who were 
now, with the unrest growing, coming into the light of day ever more 
boldly and persistently. It was the sect of the Anabaptists 312 headed 
by Niklas Storch. They preached the approach of the Day of Judg­
ment and of the millennium; they had "visions, transports, and 
the spirit of prophecy" and soon came into conflict with the Council 
of Zwickau. Münzer defended them, though he never joined them 
unconditionally and would much rather have brought them under 
his own influence. The Council took drastic measures against them; 
they had to leave the town, and Münzer with them. This was at the 
close of 1521. 
He went to Prague and sought to gain a foothold there by joining 
the remnants of the Hussite movement. But all that he accomplished 
with his proclamationc was that he had to flee from Bohemia as well. 
a Ernst.— Ed. 
M. Luther's Schrift von der Winkelmesse. (See W. Zimmermann, op. cit., Th. 2, 
S. 55.)— Ed. 
Th. Müntzer, Ankündigung mit eigner Hand geschrieben, und in Prag 1521 
angeschlagen wider die Papisten. (See W. Zimmermann, op. cit., Th. 2, S. 64-67.) — Ed. 

=====第444页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 421 
In 1522 he became preacher at Allstedt in Thuringia. The first thing 
he did here was to reform the cult. Even before Luther dared to go 
so far, he entirely abolished the Latin language and ordered the 
entire Bible, and not only the prescribed Sunday Gospels and 
epistles, to be read to the people. At the same time, he organised 
propaganda in his locality. People flocked to him from all directions, 
and Allstedt soon became the centre of the popular anti-priest 
movement of all Thuringia. 
Münzer was as yet more theologian than anything else. He still 
directed his attacks almost exclusively against the priests. He did 
not, however, preach quiet debate and peaceful progress as Luther 
did at that time, but continued Luther's earlier violent sermons, 
calling upon the princes of Saxony and the people to rise in arms 
against the Roman priests. 
"Does not Christ say, 'I came not to send peace, but a sword'? What must you" (the 
princes of Saxony) "do with that sword? Only one thing if you wish to be the servants 
of God, and that is to drive out and destroy the evil ones who stand in the way of the 
Gospel. Christ ordered very earnestly (Luke 19:27): 'bring hither mine enemies and 
slay them before me'.... Do not shallowly pretend that the power of God will do it 
without the aid of your sword, for then it would rust in its sheath. Those who stand in 
the way of God's revelation must be destroyed mercilessly, as Ezekiel, Cyrus, Josiah, 
Daniel and Elijah destroyed the priests of Baal, else the Christian Church will never 
come back to its source. We must uproot the weeds in God's vineyard at harvest time. 
God said in the Fifth Book of Moses, 7, 'thou shalt not show mercy unto the idolaters, 
but ye shall destroy their altars, and break down their images and burn them with fire 
that I shall not be wroth at you'."a 
But these appeals to the princes were of no avail, while 
revolutionary sentiments among the people grew day by day. 
Münzer, whose ideas became ever sharper and ever more bold, 
now resolutely broke away from the burgher Reformation, and 
henceforth also became an out-and-out political agitator. 
His philosophico-theological doctrine attacked all the main points 
not only of Catholicism, but of Christianity generally. In the form of 
Christianity he preached a kind of pantheism, which curiously 
resembled modern speculative contemplation313 and at times even 
approached atheism. He repudiated the Bible both as the only and as 
the infallible revelation. The real and living revelation, he said, was 
reason, a revelation that has existed at all times and still exists among 
all peoples. To hold up the Bible against reason, he maintained, was 
to kill the spirit with the letter, for the Holy Spirit of which the Bible 
speaks is not something that exists outside us—the Holy Spirit is our 
Th. Müntzer, Die Fürstenpredigt. Ausslegung des andern vnterschyds Danielis dess 
propheten gepredigt auffm  schlos  zu Alstet vor den tetigen thewren Herzcogenvnd  Vorstehern  zu 
Sachssen durch Thomä Müntzer diener des wordt gottes,  Alstedt, MDXXIIII. — Ed. 

=====第445页=====
422 Frederick Engels 
reason. Faith is nothing but reason come alive in man, and pagans 
could therefore also have faith. Through this faith, through reason 
come to life, man became godlike and blessed. Heaven is, therefore, 
nothing of another world and is to be sought in this life. It is the 
mission of believers to establish this Heaven, the kingdom of God, 
here on earth. Just as there is no Heaven in the beyond, there is also 
no Hell and no damnation. Similarly, there is no devil but man's evil 
lusts and greed. Christ was a man as we are, a prophet and a teacher, 
and his supper is a plain meal of commemoration wherein bread and 
wine are consumed without any mystic garnish. 
Münzer preached these doctrines mostly concealed in the same 
Christian phraseology behind which the present-day philosophy has 
had to hide for some time. But the arch-heretical fundamental idea is 
easily discerned in all his writings, and he obviously took the biblical 
cloak much less in earnest than many a disciple of Hegel does in 
modern times. Yet three hundred years separate Münzer from 
modern philosophy. 
Münzer's political doctrine was very closely aligned to these 
revolutionary religious conceptions, and overstepped the directly 
prevailing social and political conditions in much the same way as his 
theology overstepped the conceptions current in his time. As 
Münzer's religious philosophy approached atheism, so his political 
programme approached communism, and even on the eve of the 
February Revolution more than one present-day communist sect 
lacked as comprehensive a theoretical arsenal as was "Münzer's" in 
the sixteenth century. This programme, which was less a compilation 
of the demands of the plebeians of that day than a brilliant 
anticipation of the conditions for the emancipation of the proletarian 
element that had scarcely begun to develop among the ple­
beians—this programme demanded the immediate establishment 
of the kingdom of God on Earth, of the prophesied millennium, by 
restoring the church to its original status and abolishing all the 
institutions that conflicted with the purportedly early Christian but 
in fact very novel church. By the kingdom of God Münzer meant a 
society with no class differences, no private property and no state 
authority independent of, and foreign to, the members of society. All 
the existing authorities, insofar as they refused to submit and join 
the revolution, were to be overthrown, all work and all property 
shared in common, and complete equality introduced. A union was 
to be established to realise all this, and not only throughout 
Germany, but throughout Christendom. Princes and lords would be 
invited to join, but should they refuse the union was to take up arms 
and overthrow or kill them at the first opportunity. 

=====第446页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 423 
Münzer set to work at once to organise the union. His sermons 
became still more militant and revolutionary. He thundered forth 
against the princes, the nobility and the patricians with a passion that 
equalled the fervour of his attacks upon the clergy. He depicted the 
prevailing oppression in burning colours and countered it with his 
dream-vision of the millennium of social republican equality. Also, 
he published one revolutionary pamphlet after another, and sent 
emissaries in all directions, while personally organising the union in 
Allstedt and its vicinity. 
The first fruit of this propaganda was the destruction of St. Mary's 
Chapel in Mellerbach near Allstedt, according to the command of 
the Bible (Deut. 7 [5], 6): "Ye shall destroy their altars, and break 
down their images ... and burn their graven images with fire for thou 
art an holy people." The princes of Saxony came in person to 
Allstedt to quell the unrest and bid Münzer come to the castle. There 
he delivered a sermon the like of which they had not heard from 
Luther, whom Münzer described as "that easy-living flesh of 
Wittenberg". 3 Münzer maintained that ungodly rulers, especially 
priests and monks who treated the Gospel as heresy, should be killed, 
and referred to the New Testament for confirmation. The ungodly 
had no right to live save by the mercy of the elect. Should the princes 
not exterminate the ungodly, God would take their sword from 
them, because the entire community had the power of the  sword.  The 
princes and lords are the prime movers of usury, thievery and 
robbery; they take all creatures into their private possession—the 
fish in the water, the birds in the air, and the plants in the soil. And 
then they preach to the poor the commandment, "Thou shalt not 
steal," while they themselves take everything they find, and rob and 
oppress the peasant and the artisan. If, however, one of the latter 
commits the slightest transgression, he has to hang, and Dr. Lügner 
says to all this: Amen. 
"The masters themselves are to blame that the poor man becomes their enemy. If 
they do not remove the causes of the upheaval, how can things go well in the long run? 
Oh, dear sirs, how the Lord will smite these old pots with an iron rod! But for saying 
so, I am regarded a rebel. So be it!" (Cf. Zimmermann's Bauernkrieg, Th. 2, S. 75.) 
a This phrase is part of the tide of Th. Miinzer's pamphlet directed against Luther, 
Hochverursachte Schutzrede vnd antwwort / wider das Gaistlosse Sanfft lebende fleysch zu 
Wittenberg.... Thomas Müntzer Alstedter... Anno MDXXIIII. (In this pamphlet 
Münzer refers to Luther as Dr. Lügner, the German for Dr. Liar.)—Ed. 
b This quotation from Münzer's speeches (see the above-quoted Hochverursachte 
Schutzrede... and Die Fürstenpredigt...) is given according to Zimmermann's book.— Ed 

=====第447页=====
424 Frederick Engels 
Münzer had the sermon printed. Duke Johann of Saxony 
punished his Allstedt printer with banishment, and ordered all 
Miinzer's writings to be censored from then on by the ducal 
government in Weimar. But Münzer paid no heed to this order. He 
hastened to publish a highly inciting paper 3 in the imperial city of 
Mühlhausen, wherein he called on the people 
"to widen the hole so that all the world may see and understand who our great 
personages are that have blasphemously turned our Lord into a painted manikin". 
It ended with the following words: 
"All the world must suffer a big jolt. There will be such a game that the ungodly 
will be thrown off their seats, and the downtrodden will rise." 
Thomas Münzer, "the man with the hammer", wrote the 
following motto on the title page: 
"Beware, I have put my words into thy mouth b that thou mayest uproot, destroy, 
scatter and overthrow, and that thou mayest build and plant. A wall of iron against the 
kings,  princes, priests, and against the people hath been erected. Let them fight, for 
victory will wondrously lead to the perdition of the strong and godless tyrants." 
Münzer's breach with Luther and his party had taken place long 
before. Luther had had to accept some of the church reforms which 
Münzer had introduced without consulting him. He watched 
Münzer's activities with a moderate reformer's nettled mistrust of a 
more energetic, ambitious party. Already in the spring of 1524, 
in a letter to Melanchthon, that model of a zealous stick-in-the-mud 
philistine, Münzer wrote that he and Luther, did not understand the 
movement at all. He said they sought to choke it by the letter of the 
Bible, and that their doctrine was worm-eaten. 
"Dear brethren," he wrote, "cease your waiting and hesitation. It is time, for 
summer is at the door. Keep not friendship with the ungodly who hinder the Word 
from working its full force. Flatter not your princes, or you will perish with them. Ye 
tender scholars, be not wroth, for I can do nothing else."0 
Luther had more than once challenged Münzer to an open debate. 
The latter, however, always ready to take up the battle before the 
people, had not the least desire to let himself in for a theological 
Aussgetrückte emplössung des falschen Glaubens der ungetrewen weit... Jere. am. 23. 
Cap.  Thomas Müntzer mit dem Hammer. Mülhausen, MDXXIIII. (W. Zimmermann, 
op. cit., Th. 2, S. 77-78.)—Ed. 
In the 1850 edition there follows a phrase missing in the 1870 and 1875 editions: 
"I have put you over the people and over the empires."—Ed. 
From Münzer's letter to Melanchthon of March 27, 1522. (Zimmermann 
erroneously dated it March 29, 1524.)—Ed. 

=====第448页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 425 
squabble before the partisan public of Wittenberg University. He did 
not wish "to bring the testimony of the Spirit exclusively before the 
high school of learning".3  If Luther were sincere, he should use his 
influence to stop the chicaneries against his, Münzer's, printer, and 
lift the censorship so that their controversy might be freely fought in 
the press. 
But now, when Münzer's above-mentioned revolutionary 
brochure appeared, Luther denounced him publicly. In his pub­
lished Brieff an die Fürsten zu Sachsen von dem auffrurischen geyst he 
declared Münzer to be an instrument of Satan and called upon the 
princes to intervene and drive the instigators of the turmoil out of 
the country, since they did not confine themselves to preaching their 
evil doctrine but also incited to insurrection, to violent action against 
the authorities. 
On August 1, Münzer was compelled to appear before the princes 
in the castle of Weimar on the charge of incitement to mutiny. 
Highly compromising facts had been obtained against him; they 
were on the scent of his secret union; his hand was detected in the 
societies of the miners and the peasants. He was threatened with 
banishment. No sooner had he returned to Allstedt than he learned 
that Duke George of Saxony demanded his extradition .Union letters 
in his handwriting had been-intercepted, wherein he called George's 
subjects to armed resistance against the enemies of «.he Gospel. Had 
he not left the town, the Council would have extradited him. 
In the meantime, the growing unrest among the peasants and 
plebeians had made it incomparably easier for Münzer to carry on 
his propaganda. In the Anabaptists he found invaluable agents for 
this purpose. This sect, which had no definite and positive dogmas, 
held together only by its common opposition to all ruling classes and 
by the common symbol of the second baptism, ascetic in its mode 
of living, untiring, fanatical and intrepid in carrying on propagan­
da, had grouped itself more and more closely around Münzer. Made 
homeless by persecutions, its members wandered all over Germany 
and carried word everywhere of the new teaching, in which Münzer 
had made their own demands and wishes clear to them. Countless 
Anabaptists were put on the rack, burned at the stake or otherwise 
executed, but the courage and endurance of these emissaries was 
unshakable, and the success of their activities amid the people's 
rapidly growing unrest was enormous. Thus, after his flight from 
Thuringia, Münzer found the ground prepared wherever he went. 
Th. Müntzer, Aussgetrückte emplössung  des falschen Glaubens der ungetrewen weit..., 
quoted according to W.Zimmermann, op. cit., Th. 2, S. 77.— Ed. 

=====第449页=====
426 Frederick Engels 
Near Nuremberg, where Münzer went first, 314 a peasant revolt had 
been nipped in the bud hardly a month before. Münzer conducted 
his propaganda surreptitiously; soon people appeared who de­
fended his most audacious theological ideas on the non-obligatory 
nature of the Bible and the meaninglessness of sacraments, who 
declared Christ a mere human and the power of the lay authorities 
ungodly. "There is Satan stalking, the Spirit of Allstedt!" Luther 
exclaimed. 3 In Nuremberg Münzer printed his reply to Luther. b He 
accused him of flattering the princes and supporting the reactionary 
party by his insipid moderation. But the people would free 
themselves all the same, he wrote, and it would go with Dr. Luther as 
with a captive fox.—The Council ordered the paper confiscated, and 
Münzer had to leave Nuremberg. 
Now he went across Swabia to Alsace, then to Switzerland, and 
then back to the Upper Black Forest, where an insurrection had 
broken out several months before, largely precipitated by his 
Anabaptist emissaries. This propaganda tour of Münzer's had 
doubtless substantially contributed to the establishment of the 
people's party, to the clear definition of its demands and to the final 
general outbreak of the insurrection in April 1525. It was through 
this tour that the dual effect of Münzer's activities became 
particularly apparent—on the one hand, on the people, whom he 
addressed in the only language they could then comprehend, that of 
religious prophecy; and, on the other hand, on the initiated to whom 
he could disclose his ultimate aims. Even before his journey he had 
assembled in Thuringia a circle of resolute men from among the 
people and the lesser clergy, whom he had put at the head of the 
secret society. Now he became the soul of the entire revolutionary 
movement in Southwestern Germany, organised ties from Saxony 
and Thuringia through Franconia and Swabia up to Alsace and the 
Swiss border, and counted such South German agitators as Hub-
maier of Waldshut, Konrad Grebel of Zurich, Franz Rabmann of 
Griessen, Schappeler of Memmingen, Jakob Wehe of Leipheim, and 
Dr. Mantel in Stuttgart, who were mostly revolutionary priests, 
among his disciples and the heads of the union. He himself stayed 
mostly in Griessen on the Schaffhausen border, journeying from 
there across the Hegau, Klettgau, etc. The bloody reprisals by the 
alarmed princes and lords everywhere against this new plebeian 
From Luther's letter to Johannes Briessmann, dated February 4, 1525. Quoted 
according to Zimmermann, op. cit., Th. 2, S. 81.—  Ed. 
Th. Müntzer, Hochverursachte Schutzrede vnd antwwort/wider das Gaistlosse Sanfft 
lebende fleysch zu Wittenberg... — Ed. 

=====第450页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 427 
heresy contributed not a litde to fanning the spirit of rebellion and 
consolidating the ranks of the union. In this way Münzer conducted 
his agitation for about five months in Upper Germany and returned 
to Thuringia when the culmination of the conspiracy was near at 
hand, because he wished to lead the movement  himself.  There we 
shall find him later. 
We shall see how truly the character and behaviour of the two 
party leaders reflected the attitude of their respective parties, how 
Luther's indecision and fear of the movement, which was assuming 
serious proportions, and his cowardly servility to the princes fully 
corresponded to the hesitant and ambiguous policy of the burghers, 
and how Münzer's revolutionary energy and resolution was repro­
duced among the most advanced section of the plebeians and 
peasants. The only difference was that while Luther confined 
himself to expressing the ideas and wishes of the majority of his class 
and thereby won very cheap popularity among it, Münzer, on the 
contrary, went far beyond the immediate ideas and demands of the 
plebeians and peasants, and organised a party of the élite of the then 
existing revolutionary elements, which, inasmuch as it shared his 
ideas and energy, always remained only a small minority of the 
insurgent masses. 

=====第451页=====
428 
m 
The first signs of a budding revolutionary spirit appeared among 
the German peasants about fifty years after the suppression of the 
Hussite movement.* 
In 1476 the first peasant conspiracy occurred in the bishopric of 
Würzburg, a land impoverished by the Hussite wars, "by bad 
government, manifold taxes, payments, feuds, enmity, war, fire, 
murder, prison and the like", 3 and continually and shamelessly 
plundered by bishops, priests and the nobility. A young shepherd 
and musician, Hans Böheim of Niklashausen, also called the Drum-
Beater and Hans the Piper, suddenly appeared as a prophet in the 
Tauber valley. He declared that he had had a vision of the Virgin 
Mary, that she had commanded him to burn his drum, to stop 
serving the dance and sinful sensuality, and to exhort the people to 
penance. Everyone should purge himself of sin and the vain lusts of 
the world, forsake all ornaments and finery, and make a pilgrimage 
to the Madonna of Niklashausen to obtain forgiveness. 
Already here, with the first precursor of the movement, we find 
the asceticism typical of all medieval uprisings tinged with religion 
and, in modern times, of the early stages of every proletarian 
movement. This ascetic austerity of morals, this demand to forsake 
all joys of life and all entertainments, opposes the ruling classes with 
* In our chronology we are following the data given by Zimmermann, upon which 
we are obliged to rely in the absence of adequate sources abroad and which are quite 
satisfactory for the purposes of the present work.— Note by Engels to the 1850 edition. 
(In the 1870 and 1875 editions this note was omitted since Engels pointed out in the 
Preface that he was using Zimmermann's data.— Ed.) 
Engels quotes an extract from a 15th-century manuscript preserved in the 
Würzburg archive. See W. Zimmermann, Allgemeine Geschichte des grossen Bauern­
krieges, Th. 1, S. 118.— Ed. 

=====第452页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 429 
the principle of Spartan equality, on the one hand, and is, on the 
other, a necessary stage of transition without which the lowest 
stratum of society can never set itself in motion. In order to develop 
its revolutionary energy, to become conscious of its own hostile 
attitude towards all other elements of society, to concentrate itself as 
a class, it must begin by stripping itself of everything that could 
reconcile it with the existing social system; it must renounce the few 
pleasures that make its wretched existence in the least tolerable for 
the moment, and of which even the severest oppression could not 
deprive it. This plebeian and proletarian asceticism differs both in its 
wild fanatical form and in its essence from the bourgeois asceticism 
of the Lutheran burgher morality and of the English Puritans (as 
distinct from the Independents315 and the more radical sects), whose 
entire secret amounts to  bourgeois  thrift. It stands to reason, however, 
that this plebeian-proletarian asceticism gradually sheds its revolu­
tionary nature when the development of modern productive forces 
infinitely multiplies the luxuries, thus rendering Spartan equality 
superfluous, and when the position of the proletariat in society, and 
thereby the proletariat  itself,  become more revolutionary. This 
asceticism disappears gradually from among the masses, and in the 
sects,  which relied upon it, it degenerates either directly into 
bourgeois parsimony or into a high-sounding virtuousness which, in 
practice, degenerates to a philistine or guild-artisan meanness. 
Besides, renunciation of pleasures need hardly be preached to the 
proletariat for the simple reason that it has almost nothing more to 
renounce. 
Hans the Piper's call to penitence found a ready response; all the 
prophets of rebellion began with this call, and, indeed, only a violent 
exertion, a sudden renunciation of all this habitual mode of existence 
could set this disunited and widely scattered peasant species, raised 
in blind submission, into motion. The pilgrimages to Niklashausen 
began and rapidly increased, and the more massive the stream of 
pilgrims, the more openly the young rebel spoke out his plans. The 
Madonna of Niklashausen had told him, he preached, that 
henceforth there should be neither king nor prince, neither papal 
nor any other ecclesiastic or lay authority. Each should be a brother 
to the other and win his bread by the toil of his own hands, and none 
should have more than his neighbour. All tributes, rents, services, 
tolls,  taxes and other payments and duties should be for ever 
abolished, and forest, water and pasture should everywhere be free. 
The people received this new gospel with joy. The fame of the 
prophet, "the message of our Lady", spread far and wide; pilgrim 
throngs flocked to him from Odenwald, from the Main, Kocher and 

=====第453页=====
430 Frederick Engels 
Jagst, even from Bavaria and Swabia, and from the Rhine. Miracles 
said to have been performed by the Piper were recounted; people 
fell to their knees before him, praying to him as to a saint, and then 
fought for tufts from his cap for relics or amulets. In vain did the 
priests speak against him, denouncing his visions as the devil's 
delusions and his miracles as diabolic swindles. The mass of the 
believers increased precipitously, a revolutionary sect began to take 
shape, the Sunday sermons of the rebel shepherd drew gatherings of 
40,000 and more to Niklashausen. 
Hans the Piper preached to the masses for a number of months, 
but he did not intend to confine himself to preaching. He had secret 
connections with the pastor of Niklashausen and with two knights, 
Kunz von Thunfeld and his son, who held to the new teaching and 
were to become the military leaders of the planned insurrection. 
Finally, on the Sunday before the day of St. Kilian, when his power 
appeared to be great enough, the shepherd gave the signal. 
"And now go home," he closed his sermon, "and weigh in your mind what our 
holiest Lady has announced to you, and on the coming Saturday leave your wives and 
children and old men at home, and you, men, come back to Niklashausen on the day 
of St. Margaret, which is next Saturday, and bring your brothers and friends, as many 
as they may be. Do not come with pilgrim's staves, however, but with armour and 
arms,  a candle in one hand, and a sword, pike or halberd in the other, and the Holy 
Virgin will then tell you what she wishes you to do."a 
But before the peasants arrived in their numbers, the bishop'sb 
horsemen seized the rebel prophet at night and brought him to the 
castle of Würzburg. On the appointed day almost 34,000 armed 
peasants appeared, but the news of the Piper's detention crushed 
them. Most of them went home, while the initiated kept about 16,000 
together, with whom they marched to the castle under the leadership 
of Kunz von Thunfeld and his son Michael. The bishop persuaded 
them with promises to turn back, but no sooner had they begun to 
disperse than they were attacked by the bishop's horsemen and many 
of them taken captive. Two were decapitated, and Hans the Piper 
was burned at the stake. Kunz von Thunfeld escaped and was 
allowed to return only after ceding all his estates to the bishopric. 
The pilgrimages to Niklashausen continued for some time, but were 
finally also suppressed. 
After this initial attempt, Germany remained quiet for some time. 
Only towards the close of the century were there any new peasant 
revolts and conspiracies. 
From a free rendering of the sermon as given by W. Zimmermann (op. cit., 
Th. l, S. 121-22).— Ed. 
b Rudolf II von Scherenberg. — Ed. 

=====第454页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 431 
We shall pass over the Dutch peasant revolt of 1491 and 1492, 
which was suppressed by Duke Albrecht of Saxony in the battle of 
Heemskerk, the simultaneous peasant revolt in the Abbey of 
Kempten in Upper Swabia, and the Frisian revolt under Sjoerd 
Aylva, about 1497, a which was also suppressed by Albrecht of 
Saxony. These revolts were partly too far from the scene of the 
Peasant War proper, and partly uprisings of hitherto free peasants 
against the attempt to force feudalism upon them. We pass on to the 
two great conspiracies which laid the ground for the Peasant War: 
the Bundschuh and the Poor Konrad. 
The same famine that had precipitated the peasant revolt in the 
Netherlands, brought about a secret alliance of peasants and 
plebeians in Alsace in 1493; people of the purely burgher oppo­
sition took part in it, and it even enjoyed some sympathy among 
the lesser nobility. The seat of the alliance was in the region of 
Schlettstadt, Sulz, Dambach, Rosheim, Scherweiler, etc., etc. The 
conspirators demanded plunder and extermination of Jews, whose 
usury then, as now, fleeced the peasants of Alsace, proclamation of a 
jubilee year, whereby all debts would expire, repeal of duties, tolls 
and other imposts, abolition of the ecclesiastical and Rottweil 
(imperial) court, the right of the estates to ratify taxes, reduction of 
the priests' prebend to fifty or sixty guilders, abolition of the 
auricular confession, and self-elected courts for every community. 
When they were strong enough the conspirators planned to over­
power the stronghold of Schlettstadt, to confiscate the treasuries 
of the monasteries and of the town, and from there to arouse the 
whole of Alsace. The banner of the Union, which was to be unfurled 
at the start of the uprising, depicted a peasant's clog with a long 
leather thong, the so-called Bundschuh, which served peasant 
conspiracies as an emblem and name in the following twenty years. 
The conspirators were wont to hold their meetings at night on the 
lonesome Hunger Hill. Initiation into the Bundschuh involved the 
most mysterious of ceremonies and the severest threats of punish­
ment for betrayal. But the affair got abroad about Easter Week of 
1493,  the time appointed for the attack on Schlettstadt. The 
authorities stepped in immediately. Many of the conspirators were 
arrested and tortured, some were quartered or decapitated, and 
others had their hands or fingers cut off and were driven out of the 
country. A great many fled to Switzerland. 
a The Frisian peasant revolt occurred in 1500. Engels gives the date 1497 as in 
Zimmermann. — Ed. 

=====第455页=====
432 Frederick Engels 
The Bundschuh, however, was far from crushed by this first blow. 
On the contrary, it continued in secret and the numerous fugitives 
scattered all over Switzerland and South Germany became as 
many emissaries. Finding the same oppression and, consequently, 
the same inclination to revolt everywhere they went, they propagated 
the Bundschuh in the whole of the present-day Baden. The tenacity 
and stamina with which the peasants of Upper Germany conspired 
for about thirty years after 1493, with which they surmounted all the 
obstacles arising from their scattered way of life on the road to a 
larger, more centralised organisation, and with which they renewed 
their conspiracies over and over after countless dispersions, defeats, 
and executions of their leaders, until an opportunity came at last for 
a mass uprising—this tenacity is truly admirable. 
In 1502 there were signs of a secret movement among the peasants 
of the bishopric of Speyer, which at that time also included the 
locality of Bruchsal. The Bundschuh had reorganised itself there 
with really considerable success. About 7,000 men belonged to the 
society, whose centre was in Untergrombach, between Bruchsal and 
Weingarten, and whose ramifications reached down the Rhine to the 
Main, and up to the Margraviate of Baden. Its articles said: neither 
rent nor tithe, neither tax nor toll are to be paid any longer to the 
princes, the nobility, or the clergy; serfdom is to be abolished; the 
monasteries and other church estates are to be confiscated and divided 
among the  people,  and no other ruler is to be recognised save the Emperor. 
Here we find for the first time expressed by peasants the two 
demands—secularising church estates in favour of the people, and a 
united and indivisible German monarchy—which will henceforth be 
advocated regularly by the more advanced peasants and plebeians, 
until Thomas Münzer changes distribution of church estates to 
confiscation and conversion into community of  property,  and a united 
German Empire to a united and indivisible republic. 
The revived Bundschuh, like the old, had its own secret meeting 
place, its oath of silence, its initiation ceremonies, and its union 
banner with the legend, "Nothing but God's Justice!" Its plan of 
action was similar to that of the Alsatian union. Bruchsal, most of 
whose inhabitants belonged to the Bundschuh, was to be captured 
and a Bundschuh army organised there and sent into the 
surrounding principalities as an itinerant meeting point. 
The plan was betrayed by a clergyman who had learned of it from 
one of the conspirators in the confessional. The authorities instantly 
took countermeasures. How widespread the Bundschuh had be­
come is evident from the terror that seized the various imperial 
estates in Alsace and the Swabian League. 316 Troops were concen-

=====第456页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 433 
trated, and mass arrests were made. Emperor Maximilian, "last of 
the knights", issued bloodthirsty punitive decrees against the 
unheard-of peasant undertaking. Throngs of peasants assembled 
here and there and offered armed resistance, but the isolated 
peasant troops could not hold out for long. Some of the conspirators 
were executed, others escaped, but secrecy was so well preserved 
that, in their own localities and in the possessions of the neighbour­
ing lords, the majority, even the leaders, remained unharmed. 
After this new defeat there followed a long period of apparent 
calm in the class struggle. But work went on underground. In the 
first years of the sixteenth century Poor Konrad appeared in Swabia, 
evidently with the support of the scattered members of the 
Bundschuh. In the Black Forest the Bundschuh continued in small 
isolated groups until, ten years later, an energetic peasant leader 
succeeded in gathering the various threads into a major conspiracy. 
Both conspiracies became public one after the other in the restless 
years of 1513-15, in which the Swiss, Hungarian and Slovenian 
peasants rose simultaneously in a series of major insurrections. 
The man who revived the Upper Rhine Bundschuh was Joss Fritz 
of Untergrombach, a fugitive of the conspiracy of 1502, a former 
soldier, and in all respects an outstanding figure. After his flight he 
stayed in various localities between Lake Constance and the Black 
Forest, and finally settled in Lehen near Freiburg in Breisgau, where 
he even became a forester. Most interesting facts are contained in the 
court records about the manner in which he reorganised the 
Bundschuh from that vantage point and how ingeniously he 
recruited people of different kinds. The diplomatic talent and 
tireless perseverance of this model conspirator helped him enrol 
a great number of people of various classes into the Bundschuh 
—knights, priests, burghers, plebeians and peasants, and it appears 
almost certain that he even organised several more or less sharply 
divided grades of the conspiracy. All serviceable elements were 
utilised with the greatest circumspection and skill. Apart from the 
more initiated emissaries who traversed the country in various 
disguises, vagrants and beggars were employed for subordinate 
missions. Joss stood in direct contact with the beggar kings, and 
through them held the numerous vagabond population in the palm 
of his hand. The beggar kings played a considerable role in his 
conspiracy. They were very bizarre figures: one roamed the country 
with a girl whose seemingly wounded feet were his pretext for 
begging; he had more than eight insignia on his hat—the Fourteen 
Deliverers, St. Ottilie, Our Mother in Heaven, etc.—and, besides, 
wore a long red beard and carried a big knotty stick with a dagger 

=====第457页=====
434 Frederick Engels 
and pike. Another, who begged in the name of St. Veiten, had spices 
and wormseeds for sale, and wore a long iron-coloured coat, a red 
barret with the insignia of the Infant of Trient attached to it, a sword 
at his side, and many knives and a dagger in his girdle. Others had 
bleeding wounds, which they deliberately did not allow to heal, and 
their attire was also picturesque. There were at least ten of them, and 
for the price of two thousand guilders they were simultaneously to 
set aflame Alsace, the Margraviate of Baden, and Breisgau, and to 
put themselves, with at least 2,000 of their kind, under the command 
of Georg Schneider, a former captain of the mercenaries, on the 
day of the Zabern parish fair in Rosen, in order to take possession of 
that town. A courier service from station to station was established by 
members of the Bundschuh, and Joss Fritz and his chief emissary, 
Stoffel of Freiburg, rode continually from place to place to hold 
nocturnal military reviews of the neophytes. The court records offer 
ample evidence of the spread of the Bundschuh in the Upper Rhine 
and Black Forest regions. They contain countless names and 
descriptions of members from the various localities of that re­
gion—most of them journeymen, then peasants and innkeepers, a 
few nobles, priests (like the one from Lehen), and breaçUess 
mercenaries. This composition of the Bundschuh is evidence of the 
more developed character of the society under Joss Fritz. The urban 
plebeian element was asserting itself more and more. The ramifica­
tions of the conspiracy spread throughout Alsace, the present-day 
Baden, up to Württemberg and the Main. From time to time large 
gatherings were held on secluded mountains such as the Kniebis, 
etc., to discuss the affairs of the Union. The meetings of the chiefs, in 
which local members and delegates of remoter localities often 
participated, took place on the Hartmatte near Lehen, and it was 
there that the fourteen articles of the Bundschuh were adopted. The 
articles agreed upon were: no master besides the Emperor and 
(according to some) the Pope; abolition of the Rottweil imperial 
court and restriction of the church court to religious affairs; 
abolition of interest after it had been paid for so long that it equalled 
the capital; top interest rate of five per cent; freedom of hunting, 
fishing, pasture, and woodcutting; restriction of priests each to one 
prebend; confiscation of church estates and monastery treasures for 
the Bundschuh war chest; abolition of all inequitable taxes and tolls; 
eternal peace in all Christendom; determined action against all 
opponents of the Bundschuh; Bundschuh taxes; seizure of a strong 
town, such as Freiburg, to serve as Bundschuh headquarters; 
negotiations with the Emperor as soon as the Bundschuh troops are 
gathered, and with Switzerland in case the Emperor declines. It was 

=====第458页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 435 
evident that, on the one hand, the demands of the peasants and 
plebeians were becoming more definite and firm, and that, on the 
other, concessions had had equally to be made to the moderate and 
timid. 
The blow was to be struck about autumn 1513. Only a Bundschuh 
banner was lacking, and Joss Fritz went to Heilbronn to have it paint­
ed. Besides all sorts of emblems and pictures, it bore the peas­
ant's clog emblem and the legend, "God Help Thy Divine Justice". 
While he was away a premature attempt was made to overwhelm 
Freiburg, which was discovered. Some indiscretions in the conduct of 
propaganda put the Council of Freiburg and the Margrave of 
Baden 3 on the right scent, and the betrayal by two conspirators 
completed the series of disclosures. The Margrave, the Council of 
Freiburg, and the imperial government at Ensisheim317  instantly sent 
spies and soldiers; some Bundschuh members were arrested, 
tortured and executed. But again the majority escaped, Joss Fritz 
among them. This time the Swiss Government sternly persecuted the 
fugitives, and even executed many of them. However, it had just as 
little success as its neighbours in preventing the greater part of the 
fugitives from remaining continually in the vicinity of their former 
homes and even returning to them after some time. The Alsace 
Government in Ensisheim behaved more brutally than the others. It 
ordered very many to be decapitated, broken on the wheel, and 
quartered. Joss Fritz himself kept mainly to the Swiss bank of the 
Rhine, but often crossed to the Black Forest, without ever being 
apprehended. 
Why this time the Swiss made common cause with the neighbour­
ing governments against the Bundschuh is made apparent by the 
peasant revolt that broke out the following year, 1514, in Berne, 
Solothurn and Lucerne, b resulting in a purge of the aristocratic 
governments and the patriciate generally. The peasants also won 
certain privileges for themselves. The success of the local Swiss 
revolts was due to the simple fact that there was even less 
centralisation in Switzerland than in Germany. In 1525 the peasants 
managed to dispose of their local lords everywhere, but succumbed 
to the organised armies of the princes, and it was these latter that 
Switzerland did not have. 
Simultaneously with the Bundschuh in Baden, and apparently in 
direct association with it, a second conspiracy was formed in 
Württemberg. Documents indicate that it had existed since 1503, but 
a Christoph I.— Ed. 
0 Its first outbreaks began in  1513.—  Ed. 

=====第459页=====
436 Frederick Engels 
since the name Bundschuh became too dangerous after the setback 
of the Untergrombach conspirators, it adopted the name Poor 
Konrad. Its main seat was the valley of the Rems at the foot of the 
mountain of Hohenstaufen. Its existence had been no secret for a 
long time, at least to the people. The merciless oppression of Duke 
Ulrich's government coupled with several famine years, which 
contributed greatly to the outbreak of the movements of 1513 and 
1514,  had increased the number of conspirators. The newly imposed 
taxes on wine, meat and bread, and a capital tax of one pfennig 
yearly on every guilder, provoked the uprising. The town of 
Schorndorf, where the heads of the complot met in the house of a 
cutler named Kaspar Pregizer, was to be seized first. In the spring of 
1514,  the rebellion broke out. Three thousand—and according to 
some, five thousand—peasants gathered before the town, but were 
persuaded by the amicable promises of the Duke's officers to 
withdraw. Duke Ulrich, who had agreed to abolish the new taxes, 
arrived posthaste with eighty horsemen to find everything quiet in 
consequence of the promise. He promised to convene a Diet to 
examine all complaints. But the chiefs of the society knew very well 
that Ulrich sought only to keep the people quiet until he recruited 
and concentrated enough troops to be able to break his word and 
collect the taxes by force. From Kaspar Pregizer's house, "Poor 
Konrad's chancery", they issued a call for a society congress, and sent 
emissaries in all directions. The success of the first uprising in the 
Rems valley had everywhere stimulated the movement among the 
people. The appeals and the emissaries found a favourable response 
everywhere, and the congress held in Untertürkheim on May 28 was 
attended by a large number of representatives from all parts of 
Württemberg. It was decided to proceed at once with propaganda 
and to strike in the Rems valley at the first opportunity, in order to 
spread the uprising from that point in every direction. While 
Bantelhans of Dettingen, a former soldier, and Singerhans of 
Würtingen, an esteemed peasant, were bringing the Swabian Jura 
into the society, the uprising broke out on every side. Though 
Singerhans was attacked and seized, the towns of Backnang, 
Winnenden, and Markgröningen fell into the hands of the peasants 
who had joined forces with the plebeians, and the entire area from 
Weinsberg to Blaubeuren, and from there to the border of Baden, 
was in open revolt. Ulrich was compelled to yield. However, while 
calling the Diet for June 25, he wrote to the surrounding princes and 
free towns asking for aid against the uprising, which, he said, 
threatened all princes, authorities and nobles in the Empire, and 
which "bore an uncommon resemblance to the Bundschuh". 

=====第460页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 437 
In the meantime, the Diet, i. e. the deputies of the towns, and 
many delegates of the peasants who also demanded seats in the Diet, 
came together as early as June 18 in Stuttgart. The prelates had not 
yet arrived. The knights had not even been invited. The city 
opposition of Stuttgart, as well as two threatening peasant throngs at 
Leonberg and in the Rems valley, supported the demands of the 
peasants. Their delegates were admitted, and it was decided to 
depose and punish the three hated councillors of the Duke—Lam-
parter, Thumb and Lorcher—and appoint for the Duke a council of 
four knights, four burghers and four peasants, to grant him a fixed 
civil allowance, and to confiscate the monasteries and endowments in 
favour of the state treasury. 
Duke Ulrich countered these revolutionary decisions with a coup 
d'état. On June 21 he rode with his knights and councillors to 
Tübingen, where he was followed by the prelates, ordered the 
burghers to come there as well, which they did, and there continued 
the Diet without the peasants. The burghers, confronted with 
military terror, betrayed their peasant allies. On July 8 the Tübingen 
agreement came about, saddling the country with almost a million of 
the Duke's debts, laying some restrictions on the Duke which he 
never observed, and disposing of the peasants with a few meagre 
general phrases and a very definite penal law against insurrection 
and association. Naturally, nothing was said any more about peasant 
representation in the Diet. The peasantry cried treason, but the 
Duke, who had acquired new credit after his debts were taken over 
by the estates, soon gathered troops, and his neighbours, particular­
ly the Elector Palatine, 3 also sent him military aid. The Tübingen 
agreement was thus accepted all over the country towards the end of 
July, and a new oath was taken. Only in the Rems valley Poor Konrad 
offered resistance. The Duke, who again rode there in person, barely 
escaped with his life. A peasant camp was set up on the mountain of 
Kappel. But as the affair dragged on, most of the insurgents 
dispersed for lack of food, and the rest also went home after an 
ambiguous agreement with some of the Diet deputies. In the 
meantime, Ulrich, his army strengthened with companies willingly 
placed at his service by the towns, which, having attained their 
demands, turned fanatically against the peasants, attacked the Rems 
valley in spite of the agreement and plundered its towns and villages. 
Sixteen hundred peasants were taken prisoner, sixteen of them 
instantly decapitated, and most of the others made to pay heavy 
fines into Ulrich's treasury. Many remained in prison for a long 
a Ludwig V.— Ed 
16-1124 

=====第461页=====
438 Frederick Engels 
time.  Strict penal laws were enacted against a revival of the society, 
against all gatherings of peasants, and the nobility of Swabia formed 
a special league for the suppression of all attempts at insurrec­
tion.—The top leaders of Poor Konrad had meanwhile succeeded in 
escaping to Switzerland, whence after a few years they returned 
home, most of them singly. 
At the time of the Württemberg movement, signs of new Bund­
schuh activity were observed in Breisgau and in the Margra-
viate of Baden. In June, an insurrection was attempted near Bühl, 
but it was quickly throttled by Margrave Philip, and its leader, Gugel-
Bastian, was seized in Freiburg and beheaded. 
In the spring of the same year, 1514, a general peasant war broke 
out in Hungary. A crusade against the Turks was preached, and 
freedom was promised as usual to the serfs and bondsmen who 
would join it. About 60,000 gathered under the command of Georg 
Dözsa, a Szekler, 318 who had distinguished himself in previous 
Turkish wars and attained nobility. The Hungarian knights and 
magnates, however, looked with disfavour upon the crusade, which 
threatened to deprive them of their property and bondsmen. They 
overtook isolated peasant groups, took back their serfs by forte and 
maltreated them. When this reached the ears of the army of crusad­
ers the fury of the oppressed peasants broke loose. Two of the 
most enthusiastic advocates of the crusade, Laurentius and Barna­
bas, fanned the hatred against the nobility in the army by their 
revolutionary speeches. Dozsa himself was as angered with the 
treacherous nobility as his troops. The army of crusaders became an 
army of revolution and Dôzsa put himself at the head of the new 
movement. 
He camped with his peasants in the Râkos field near Pest. Clashes 
with men of the noblemen's party in the surrounding villages and the 
suburbs of Pest opened the hostilities. It soon came to skirmishes, 
and then to Sicilian Vespers 319 for all the noblemen who fell into the 
hands of the peasants, and to destruction by fire of all the castles in 
the vicinity. The court made its threats in vain. After the first acts of 
popular justice against the nobility had been accomplished under the 
walls of the capital, Dozsa proceeded with further operations. He 
divided his army into five columns. Two were sent to the mountains 
of Upper Hungary to rouse the populace and exterminate the 
nobility.. The third, under Ambros Szâleresi, a citizen of Pest, 
remained on the Râkos to watch the capital, while the fourth and 
fifth were led by Dôzsa and his brother Gregor against Szegedin. 3 
a The Hungarian name is Szeged.— Ed. 

=====第462页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 439 
In the meantime, the nobility gathered in Pest, and summoned to 
its aid Johann Zâpolya, the voivode of Transylvania. Joined by the 
burghers of Budapest, the nobility attacked and annihilated the 
army on the Râkos, after Szâleresi and the burgher elements in the 
peasant force had gone over to the enemy. A host of prisoners was 
executed in the most cruel fashion, and the rest sent home minus 
their noses and ears. 
Dozsa failed at Szegedin and marched on Csanâd, which he 
captured on defeating an army of noblemen under Istvân Batory 
and Bishop Csâky. He took bloody revenge on the prisoners, among 
them the bishop and the royal Chancellor Teleki, for the Râkos 
atrocities. In Csanâd he proclaimed a republic, abolished the 
nobility, declared general equality and sovereignty of the people, 
and then marched against Temesvâr, 3 to which Bâtory had fled. 
But while he besieged this fortress for two months and was 
reinforced by a new army under Anton Hosszu, his two army 
columns in Upper Hungary were defeated by the nobility in several 
battles. Johann Zâpolya with his Transylvanian army advanced 
against him, attacked and dispersed the peasants. Dôzsa was taken 
prisoner and roasted alive on a red-hot throne. His flesh was eaten 
by his own people, this being the condition on which their lives were 
spared. The dispersed peasants, reassembled by Laurentius and 
Hosszû, were again defeated, and those who fell into enemy hands 
were either impaled or hanged. The peasants' corpses hung in 
thousands along the roads or on the edges of gutted villages. About 
60,000, it is said, either fell in battle or were massacred. The nobility 
saw to it that at the next Diet serfdom was again recognised as the law 
of the land. 
The peasant revolt in the "Wendish mark", that is, Carinthia, 
Carniola and Styria, which broke out at about the same time, reposed 
on a Bundschuh-like conspiracy that had taken shape and precipi­
tated a rising in this region—wrung dry by the nobility and imperial 
officials, ravaged by Turkish invasions, and plagued by famines—as 
far back as 1503. Already in 1513, the Slovenian and German 
peasants of this region once more raised the battle standard of the 
Stara Prawa (The Old Rights). If they allowed themselves to be 
placated that year, and if in 1514, when they gathered anew in larger 
masses, they were again persuaded to go home by Emperor 
Maximilian's explicit promise to restore the Old Rights, the war of 
revenge of the perpetually deceived people broke out with 
redoubled vigour in the spring of 1515. Just as in Hungary, castles 
*' The Romanian name is Timigoara.— Ed. 

=====第463页=====
440 Frederick Engels 
and monasteries were destroyed everywhere, and the captured 
nobles were tried by peasant juries and decapitated. In Styria 
and Carinthia the Emperor's captain, Dietrichstein, soon suc­
ceeded in crushing the revolt. In Carniola it was only suppressed by a 
sudden onslaught on Rain (autumn of 1516) and the subsequent 
countless Austrian atrocities, which duplicated the infamies of the 
Hungarian nobility. 
It is clear why, after this series of decisive defeats and the mass 
atrocities of the nobility, the German peasants long remained quiet. 
Yet conspiracies and local uprisings did not cease altogether. Already 
in 1516 most of the fugitives of the Bundschuh and the Poor Konrad 
returned to Swabia and the Upper Rhine, and in 1517 the 
Bundschuh was again in full action in the Black Forest. Joss Fritz 
himself,  still hiding the old Bundschuh banner of 1513 on his chest, 
again travelled the length and breadth of the Black Forest and 
developed energetic activity. The conspiracy was revived. Just as 
four years before, gatherings were held on the Kniebis. However, 
the secret was discovered, the authorities learned of the matter, and 
took action. Many conspirators were captured and executed. The 
most active and intelligent were compelled to flee, among them Joss 
Fritz, who, though he again evaded capture, seems to have died soon 
thereafter in Switzerland, for he is not heard of again. 

=====第464页=====
441 
IV 
At the time when the fourth Bundschuh conspiracy was sup­
pressed in the Black Forest, Luther in Wittenberg gave the signal 
for the movement that was to draw all the estates into the vortex 
and shake the whole Empire. The theses of the Augustinian from 
Thuringia 320 had the effect of a match held to a powder keg. The 
multifold and conflicting aspirations of the knights and burghers, 
peasants and plebeians, princes craving for sovereignty, and the 
lesser clergy, the clandestine mystic sects and the scholarly, satirical 
and burlesque321 literary opposition, found in Luther's theses a 
momentarily general and common expression, and fell in with them 
with astounding rapidity. Formed overnight, this alliance of all the 
dissident elements, however brief its duration, suddenly revealed the 
enormous power of the movement, and drove it forward very 
rapidly. 
However, precisely this rapid growth of the movement was also 
very quickly bound to develop the seeds of discord that lay concealed 
in it. At least, it was bound to tear asunder the constituent parts of 
that agitated mass which, by their very place in life, were directly 
opposed to each other, and to return them to their normal, hostile 
state.  This polarisation of the motley opposition at two centres of 
attraction was observed in the very first years of the Reformation. 
The nobility and the burghers grouped themselves unconditionally 
around Luther. Peasants and plebeians, as yet failing to see in Luther 
a direct enemy, formed as before a separate revolutionary party of 
the opposition. Yet the movement became much more general, more 
far-reaching, than it had been before Luther, which made sharp 
contradictions and an open conflict between the two parties 
inevitable. This direct antithesis soon became apparent. While 

=====第465页=====
442 Frederick Engels 
Luther and Münzer attacked each other in the press and from the 
pulpit, the armies of princes, knights and towns that for the most 
part consisted of Lutherans or elements at least gravitating towards 
Lutherism, attacked the throngs of peasants and plebeians. 
How strongly the interests and requirements of the various 
elements behind the Reformation diverged is seen from the attempt 
of the nobility to compel the princes and the clergy to meet their 
demands even before the Peasant War. 
We have already examined the situation of the German nobility 
early in the sixteenth century. It was on the point of losing its 
independence to the ever more powerful lay and clerical princes. It 
saw at the same time that the decline of imperial power, the Empire 
breaking up into a number of sovereign principalities, was keeping 
pace with its own decline. It thought that its own collapse meant the 
collapse of the Germans as a nation. Furthermore, the nobility, and 
particularly that section of it which owed allegiance to the Empire, 
was the estate that by virtue of its military profession and its attitude 
towards the princes, directly represented the Empire and imperial 
rule.  It was the most national of the estates, and the mightier the 
imperial power, the weaker and less numerous the princes and the 
stronger the unity of Germany, the more powerful became the 
nobility. This was the reason for the general discontent of the 
knighthood with Germany's pitiful political situation, with the 
weakness of the Empire in foreign affairs which increased as the 
imperial family added to the Empire one inherited province after 
another, with the intrigues of foreign powers inside Germany, and 
with the plots of German princes and foreign countries against 
imperial rule. The demands of the nobility, therefore, had fo be 
above all concentrated on the demand for an imperial reform whose 
victims were to be the princes and the higher clergy. Ulrich von 
Hütten, the theorist of the German nobility, took it upon himself to 
formulate the demand for reforms together with Franz von Sickingen, 
the nobility's military and diplomatic representative. 
The imperial reform demanded on behalf of the nobility was 
conceived by Hütten in very clear and radical terms. Hütten 
demanded nothing short of eliminating all princes, secularising all 
church principalities and estates, and establishing a noblemen's 
democracy  headed by a monarch, much like the late Polish republic 
in its best days. Hütten and Sickingen hoped to make the Empire 
united, free and powerful again through the rule of the nobility, a 
predominantly military class, elimination of princes, those bearers of 
disunity, annihilation of the power of the priests, and Germany's 
liberation from the dominance of Rome. 

=====第466页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 443 
Founded on serfdom, this noblemen's democracy as fashioned in 
Poland and, in somewhat modified form, in the early centuries of the 
states conquered by the Germanic tribes, is one of the most primitive 
forms of society and quite normally matures into a highly developed 
feudal hierarchy, a considerably higher stage. Such a pure type of 
noblemen's democracy was therefore impossible in the sixteenth 
century.3 It was impossible if only because of the. important and 
powerful German towns. On the other hand, an alliance of the lesser 
nobility and the towns that in England brought about the 
transformation of the monarchy of feudal estates into a bourgeois-
constitutional monarchy, was also out of the question. In Germany 
the old nobility still survived, while in England it had been 
exterminated in the Wars of the Roses322 down to twenty-eight 
families, and replaced by a new nobility of bourgeois extraction and 
with bourgeois tendencies; in Germany serfdom was still rampant 
and the nobility drew its income from feudal sources, while in 
England serfdom had been virtually abolished and the nobles had 
become ordinary bourgeois landowners with a bourgeois source of 
income—the rent. Finally, the centralisation of absolute monarchy 
which we saw in France and which continuously developed since 
Louis XI in the conflict between the nobility and the burghers was 
impossible in Germany if only because the conditions for national 
centralisation were totally absent or existed in a very rudimentary 
form. 
Under the circumstances, the further Hütten went in putting his 
ideal into practice, the more concessions he was compelled to make, 
and the more indefinite became the outlines of his imperial reform. 
The nobility was not strong enough to carry out the reform on its 
own. This was evident from its increasing weakness as compared 
with the princes. Allies were needed, and these could only be found 
in the towns, among the peasants and the influential theorists of the 
Reformation movement. But the towns knew the nobility too well to 
trust it, and rejected every offer of alliance. The peasants rightly 
considered the nobility, which exploited and maltreated them, as 
their bitterest enemy, while the theorists of the Reformation held 
either with the burghers, the princes, or the peasants. What 
advantages, indeed, could the nobility promise the burghers and the 
peasants from an imperial reform that was mainly intended to 
aggrandise the nobility? Under the circumstances Hütten had no 
other choice but to say little or nothing in his propaganda about the 
future relations between the nobility, the towns and the peasants. He 
a The 1850 edition has "in sixteenth-century Germany".— Ed. 

=====第467页=====
444 Frederick Engels 
put all blame on the princes, the priests, and the dependence upon 
Rome, and showed the burghers that it was in their interests to 
remain at least neutral in the coming struggle between the nobility 
and the princes. He said nothing of abolishing serfdom or the 
services imposed upon the peasants by the nobility. 
The attitude of the German nobility towards the peasants was at 
that time exactly the same as that of the Polish nobility towards its 
peasants in the insurrections of 1830-46.a As in the modern Polish 
uprisings,323  the movement in Germany could be sustained only 
through an alliance of all the opposition parties, particularly the 
nobility and the peasants. Yet it was just this alliance that was 
impossible in both cases. The nobility deemed it unnecessary to give 
up its political privileges and its feudal rights vis-à-vis the peasants, 
while the revolutionary peasants would not be drawn by vague and 
general prospects into an alliance with the nobility, the estate which 
oppressed them the most. The nobility could no more win over the 
peasants in Germany in 1522 than it could in Poland in 1830. Only 
total abolition of serfdom, bondage and all the privileges of the 
nobility could have induced the rural population to side with the 
nobility. But like every privileged estate the nobility had not the 
slightest desire voluntarily to give up its privileges, its highly 
exclusive position, and most of its sources of income. 
Thus,  when the struggle finally broke out the nobles had to face 
the princes alone. And it came as no surprise that the princes, who 
had for two centuries been cutting the ground from under the 
nobility, gained another easy victory. 
The courseb  of the struggle is well known. In 1522 Hütten and 
Sickingen, who was already recognised as the political and military 
chief of the Middle-German nobility, organised in Landau a union of 
the Rhenish, Swabian and Franconian nobility for a term of six 
years,  ostensibly for self-defence. Sickingen assembled an army, 
partly on his own, and partly with the neighbouring knights, 
organised recruitment and reinforcements in Franconia, along the 
Lower Rhine, in the Netherlands and Westphalia, and in September 
1522 opened hostilities by declaring a feud against the Elector-
Archbishop of Trier. c However, while he was stationed near Trier, 
his reinforcements were cut off by a swift intervention of the princes. 
The Landgrave of Hesse and the Elector Palatined came to Trier's 
The 1850 and 1870 editions have Insurrektionen seit 1830 (insurrections since 
1830) instead of Insurrektionen 1830-46 (insurrections of 1830-46).— Ed. 
The 1850 edition has Versuch (attempt) instead of Verlauf (course).— Ed. 
c Richard.— Ed. 
Philip I and Ludwig V.— Ed. 

=====第468页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 445 
aid and Sickingen was compelled to retreat to his castle of Landstuhl. 
In spite of all Hutten's efforts and those of his other friends, the 
united nobility, intimidated by the concerted and swift moves of the 
princes, left Sickingen in the lurch. Sickingen was mortally wounded, 
surrendered Landstuhl, and died soon after. Hütten had to flee to 
Switzerland, where he died a few months later on the Isle of Ufnau 
in the Lake of Zurich. 
This defeat and the death of the two leaders broke the power of 
the nobility as a body independent of the princes. From then on the 
nobility acted only in the service and under the leadership of the 
princes. The Peasant War, which broke out soon after, compelled the 
nobles to seek the direct or indirect protection of the princes. Also, it 
proved that the German nobility would rather continue exploiting 
the peasants under the dominance of the princes than overthrow the 
princes and priests in an open alliance with emancipated peasants. 

=====第469页=====
446 
v 
Not a year passed since Luther's declaration of war against the 
Catholic hierarchy set in motion all the opposition elements in 
Germany without the peasants again and again bringing forward 
their demands. Between 1518 and 1523 one local peasant revolt 
followed another in the Black Forest and in Upper Swabia, and after 
the spring of 1524 revolts became systematic. In April 1524 the 
peasants of the Abbey of Marchthal refused to do statute labour and 
to pay tributes; in May the peasants of St. Blasien refused to make 
serf payments; in June the peasants of Steinheim, near Memmingen, 
announced that they would pay neither tithes nor other duties; in 
July and August the peasants of Thurgau revolted and were quelled 
partly by the mediation of Zurich and partly by the brutality of the 
Confederacy, which executed many of them. Finally, a more 
determined uprising, which may be regarded as the direct beginning 
of the Peasant War, took place in the Landgraviate of Stühlingen. 
The peasants of Stühlingen suddenly refused to deliver anything 
to the Landgrave, assembled in strong numbers, and on August 24, 
1524,  moved towards Waldshut under the command of Hans Müller 
of Bulgenbach. Here they founded an evangelist fraternity jointly with 
the burghers. The latter joined the organisation the more willingly 
because they were at odds with the government of the Austrian 
Forelands 324 over the religious persecution of their preacher, 
Balthasar Hubmaier, Thomas Münzer's friend and disciple. A weekly 
tax of three kreutzers was imposed by the Union—an enormous 
figure, considering the value of money at that time. Emissaries were 
sent to Alsace, the Moselle, the entire Upper Rhine and Franconia to 
bring peasants everywhere into the Union. The Union announced 
that its purpose was to abolish feudal rule, destroy all castles and 
monasteries and to eliminate all lords except the Emperor. The 
German tricolour 325 was the banner of the Union. 

=====第470页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 447 
The uprising gained momentum rapidly in all of what is now 
Upper Baden. Panic seized the nobility of Upper Swabia, whose 
armed forces were almost all in Italy, making war against Francis I of 
France. They had no choice but to drag out the affair by means of 
negotiations and, in the meanwhile, to collect money and recruit 
troops until strong enough to punish the peasants for their audacity 
with "fire and destruction, plunder and carnage".3  There began that 
systematic betrayal, that continuous deceit and malice, which were 
typical of the nobility and the princes throughout the Peasant War 
and which were their strongest weapon against the decentralised 
peasants whom it was hard to organise. The Swabian League, 
consisting of the princes, the nobility and the imperial cities of 
South-West Germany, put itself between the warring forces, but did 
not guarantee the peasants any real concessions. The latter remained 
in motion. From September 30 to the middle of October Hans 
Müller of Bulgenbach marched through the Black Forest to Urach 
and Furtwangen, increased his troops to 3,500 men and took up 
positions near Ewattingen (in the vicinity of Stühlingen). The 
nobility had no more than 1,700 men at their disposal, and even 
those were divided. They had to seek an armistice, which was, 
indeed, concluded in the camp at Ewattingen. The peasants were 
promised an amicable settlement either directly between the parties 
concerned or through arbitrators, and an investigation of their 
grievances by the provincial court at Stockach. The troops of the 
nobility and of the peasants dispersed. 
The peasants worked out sixteen articles which they would press 
for in the court at Stockach. The articles were very moderate, and 
went no further than abolition of hunting rights, statute labour, 
oppressive taxes and the privileges of lords in general, and 
protection against arbitrary imprisonment and biassed, arbitrary 
courts. 
But no sooner had the peasants gone home than the nobility 
demanded the restoration of all controversial tributes pending the 
court decision. Naturally, the peasants refused and referred the 
lords to the court. The conflict flared up anew, the peasants 
reassembled and the princes and lords concentrated their troops. 
This time the movement spread farther beyond Breisgau and deep 
into Württemberg. The troops under Georg Truchsess of Waldburg, 
the Alba of the Peasant War, watched the manoeuvres of the 
a Cited from the ultimatum tendered by Georg Truchsess, commander of the 
punitive army of the Swabian League, to the peasants of Hegau on February 15, 1525. 
(See W. Zimmermann, Allgemeine Geschichte des grossen Bauernkrieges, Th. 2, 
S. 33-34.)— Ed. 

=====第471页=====
448 Frederick Engels 
peasants, attacked their contingents one by one, but did not dare 
to attack the main force. In the meantime, Georg Truchsess 
negotiated with the peasant chiefs and reached agreements here and 
there. 
By the end of December proceedings began at the Stockach 
provincial court. The peasants objected to the court being composed 
entirely of noblemen. An imperial edict326  was read to them in reply. 
The proceedings were drawn out, and in the meantime the nobility, 
the princes and the Swabian League armed themselves. Archduke 
Ferdinand who ruled Württemberg, 3 the Black Forest of Baden and 
Southern Alsace in addition to the hereditary lands which still belong 
to Austria, called for the utmost severity against the rebel peasants. 
They were to be captured, tortured and mercilessly slain in whatever 
manner was the most convenient, their possessions were to be 
burned and devastated, and their wives and children driven off the 
land. This shows how the princes and lords observed the armistice 
and what they meant by amicable arbitration and investigation of 
grievances. Archduke Ferdinand, to whom the house of Weiser, of 
Augsburg, advanced money, 327 armed himself in all haste. The 
Swabian League ordered money and a contingent of troops to be 
raised in three phases. 
These above rebellions coincided with the five months of Thomas 
Münzer's presence in Upper Baden. 328 Although there are no direct 
proofs of the influence he had on the outbreak and course of the 
movement, it is completely established indirectly. The more 
resolute peasant revolutionaries were mostly his disciples, and put 
forward his ideas. The twelve articles and the Letter of Articles of 
Upper Baden peasants are ascribed to him by all his contemporaries, 
although beyond any doubt he had no part in composing at least the 
former. When still on his way back to Thuringia he addressed a 
decidedly revolutionary manifesto to the insurgent peasants.329 
Duke Ulrich, exiled from Württemberg in 1519, conspired 
meanwhile to regain his land with the aid of the peasants. In fact, he 
had been trying to utilise the revolutionary party ever since he was 
exiled, and had supported it continuously. His name was associated 
with most of the local disturbances between 1520 and 1524 in the 
Black Forest and in Württemberg. Now he was arming for an attack 
on Württemberg from his castle, Hohentwiel. However, he too was 
only being used by the peasants, had no influence over them and, 
even less, their trust. 
After Duke Ulrich was banished in 1519.— Ed. 

=====第472页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 449 
The winter passed but nothing decisive was undertaken by either 
side.  The princely masters went into hiding. The peasant revolt was 
gathering momentum. In January 1525 the entire country between 
the Danube, the Rhine and the Lech was in great ferment, and in 
February the storm broke. 
While the Black Forest and Hegau Troop under Hans Müller of 
Bulgenbach was conspiring with Ulrich of Württemberg and shared 
in a part of his unsuccessful march on Stuttgart (February and 
March 1525), the peasants in Ried, above the Ulm, rose on February 
9, assembled in a camp near Baltringen protected on all sides by 
marshes, hoisted the red flag, and formed the Baltringen Troop under 
the leadership of Ulrich Schmid. This troop was 10,000 to 12,000 
strong. 
On February 25, the 7,000-strong Upper Allgäu Troop assembled 
at Schüssen, stimulated by the rumour that an armed force was 
marching against the discontented elements who had appeared in 
this locality as everywhere else. The people of Kempten, who had 
been at odds with their archbishop 3 all winter, assembled the next 
day and joined the peasants. The towns of Memmingen and 
Kaufbeuren joined the movement after laying down their condi­
tions;  yet the ambiguous attitude of the towns to this struggle was 
already apparent. On March 7 twelve articles were adopted in 
Memmingen for all the peasants of Upper Allgäu. 
Tidings from the Allgäu peasants prompted the formation of a 
Lake Troop under Eitel Hans on Lake Constance. It also grew very 
quickly and established its headquarters in Bermatingen. 
Similarly, early in March the peasants rose in Lower Allgäu, in the 
region of Ochsenhausen and Schellenberg, in Zeil and Waldburg, 
the estates of Truchsess. This Lower Allgäu Troop, which consisted of 
7,000 men, had its camp near Wurzach. 
These four troops accepted all the Memmingen articles, inciden­
tally more moderate even than the Hegau articles because they 
showed a remarkable lack of determination in points relating to the 
attitude of the armed troops towards the nobility and the govern­
ments. Such determination as was shown appeared only in the course 
of the war, after the peasants had experienced the behaviour of their 
enemies. 
At the same time, a sixth troop formed on the Danube. Peasants 
from the entire region, from Ulm to Donauwörth, from the valleys 
of the Hier, Roth and Biber, came to Leipheim and set up camp 
there. Every able-bodied man from fifteen localities had come, while 
a Sebastian von Breitenstein. — Ed. 

=====第473页=====
450 Frederick Engels 
reinforcements were drawn from 117. The leader of the Leipheim 
Troop was Ulrich Schön, and its preacher was Jakob Wehe, the pastor 
of Leipheim. 
Thus,  in the beginning of March there were 30,000 to 40,000 
insurgent Upper Swabian peasants under arms in six camps. The 
peasant troops were a mixed lot. Münzer's revolutionary party was 
in thé minority everywhere. Yet it formed the backbone of all the 
peasant camps. The bulk of the peasants were always ready to come 
to terms with the lords wherever they were promised the concessions 
they had hoped to gain by their menacing attitude. As the uprising 
dragged on and the princes' armies drew nearer, they became 
war-weary and most of those who still had something to lose went 
home. Moreover, a vagabond mass of the lumpenproletariat had 
joined the troops and this undermined their discipline and 
demoralised the peasants, because the vagabonds came and went as 
they pleased. This alone explains why the peasants at first remained 
everywhere on the defensive, why their morale deteriorated in the 
camps and why, aside from their tactical shortcomings and the 
shortage of good leaders, they were no match for the armies of the 
princes. 
While the troops were still assembling, Duke Ulrich invaded 
Württemberg from Hohentwiel with recruited detachments and a 
few Hegau peasants. The Swabian League would have been lost if 
the peasants had used the opportunity to attack the troops of 
Truchsess von Waldburg from the other flank. But because of the 
defensive attitude of the peasantry, Truchsess soon succeeded in 
concluding an armistice with the Baltringen, Allgäu and Lake 
peasants, starting negotiations and fixing Judica Sunday (April  2) 330 
as the day on which the whole affair was to be settled. This gave him 
a chance to march against Duke Ulrich, to occupy Stuttgart and 
compel him to abandon Württemberg again on March 17. Then he 
turned against the peasants, but the mercenaries in his own army 
revolted and refused to march against them. Truchsess succeeded in 
placating the mutineers and moved towards Ulm, where new 
reinforcements were being formed. He left an observation post at 
Kirchheim near Teck. 
The Swabian League, its hands at last free and its first contingents 
gathered, now threw off its mask, declaring itself 
"determined to end with arms in hand and with the aid of God that which the 
peasants have wilfully undertaken".3 
a From the decision made at a conference of League authorities at Ulm in March 
1525.  (It is recorded in a document from the Ulm archive and quoted by 
Zimmermann, op. cit., Th. 2, S. 167.) — Ed. 

=====第474页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 451 
The peasants had meanwhile faithfully observed the armistice. 
They had drawn up their demands, the famous Twelve Articles, for 
the negotiations on Judica Sunday. They demanded the right to elect 
and depose clergymen through the communities; abolition of the 
small tithe and utilisation of the great tithe,331 after subtraction of the 
pastors' salaries, for public purposes; abolition of serfdom, death 
tolls,  fishing and hunting rights; restriction of excessive statute 
labour, taxes and rents; restitution of forests, pastures and privileges 
forcibly withdrawn from communities and individuals, and an end to 
arbitrary justice and administration. Clearly, the moderate concilia­
tory party still had the upper hand among the peasant troops. The 
revolutionary party had formulated its programme earlier in the 
Letter of Articles. It was an open letter to all peasant communities, 
calling on them to join the "Christian Alliance and Brotherhood" for 
the purpose of removing all burdens either through goodwill, 
"which was unlikely", or by force, and threatening all shirkers with 
"lay excommunication", i. e. with expulsion from society and 
ostracism by members of the league. All castles, monasteries and 
priests' endowments were also to be placed under lay anathema, the 
letter said, unless the nobility, the priests and monks relinquished 
them of their own accord, moved into ordinary houses like other 
people, and joined the Christian Alliance.—This radical manifesto, 
obviously composed before the spring insurrection of 1525, thus 
speaks above all of revolution, of complete victory over the still 
reigning classes, while the "lay excommunication" is designed for 
the oppressors and traitors who were to be killed, for the castles that 
were to be burned, and the monasteries and endowments that were 
to be confiscated and whose treasures were to be turned into cash. 
But before the peasants came to present their Twelve Articles to 
the appointed courts of arbitration, they learned that the Swabian 
League had violated the armistice and that its troops were 
approaching. Instantly, they took countermeasures. A general 
meeting of all Allgäu, Baltringen and Lake peasants was held at 
Gaisbeuren. The four troops were combined and reorganised into 
four new columns. A decision was taken to confiscate the church 
estates, to sell their treasures in favour of the war chest, and to burn 
the castles. Thus alongside the official Twelve Articles, the Letter of 
Articles became the statute of warfare, and Judica Sunday, the day 
designated for the conclusion of peace, became the date of a general 
uprising. 
The mounting unrest everywhere, continuous local conflicts 
between peasants and nobility, tidings of the uprising in the Black 
Forest, which had been brewing in the preceding six months, and of 

=====第475页=====
452 Frederick Engels 
its spread to the Danube and the Lech, are enough to explain the 
rapid succession of peasant revolts in two-thirds of Germany. But 
that the individual3  revolts broke out simultaneously proves that 
there were men at the head of the movement who organised them 
through Anabaptist and other emissaries. Already in the second half 
of March disorders broke out in Württemberg, in the lower reaches 
of the Neckar, in Odenwald, and in Lower and Middle Franconia. 
However, April 2, Judica Sunday, was named everywhere be­
forehand as the day of the general uprising, and everywhere the 
decisive blow, the revolt en  masse,  was delivered in the first week of 
April. The Allgäu, Hegau and Lake peasants also sounded the bells 
on April  1 and called mass meetings to summon all able-bodied men 
to their camp; they opened hostilities against the castles and 
monasteries simultaneously with the Baltringen peasants. 
In Franconia, where the movement had six centres, the insurrec­
tion broke out everywhere in the first days of April. At about the 
same time two peasant camps were formed near Nördlingen, with 
whose aid the revolutionary party of the town under Anton Forner 
gained the upper hand, appointed Forner town mayor, and 
consummated a union between the town and the peasants. In the 
region of Ansbach the peasants revolted everywhere between April 1 
and 7, and from here the uprising spread as far as Bavaria. In the 
region of Rothenburg the peasants had been under arms since March 
22. In the town of Rothenburg the rule of the honourables was 
overthrown by the petty burghers and the plebeians under Stephan 
von Menzingen on March 27, but since peasant dues were the chief 
source of revenue for the town, the new government also vacillated 
and acted ambiguously towards the peasants. A general uprising of 
the peasants and the townships broke out early in April in the Grand 
Chapter of Würzburg, 352 and in the bishopric of Bamberg a general 
insurrection compelled the bishop b to yield in five days. And a 
strong Bildhausen peasant camp formed in the North, on the border of 
Thuringia. 
In Odenwald*  where Wendel Hipler, nobleman and former chancel­
lor of the Counts von Hohenlohe, and Georg Metzler, an innkeeper 
from Ballenberg near Krautheim, headed the revolutionary party, 
the storm broke out already on March 26. The peasants marched 
from all directions towards the Tauber. The two thousand men of 
the Rothenburg camp joined them as well. Georg Metzler took 
The 1850 and 1870 editions have partiellen (partial) instead of einzelnen 
(individual).— Ed. 
Weigand von Redwitz.— Ed. 

=====第476页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 453 
command and after the arrival of all reinforcements marched on 
April 4 to the monastery of Schönthal on the Jagst, where he was 
joined by the peasants of  the Neckar valley. The latter, led by Jäcklein 
Rohrbach, an innkeeper from Böckingen near Heilbronn, had begun 
their insurrection in Flein, Sontheim»etc, on Judica Sunday, while 
Wendel Hipler took Öhringen by surprise with a number of 
conspirators and drew the peasants in the vicinity into the move­
ment. In Schönthal the two peasant columns combined into the 
Gay Troop, accepted the Twelve Articles and made a few raids on 
castles and monasteries. The Gay Troop was about  8,000  strong and 
had cannon and 3,000 muskets. Florian  Geyer,  a Franconian knight, 
joined the force and formed the Black Troop, a select corps 
recruited mainly from the Rothenburg and Öhringen army reserve. 
The Württemberg magistrate in Neckarsulm, Count Ludwig von 
Helfenstein, opened the hostilities. He ordered all captured peasants 
to be executed on the spot. The Gay Troop marched to meet him. 
The peasants were embittered by the massacres and by news of the 
defeat of the Leipheim Troop, of Jakob Wehe's execution, and the 
Truchsess atrocities. Von Helfenstein, who had moved into Weins-
berg, was attacked there. The castle was stormed by Florian Geyer, 
the town seized in a prolonged battle and Count Ludwig taken 
prisoner along with several knights. On the following day, April 17, 
Jäcklein Rohrbach and the most resolute members of the troop held 
court over the prisoners and made fourteen of them, with von 
Helfenstein at their head, run the gauntlet, this being the most 
humiliating death they could think of. The capture of Weinsberg 
and Jäcklein's terroristic revenge on von Helfenstein did not fail to 
have their effect on the nobility. The Counts von Löwenstein joined 
the peasant alliance. The Counts von Hohenlohe, who had joined 
previously but had given no aid, immediately sent the desired 
cannon and powder. 
The chiefs debated among themselves whether they should make 
Götz von Berlichingen their commander, "since he could bring to 
them the nobility". The proposal found sympathy, but Florian 
Geyer, who saw the seeds of reaction in this mood of the peasants 
and their chiefs, separated from the Gay Troop and marched on his 
own with his Black Troop, first through the Neckar and then the 
Würzburg region, everywhere destroying castles and the lairs of the 
priesthood. 
The rest of the troops marched first of all against Heilbronn. In 
this powerful free imperial town the patriciate was, as almost 
everywhere, confronted by a burgher and revolutionary opposition. 
In secret agreement with the peasants, the latter opened the gates to 

=====第477页=====
454 Frederick Engels 
Georg Metzler and Jäcklein Rohrbach on April 17 during a 
disturbance. The peasant chiefs and their people took possession of 
the town, which was then admitted to their brotherhood and 
delivered 1,200 guilders in cash and a squad of volunteers. Only the 
possessions of the clergy and the Teutonic Order 333 were pillaged. 
On April 22, the peasants moved out, leaving a small garrison. 
Heilbronn was to become the centre of the various troops, the latter 
actually sending delegates and conferring over joint actions and the 
common demands of the peasantry. But the burgher opposition and 
the patricians, who had joined forces after the peasant invasion, 
regained the upper hand in the town, preventing decisive steps and 
waiting only for the approach of the princes' troops to openly betray 
the peasants. 
The peasants marched toward Odenwald. Götz von Berlichingen, 
who had a few days before offered himself to the Elector Palatine, 3 
then to the peasantry, and then again to the Elector, was to join the 
Evangelist Fraternity on April 24 and assume supreme command of 
' the Gay Bright Troop (as distinct from the Black Troop of Florian 
Geyer). At the same time, however, he was the prisoner of the 
peasants, who mistrusted him and bound him to a council of chiefs, 
without whose approval he could undertake nothing. Götz and 
Metzler marched with the bulk of the peasants across Buchen to 
Amorbach, where, during their stay from April 30 to May 5, they 
roused the entire Mainz region. The nobility was everywhere 
compelled to join in, and its castles were thus spared. Only the 
monasteries were burned and pillaged. The troop had become 
visibly demoralised. The most energetic men had gone away with 
Florian Geyer or with Jäcklein Rohrbach who, after the capture of 
Heilbronn, also separated from the troop, apparently because he, 
the judge of Count von Helfenstein, could no longer remain with a 
body that was inclined towards reconciliation with the nobility. This 
gravitation towards reaching an understanding with the nobility was 
in itself a sign of demoralisation. Soon Wendel Hipler proposed a 
very sound reorganisation of the troop. He suggested that the 
mercenaries, who had been offering their services daily, should be 
taken on. He also suggested that the troop should no longer be 
renewed monthly through the arrival of fresh contingents and the 
dismissal of old ones, and that the men under arms, who had 
received a certain amount of military training, should be retained. 
But a community meeting rejected both proposals. The peasants had 
already become volatile and viewed the war as little more than 
a Ludwig V.— Ed. 

=====第478页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 455 
pillage, where the competition of the mercenaries held no advantage 
for them and where they wanted to be free to go home as soon as 
their pockets were filled. In Amorbach matters came to a point 
where Hans Berlin, a Heilbronn councillor, induced the chiefs and 
troop councillors to accept a Declaration of the Twelve Articles, 334 a 
document wherein the remaining arrowheads of the Twelve Articles 
were blunted and words of humble supplication were put into the 
mouths of the peasants. But this was too much for the peasants; they 
rejected the Declaration with a display of vehemence and insisted 
upon the original Articles. 
In the meantime, a decisive change had taken place in the 
Würzburg area. The bishop, 3 who had withdrawn to fortified 
Frauenberg near Würzburg after the first peasant uprising early in 
April and had vainly sent messages in all directions asking for aid, 
was finally compelled to make temporary concessions. On May 2 a 
Diet opened in which the peasants were represented, but letters 
proving the bishop's treacherous moves were intercepted before any 
results could be achieved. The Diet broke up at once, and hostilities 
began between the insurgent townsmen and peasants, on the one 
hand, and the bishop's forces, on the other. The bishop escaped to 
Heidelberg on May 5, and on the following day Florian Geyer with 
his Black Troop entered Würzburg, and with him came the 
Franconian Tauber Troop, which consisted of the peasants of 
Mergentheim, Rothenburg and Ansbach. On May 7 Götz von 
Berlichingen arrived with his Gay Bright Troop, and the siege of 
Frauenberg began. 
In Limburg and the Ellwangen and Hall regions another 
contingent was formed by the end of March, and in early April that 
of Gaildorf,  or the Common Gay Troop. It showed considerable 
violence, roused the entire region, burned down many monasteries 
and castles, including the castle of Hohenstaufen, compelled all the 
peasants to join it, and forced the nobles, and even the cup-bearers 
of Limburg, to enter the Christian Brotherhood. Early in May it 
invaded Württemberg, but was compelled to withdraw. As in 1848 
the separatism of the German system of small states obstructed joint 
action by the revolutionaries of the various states. The Gaildorf 
Troop, restricted to a small area, was naturally bound to disperse 
when all resistance within that area was broken. It concluded an 
agreement with the town of Gmünd and went home, leaving only 
500 under arms. 
a Konrad  111.—Ed. 

=====第479页=====
456 Frederick Engels 
In the Palatinate peasant troops were formed on either bank of the 
Rhine by the end of April. They destroyed many castles and 
monasteries, and oh May 1 took Neustadt on the Haardt after the 
Bruchrain peasants had crossed the river on the previous day and 
forced Speyer to conclude an agreement. Marshal von Habern at the 
head of the Elector's small force was powerless against them, and on 
May 10 the Elector was compelled to come to an agreement with the 
insurgent peasants, guaranteeing them redress of grievances 
through a Diet. 
Finally, in Württemberg the revolt had already broken out early in 
some localities. The peasants of the Urach Jura formed a union 
against priests and lords already in February and the peasants of 
Blaubeuren, Urach, Münsingen, Balingen and Rosenfeld revolted at 
the end of March. The Württemberg region was invaded by the 
Gaildorf Troop at Göppingen, by Jäcklein Rohrbach at Brackenheim 
and by the remnants of the beaten Leipheim Troop at Pfullingen, 
inciting the rural population to revolt. There were also serious 
disturbances in other localities. Already on April 6 Pfullingen 
surrendered to the peasants. The Austrian Archduke's a government 
was driven to the wall. It had no money and only few troops. The 
cities and castles were in a bad state and had neither garrisons nor 
munition. Even Asperg was practically defenseless. 
The government's attempt to call out the town reserves against the 
peasants caused its instant defeat. On April 16 the Bottwarb  reserves 
refused to obey orders. Instead of marching to Stuttgart, they turned 
to Wunnenstein near Bottwar, where they formed the nucleus of a 
camp of burghers and peasants whose number increased rapidly. 
The rebellion in Zabergäu broke out on the same day. The Maul-
bronn monastery was pillaged and a few more monasteries and cas­
tles were laid waste. Reinforcements marched from neighbouring 
Bruchrain to join the local peasants. 
The Wunnenstein troop was under the command of Matern 
Feuerbacher, a Bottwar town councillor. He was a leader of the 
burgher opposition, but was so strongly compromised that he was 
compelled to go with the peasants. However, he remained at all times 
very moderate, prevented the implementation of the Letter of Articles 
against the castles, and sought everywhere to reconcile the peasants 
with the moderate burgherdom. He prevented the amalgamation of 
the Württemberg peasants with the Gay Bright Troop, and later 
likewise prevailed on the Gaildorf Troop to withdraw from 
a Ferdinand I.— Ed. 
b Or Gross bottwar.— Ed, 

=====第480页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 457 
Württemberg. On April 19 he was deposed for his burgher 
tendencies but again made commander the next day. He was 
indispensable, and even when Jäcklein Rohrbach arrived with 200 
determined men to join the Württemberg peasants on April 22, he 
had no choice but to leave Feuerbacher in command and confined 
himself to rigid supervision of his actions. 
On April 18 the government attempted to negotiate with the 
peasants stationed at Wunnenstein. The peasants insisted on the 
Twelve Articles, but naturally the government's representatives 
could not accept them. The troop set itself in motion. On April 20 it 
reached Lauffen, where, for the last time, it turned down the 
proposals of the government delegates. On April 22 the troop, 
numbering 6,000, appeared in Bietigheim and threatened Stuttgart. 
Most members of the Stuttgart Council had fled and a citizens' 
committee took over the administration. Among the citizenry there 
was the same division as everywhere else into parties of the 
honourables, the burgher opposition, and the revolutionary 
plebeians. On April 25 the latter opened the gates to the peasants 
and Stuttgart was instantly taken. Here the organisation of the Gay 
Christian Troop, as the Württemberg insurgents now called them­
selves, was completed and the rules of pay, division of booty, 
maintenance, etc., were rigidly defined. A detachment of Stutt­
garters under Theus Gerber joined the troop. 
On April 29 Feuerbacher marched with all his men against the 
Gaildorfers who had entered Württemberg region at Schorndorf. 
He drew the entire area into his alliance and thereby prevailed on 
the Gaildorfers to withdraw. In this way he prevented Rohrbach's 
revolutionary element in his troop from joining hands with the 
reckless Gaildorfers and thus being dangerously strengthened. 
Upon receiving news of Truchsess' approach, he left Schorndorf to 
meet him, and on May 1 made camp near Kirchheim unter Teck. 
We have herewith traced the origin and development of the 
uprising in the part of Germany that should be regarded as the 
territory of the first group of peasant armies. Before we proceed to 
the other groups (Thuringia and Hesse, Alsace, Austria and the 
Alps) we must give an account of the military operations of 
Truchsess, in which he, alone in the beginning and later supported 
by various princes and townships, annihilated this first group of 
insurgents. 
We left .Truchsess near Ulm, where he had come late in March 
after leaving an observation corps in Kirchheim unter Teck under 
the command of Dietrich Spät. Truchsess' corps, which, including 
the League reinforcements concentrated in Ulm, had not quite 

=====第481页=====
458 Frederick Engels 
10,000 men, of whom 7,200 were infantry, was the only army 
available for an offensive war against the peasants. Reinforcements 
came to Ulm very slowly, due partly to the difficulties of recruiting in 
insurgent localities, partly to the governments' lack of money, and 
partly to the fact that the few available troops were everywhere more 
than indispensable for manning the fortresses and castles. We have 
already taken note of the small number of troops at the disposal of 
the princes and towns outside the Swabian League. Everything 
therefore depended upon Georg Truchsess and his League army. 
Truchsess turned first against the Baltringen Troop, which had in 
the meantime begun to destroy castles and monasteries in the vicinity 
of Ried. The peasants, who withdrew at the approach of the League 
troops, were outflanked and driven out of the marshes, crossed the 
Danube and plunged into the ravines and forests of the Swabian 
Jura. In this region the cannon and cavalry which formed the 
backbone of the League army were of little avail against them, and 
Truchsess did not pursue them farther. He marched against the 
Leipheim Troop which had  5,000  men stationed at Leipheim, 4,000 
in the Mindel valley, and 6,000 at Illertissen. The Leipheim Troop 
was fomenting rebellion in the entire region, destroying monasteries 
and castles, and preparing to march against Ulm with all its three 
columns. It seems that a certain degree of demoralisation had set in 
among the peasants here as well, undermining their military morale, 
for Jakob Wehe tried at the very outset to negotiate with Truchsess. 
The latter, however, backed by a sufficient military force, declined to 
negotiate and on April 4 attacked and routed the main troop at 
Leipheim. Jakob Wehe, Ulrich Schön and two other peasant leaders 
were captured and beheaded; Leipheim capitulated, and several 
expeditions to the adjacent countryside subdued the entire region. 
A new mutiny of mercenaries, who demanded plunder and 
additional pay, delayed Truchsess again until April 10, when he 
marched south-west against the Baltringen Troop which had, in the 
meantime, invaded his estates, Waldburg, Zeil and Wolfegg, and 
besieged his castles. Here, too, he found the peasants disunited, and 
defeated them on April 11 and 12 successively in several battles, 
which completely disrupted the Baltringen Troop. Its remnants 
withdrew under the command of priest Florian and joined the Lake 
Troop. Truchsess now turned against the latter. The Lake Troop, 
which had not merely roved through the countryside all this time, 
but had also drawn the towns of Buchhorn (Friedrichshafen) and 
Wollmatingen into the brotherhood, held a big military council in 
the monastery of Salem on April 13 and decided to move against 
Truchsess. Alarm bells were sounded at once, and 10,000 men 

=====第482页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 459 
joined by the defeated Baltringen Troop assembled in the Ber-
matingen camp. On April 15 they stood their ground in a battle with 
Truchsess, who did not want to risk his army in a decisive battle and 
preferred to negotiate, strengthened in this purpose by news of the 
approach of the Allgäu and Hegau troops. On April 17 he therefore 
concluded an agreement with the Lake and Baltringen peasants in 
Weingarten. On the face of it, the agreement was quite favourable 
for the peasants, and they accepted it without hesitation. Ultimately, 
he also prevailed on the delegates of the Upper and Lower Allgäu 
peasants to accept this agreement, and marched towards Württem­
berg. 
Here Truchsess' cunning saved him from certain defeat. Had he 
not succeeded in fooling the weak, dull-witted, and for the most part 
already demoralised peasants and their mostly incapable, timid and 
venal leaders, he and his small army would have been enveloped by 
four columns of at least 25,000 to 30,000 men, and would have faced 
inevitable disaster. It was his enemies' narrow-mindedness, always 
unavoidable when peasants gather in a mass, that enabled him to 
dispose of them at the very moment when they could have ended the 
war with one blow, at least in Swabia and Franconia. The Lake 
peasants observed the agreement, which naturally was turned 
against them in due course, so rigidly that they later took up arms 
against their allies, the Hegau peasants. Although the Allgäu 
peasants, drawn into the betrayal by their leaders, soon renounced 
the agreement, Truchsess was by then out of danger. 
Though not bound by the Weingarten agreement, the Hegau 
peasants soon gave a new display of the infinite parochial bigotry and 
stubborn provincialism that proved the undoing of the entire 
Peasant War. When, after futile negotiations with them, Truchsess 
marched off to Württemberg, they followed him and were con­
tinually on his flank, but it did not occur to them to unite with the 
Württemberg Gay Christian Troop, and this because previously 
the peasants of Württemberg and the Neckar valley had refused 
them assistance. When Truchsess had marched far enough from 
their home country, they simply turned back and marched on 
Freiburg. 
We left the Württemberg peasants under the command of Matern 
Feuerbacher at Kirchheim unter Teck, from where the observation 
corps left by Truchsess under the command of Dietrich Spät had 
withdrawn towards Urach. After an unsuccessful attempt to take 
Urach, Feuerbacher turned towards Nürtingen and sent messages to 
all insurgent troops in the vicinity to assist him in the decisive battle. 
And considerable reinforcements did come from both the Württem-

=====第483页=====
460 Frederick Engels 
berg lowlands and from Gäu. The Gäu peasants, who had joined the 
remnants of the Leipheim Troop that had withdrawn to West 
Württemberg and roused the valleys of the Upper Neckar and 
Nagold up to Böblingen and Leonberg, came in two strong columns 
to join Feuerbacher at Nürtingen on May 5. Truchsess stumbled 
upon the united troop at Böblingen. Its number, its artillery and 
position perplexed him. As was his custom, he at once began to 
negotiate and concluded an armistice with the peasants. But no 
sooner had he thus secured his position than he attacked them on 
May 12 during the armistice and forced a decisive battle on them. The 
peasants offered long and courageous resistance until Böblingen 
finally surrendered to Truchsess owing to betrayal by the burghers. 
The peasants' left wing, deprived of its base of support, was forced 
back and outflanked. This decided the issue. The poorly disciplined 
peasants were thrown into confusion and fled in disorder; those who 
were not killed or captured by League horsemen threw away their 
weapons and hurried home. The Gay Christian Troop, and with it 
the whole Württemberg insurrection, were crushed. Theus Gerber 
fled to Esslingen and Feuerbacher to Switzerland, while Jäcklein 
Rohrbach was taken prisoner and dragged in chains to Neckargar-
tach, where he was bound to a stake, surrounded with firewood 
and roasted to death on a slow fire, while Truchsess, carousing with 
his knights, gloated over this knightly spectacle. 
From Neckargartach Truchsess supported the operations of the 
Elector Palatine by invading Kraichgau. On receiving word of 
Truchsess' success, the Elector, who meanwhile had gathered an 
army, immediately broke his agreement With the peasants, attacked 
Bruchrain on May 23, captured and burned Maisch in spite of its 
vigorous resistance, pillaged a number of villages, and garrisoned 
Bruchsal. At the same time Truchsess attacked Eppingen and 
captured the chief of the local movement, Anton Eisenhut, whom 
the Elector immediately executed along with a dozen other peasant 
leaders. Bruchrain and Kraichgau were thus subdued and compelled 
to pay an indemnity of about 40,000 guilders. Both armies, that of 
Truchsess — reduced to 6,000 men in the preceding battles—and 
that of the Elector (6,500 men), united and moved against the 
Odenwalders. 
Word of the Böblingen defeat spread terror everywhere among 
the insurgents. The free imperial cities which had come under the 
heavy hand of the peasants, heaved a sigh of  relief.  The city of 
Heilbronn was the first to seek reconciliation with the Swabian 
League. In Heilbronn the peasants' chancellory and delegates of the 
various troops deliberated over the proposals they would make to the 

=====第484页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 461 
Emperor3  and the Empire in the name of all the insurgent peasants. 
These negotiations, whose outcome was to apply to all Germany, 
revealed again that none of the estates, including the peasants, was 
sufficiently developed to alter the situation in Germany according to 
its own lights. It was obvious at once that the support of the nobility 
and particularly of the burghers had to be gained for this purpose. 
Wendel Hipler took charge of the negotiations. Of all the leaders of 
the movement he had the best grasp on the existing situation. He was 
not a far-seeing revolutionary like Münzer, nor a peasant representa­
tive like Metzler or Rohrbach; his extensive experience and his 
practical knowledge of the attitude of the various estates towards 
each other prevented him from representing any one of the estates 
involved in the movement in opposition to the others. Just as 
Münzer, a representative of the budding proletariat, a class which 
then stood totally outside the official organisation of society, was 
driven to anticipate communism, Wendel Hipler, the representa­
tive of what may be described as the cross-section of the nation's 
progressive elements, anticipated modern  bourgeois  society.  The prin­
ciples he represented and the demands he made were not really 
immediately practicable. They were the somewhat idealised and 
inevitable result of the dissolution of feudal society. And the 
peasants, having set themselves to drafting legislation for the whole 
Empire, were compelled to accept them. In Heilbronn, therefore, 
the centralisation demanded by the peasants assumed a more 
definite form which was, however, worlds removed from the 
peasants' own idea. For instance, it was much more clearly expressed 
in the demands for a standard currency, standard weights and 
measures, abolition of internal customs, etc., that is, in demands that 
were far more in the interest of townsmen than in that of the 
peasants. Concessions were made to the nobility that substantially 
approached the modern system of redemption and that would in the 
long run transform feudal into bourgeois landownership. In short, 
since the peasants' demands were composed as an "imperial 
reform", they necessarily complied with the definitive interests 
rather than the immediate demands of the burghers. 
While this imperial reform was still being debated in Heilbronn, 
the author of the Declaration of the Twelve Articles, Hans Berlin, 
was already on his way to meet Truchsess and negotiate the 
surrender of the township on behalf of the honourables and 
burghers. Reactionary movements within the town supported this 
betrayal, and Wendel Hipler was obliged to flee with the peasants. 
a Charles V.— Ed. 

=====第485页=====
462 Frederick Engels 
He went to Weinsberg, where he attempted to assemble the rem­
nants of the Württemberg Troop and the small mobile unit of 
Gaildorfers. But the approach of the Elector Palatine and Truch-
sess drove him from there as well, and he was compelled to go to 
Würzburg to rouse the Gay Bright Troop into action. In the mean­
time,  the armies of the League and the Elector subdued the 
entire Neckar region, compelled the peasants to renew their oath of 
allegiance, burned many villages, and slayed or hanged all runaway 
peasants who fell into their hands. Weinsberg was burned to avenge 
the execution of von Helfenstein. 
The peasant troops assembled near Würzburg had in the 
meantime laid siege to Frauenberg, and on May 15, before even a 
breach was made in the wall of the fortress, they bravely but 
unsuccessfully attempted to storm it. Four hundred of the best men, 
mostly of Florian Geyer's Troop, were left behind in the ditches, 
dead or wounded. Two days later, on May 17, Wendel Hipler 
arrived and ordered a military council. He proposed to leave only 
4,000 men at Frauenberg, and to encamp with the main force of 
about 20,000 men at Krautheim on the Jagst under the very nose of 
Truchsess, so that all reinforcements might be concentrated there. It 
was an excellent plan. Only by keeping the masses together and 
securing numerical superiority could the peasants hope to defeat the 
princely army, which now numbered about 13,000 men. The 
demoralisation and discouragement of the peasants, however, was 
too far gone to contemplate any energetic action. Besides, Götz von 
Berlichingen, who soon turned traitor, may have helped to hold the 
troop in check, and Hipler's plan was thus never executed. Instead, 
the forces were split up as usual. Not until May 23 did the Gay Bright 
Troop go into action after the Franconians promised to follow 
without delay. On May 26 the Ansbach detachments encamped in 
Würzburg were induced to return home on receiving word that 
their Margrave 3 had opened hostilities against the peasants. The 
rest of the besieging army, along with Florian Geyer's Black 
Troop, occupied positions at Heidingsfeld in the vicinity of Würz­
burg. 
On May 24 the Gay Bright Troop, not really ready for battle, 
arrived in Krautheim. Many learned here that in their absence their 
villages had sworn allegiance to Truchsess, and used this as a pretext 
to go home. The troop moved on to Neckarsulm, and on May 28 
started negotiations with Truchsess. At the same time messengers 
a Casimir, Margrave of Brandenburg, who was in possession of Ansbach and 
Bayreuth. — Ed, 

=====第486页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 463 
were sent to the peasants of Franconia, Alsace and Black For-
est-Hegau to ask for reinforcements as quickly as possible. From 
Neckarsulm Götz [von Berlichingen] marched back to Öhringen. 
The troop steadily melted away. Götz von Berlichingen also dis­
appeared during the march. He had gone home, having previ­
ously negotiated with Truchsess through his old brother-in­
arms,  Dietrich Spät, on going over to the other side. At Öhringen a 
false rumour of the enemy's approach threw the perplexed and 
discouraged peasantry into panic. The troop dispersed in utter 
confusion, and it was with difficulty that Metzler and Wendel Hipler 
succeeded in keeping together about 2,000 men, whom they again 
led toward Krautheim. In the meantime, the Franconian army of 
5,000  men had come, but due to a side march through Löwenstein 
towards Öhringen, ordered by Götz with obviously treacherous 
intents, it missed the Gay Troop and moved towards Neckarsulm. 
This town, occupied by several detachments of the Gay Bright 
Troop, was besieged by Truchsess. The Franconians arrived at night 
and saw the fires of the League camp, but their leaders had not the 
courage to venture an attack and retreated to Krautheim where they 
at last found the remainder of the Gay Bright Troop. In the absence 
of aid, Neckarsulm surrendered to the League force on May 29. At 
once Truchsess had thirteen peasants executed and set out against 
the other peasant troops, burning and ravaging, pillaging and 
murdering along the way. His route through the valleys of the 
Neckar, Kocher and Jagst was marked with ruins and the corpses of 
peasants hanging on trees. 
At Krautheim the League army encountered the peasants who had 
been forced by a flanking movement by Truchsess to withdraw 
towards Königshofen on the Tauber. Here they took up their 
position,  8,000  strong and with 32 cannon. Truchsess approached 
them behind the cover of hills and forests. He sent out columns to 
envelop them, and on June 2 attacked in such greatly superior force 
and with so much energy that they were defeated and dispersed in 
spite of the stubborn resistance of several of their troops that lasted 
into the night. As everywhere, it was the League horsemen, the 
"Peasants' Death", who were mainly instrumental in annihilating the 
insurgent army, charging down upon the peasants who were shaken 
by artillery and musket fire and lance attacks, breaking their ranks 
completely and slaying them one by one. The fate of 300 Königs­
hofen burghers who had joined the peasant army serves as an 
illustration of the warfare led by Truchsess and his horsemen. All 
but fifteen of them were killed in the battle and four of the survivors 
were subsequently beheaded. 

=====第487页=====
464 Frederick Engels 
Having thus settled with the peasants of Odenwald, the Neckar 
valley and Lower Franconia, Truchsess subdued the whole region in 
a series of punitive expeditions, burning down whole villages and 
executing countless people. Then he marched against Würzburg. On 
the way he learned that the second Franconian Troop under Florian 
Geyer and Gregor von Burgbernheim was stationed at  Sulzdorf,  and 
instantly turned against it. 
After his unsuccessful storming of Frauenberg, Florian Geyer had 
mainly devoted himself to negotiating with the princes and towns, 
especially with Rothenburg and Margrave Casimir of Ansbach, 
urging them to join the peasant brotherhood. But the negotiations 
were brought to an abrupt end by the news of the Königshofen 
defeat. His troop was joined by that of Ansbach under Gregor von 
Burgbernheim. The Ansbach troop had only recently been formed. 
Margrave Casimir had managed to keep in check the peasant revolt 
in his possessions in true Hohenzollern style, partly with promises 
and partly by means of a threatening mass of troops. He maintained 
complete neutrality towards all outside troops as long as they did not 
recruit Ansbach subjects, and tried to direct the hatred of the 
peasants mainly against the church endowments, through whose 
ultimate confiscation he hoped to enrich  himself.  In the meantime 
he kept arming and biding his time. As soon as he learned of the 
Böblingen battle he opened hostilities against his rebellious peasants, 
pillaging and burning their villages and hanging or otherwise killing 
many of them. But the peasants rallied quickly and defeated him at 
Windsheim under the command of Gregor von Burgbernheim on 
May 29. The call of the hard-pressed Odenwald peasants reached 
them as they were still pursuing him, and they headed at once for 
Heidingsfeld and from there, with Florian Geyer, again towards 
Würzburg (June 2). With no word arriving from the Odenwald 
troop,  they left behind  5,000  peasants in Würzburg and with 
4,000—the rest having deserted — they followed the others. Made 
complacent by false news of the outcome of the Königshofen battle, 
they were attacked by Truchsess at Sulzdorf and completely defeated. 
Truchsess' horsemen and mercenaries staged a terrible bloodbath. 
Florian Geyer rallied the remainder of his Black Troop, 600 in 
number, and fought his way to the village of Ingolstadt. Two 
hundred occupied the church and churchyard, and 400 took the 
castle. The Elector Palatine's forces pursued Geyer, and a column of 
1,200 men captured the village and set fire to the church. Those who 
did not perish in the flames were slaughtered. The Elector's troops 
then breached the dilapidated castle wall and attempted to storm the 
fortress. Turned back twice by the peasants, who had taken cover 

=====第488页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 465 
behind an inner wall, they shot up the inner wall as well, and tried a 
third assault, which was successful. Half of Geyer's men were 
massacred, but Geyer managed to escape with the other 200. Their 
hiding place, however, was discovered on the following day 
(Whit-Monday). The Elector Palatine's soldiers surrounded the 
woods in which they lay hidden, and slaughtered all of them. Only 
seventeen prisoners were taken during those two days. Again Florian 
Geyer fought his way out of the encirclement with a few of his most 
intrepid fighters and set out to join the Gaildorf peasants, who had 
again assembled a body of about 7,000 men. But upon his arrival he 
found them mostly dispersed by the crushing news from every side. 
He made a last attempt to assemble the peasants dispersed in the 
woods, but was surprised by enemy forces at Hall on June 9 and laid 
down his life fighting. 
Truchsess, who had sent word to besieged Frauenberg on the 
heels of the Königshofen victory, now marched towards Würzburg. 
The Council came to a secret understanding with him, so that on the 
night of June 7 the League army was allowed to surround the city 
where  5,000  peasants were stationed, and the following morning 
marched with sheathed swords through the gates opened by the 
Council. This betrayal of the Würzburg "honourables" caused the 
last troop of the Franconian peasants to be disarmed and all its 
leaders to be arrested. Truchsess immediately ordered 81 of them 
decapitated. The various Franconian princes arrived in Würzburg 
one after the other, and among them the Bishop of Würzburg 
himself, 3 the Bishop of Bambergb  and the Margrave of Branden-
burg-Ansbach. The gracious lords distributed the roles among 
themselves. Truchsess marched with the Bishop of Bamberg, who 
presently broke the agreement concluded with his peasants and 
opened his land to the fierce and murderous hordes of the League 
army. Margrave Casimir devastated his own land. Deiningen was 
burned and numerous villages were pillaged or gutted. In every town 
the Margrave held a bloodthirsty court. He ordered eighteen rebels 
beheaded in Neustadt on the Aisch and in Bergel forty-three 
suffered the same fate. From there he went to Rothenburg where the 
honourables had already made a counter-revolution and arrested 
Stephan von Menzingen. The Rothenburg petty burghers and 
plebeians now had to pay heavily for behaving so ambiguously 
towards the peasants, refusing them all help until the very last, 
insisting in their local narrow-minded egotism on the suppression of 
a Konrad  III.—Ed. 
Weigand von Redwitz.— Ed. 

=====第489页=====
466 Frederick Engels 
countryside crafts in favour of the city guilds, and only unwillingly 
giving up the city revenues flowing in from the feudal services of the 
peasants. The Margrave ordered sixteen of them executed, Men-
zingen naturally first of  all.—  The Bishop of Würzburg marched 
through his region in a similar manner, pillaging, ravaging and 
burning everything on his way. He had 256 rebels decapitated on 
this triumphal march, and upon returning to Würzburg crowned his 
handiwork by beheading another thirteen Würzburg rebels. 
In the Mainz region the viceregent, Bishop Wilhelm von 
Strassburg, restored order without resistance. He executed only four 
men. Rheingau, which had also been in revolt but where everybody 
had long since come home, was eventually invaded by Frowin von 
Hütten, a cousin of Ulrich, and fully "pacified" by the execution of 
twelve ringleaders. Frankfurt, which also experienced considerable 
revolutionary unrest, was held in check first by the conciliatory 
attitude of the Council and later by recruited troops. In the Rhenish 
Palatinate about  8,000  peasants had assembled anew after the 
Elector's breach of faith, and had again burned monasteries and 
castles, but the Archbishop of Trier 3 came to the aid of Marshal von 
Habern and made short work of them on June 23 at Pfed-
dersheim. A series of atrocities (eighty-two were executed in Pfed-
dersheim alone) and the capture of Weissenburg on July 7 put an 
end to the insurrection. 
Of all the peasant troops only two were still unvanquished: the 
Hegau-Black Forest Troop and that of Allgäu. Archduke Ferdinand 
had tried intriguing against both. Just as Margrave Casimir and 
other princes sought to utilise the insurrection to annex church lands 
and principalities, Ferdinand wished to use it for the aggrandisement 
of the House of Austria. He had negotiated with the Allgäu 
commander, Walter Bach, and with the Hegau commander, Hans 
Müller of Bulgenbach, in the hope of prevailing on the peasants to 
declare allegiance to Austria, but though both chiefs were venal they 
could not talk their troops into anything more than an armistice 
between the Allgäu Troop and the Archduke, and neutrality towards 
Austria. 
Retreating from the Württemberg region, the peasants of Hegau 
destroyed a number of castles and gathered reinforcements in the 
provinces of the Margraviate of Baden. On May 13 they marched on 
Freiburg, bombarded it from May 18, and entered it triumphantly 
when the town surrendered on May 23. From there thev moved 
•' Rkhaid von Greifenklau. — Ed. 

=====第490页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 467 
towards Stockach and Radolfzell, and waged a long but unsuccessful 
small war against the garrisons of those towns. Together with the 
nobility and other surrounding towns, the latter appealed to the 
Lake peasants for help in accordance with the Weingarten agree­
ment. The former rebels of the Lake Troop rose,  5,000  strong, 
against their confederates. These peasants were so narrow-minded 
and short-sighted that only 600 refused to fight, expressing their 
wish to join the Hegau peasants, for which they were massacred. 
Meanwhile, persuaded by Hans Müller of Bulgenbach, who had sold 
himself to the enemy, the Hegau peasants lifted their siege, and 
when thereupon Hans Müller ran away, most of them dispersed. 
The remainder entrenched themselves on the Hilzingen Steep, 
where they were beaten and annihilated on July 16 by troops that 
had in the meantime become available. The Swiss cities negotiated an 
agreement on behalf of the Hegau peasants, which, however, did not 
prevent the other side from capturing and beheading Hans Müller 
in Laufenburg, his betrayal notwithstanding. In Breisgau the town of 
Freiburg also deserted the peasant union (July 17) and sent troops 
against the peasants, but due to the weakness of the princely force an 
agreement was reached here as elsewhere, known as the agreement 
of Offenburg 335 (September 18), which also applied to Sundgau. The 
eight Black Forest groups and the Klettgau peasants, who were not 
as yet disarmed, were again compelled to rebel by the tyranny of 
Count von Sulz, and were defeated in October. On November 13 the 
Black Forest peasants were forced to conclude an agreement, 336 and 
Waldshut, the last bulwark of the insurrection in the Upper Rhine, 
fell on December 6. 
After Truchsess' departure the Allgäu peasants renewed their 
campaign against the monasteries and castles and wreaked venge­
ance for the ravages caused by the League army. They were con­
fronted by few troops, who risked only insignificant isolated skir­
mishes and never followed them into the woods. In June, a 
movement against the honourables broke out in Memmingen, which 
had hitherto been more or less neutral. This movement was defeated 
only due to the accidental presence in the vicinity of some League 
troops, who came in time to aid the honourables. Schappeler, 
preacher and leader of the plebeian movement, took refuge in 
St. Gallen. The peasants appeared before the town and were about to 
begin shooting breaches in its wall when they learned that Truchsess 
was approaching from Würzburg. On June 27 they set out against 
him in two columns across Babenhausen and Obergünzburg. 
Archduke Ferdinand again attempted to win the peasants for the 
House of Austria. On the strength of the armistice concluded with 

=====第491页=====
468 Frederick Engels 
them, he demanded of Truchsess to march no farther against them. 
The Swabian League, however, ordered Truchsess to attack, but to 
refrain from pillaging and burning. But Truchsess was too clever to 
relinquish his prime and most effective weapon even if he were able 
to hold in check the mercenaries whom he had led from Lake 
Constance to the Main, from one atrocity to another. The peasants, 
numbering about 23,000, took up battle positions across the Hier and 
Leubas. Truchsess opposed them with 11,000 men. The positions of 
both armies were very strong. The cavalry was ineffective due to the 
terrain, and if the Truchsess mercenaries were superior to the 
peasants in organisation, ammunition and discipline, the Allgäu 
peasants had in their ranks a host of former soldiers and 
experienced commanders, and many well-manned cannon. On July 
19 the League army opened fire, which was continued on both sides 
through July 20, but with no result. On July 21 Georg von 
Frundsberg joined Truchsess with 3,000 mercenaries. He knew 
many of the peasant commanders, for they had served under him in 
the Italian military expeditions, and entered into negotiations with 
them. Treason succeeded where military resources proved insuffi­
cient. Walter Bach and several other commanders and artillerymen 
sold out. They set fire to the powder stores of the peasants and 
induced the troop to attempt an enveloping movement, but as soon 
as the peasants left their strong positions they ran into an ambush 
engineered by Truchsess in collusion with Bach and the other 
traitors. The peasants' ability to defend themselves was impaired 
since their traitorous commanders had left them under the pretext 
of reconnoitring and were already on their way to Switzerland. Thus, 
two of the peasant columns were routed, while a third, under Knopf 
of Leubas, was able to withdraw in good order. It resumed its 
position on the mountain of Kollen near Kempten, where it was 
surrounded by Truchsess. But the latter did not dare attack the 
peasants; he cut off their supply routes and tried to demoralise them 
by burning about 200 villages in the vicinity. Hunger and the sight of 
their burning homes finally brought the peasants to their knees (July 
25). More than twenty were immediately executed. Knopf of Leubas, 
the only leader of this troop who did not betray his banner, fled 
to Bregenz. There he was captured and hanged after a long 
imprisonment. 
This brought the Peasant War in Swabia and Franconia to an end. 

=====第492页=====
469 
vi 
Directly after the outbreak of the first movement in Swabia, 
Thomas Münzer again hurried to Thuringia, and in late February or 
early March stayed in the free imperial town of Mühlhausen, where 
his party was stronger than elsewhere. He held the threads of the 
whole movement and knew that a storm was brewing in South 
Germany. So he set out to turn Thuringia into the centre of the 
movement in North Germany. He found the soil extremely 
fertile. Thuringia  itself,  the main scene of the Reformation move­
ment, was in great ferment. The misery of the downtrodden 
peasants and the prevailing revolutionary, religious and politi­
cal doctrines had also made a general uprising imminent in the 
neighbouring provinces of Hesse and Saxony, and in the Harz 
region. In Mühlhausen itself the bulk of the petty burgherdom was 
won over to Münzer's extreme standpoint and could hardly wait to 
assert its superiority over the arrogant honourables. To prevent 
premature action, Münzer was compelled to act as a moderator, but 
his disciple, Pfeifer, who held the reins of the movement there, had 
committed himself so greatly that he could not hold back the 
outbreak, and as early as March 17, 1525, before the general 
uprising in South Germany, Mühlhausen made its revolution. 
The old patrician Council was overthrown and the government 
handed over to the newly elected "eternal council", with Münzer as 
president. 337 
The worst thing that can befall the leader of an extreme party is to 
be compelled to assume power at a time when the movement is not 
yet ripe for the domination of the class he represents and for the 
measures this domination implies. What he can do depends not on 
his will but on the degree of antagonism between the various classes, 
17-1124 

=====第493页=====
470 Frederick Engels 
and on the level of development of the material means of existence, 
of the conditions of production and commerce upon which the 
degree of intensity of the class contradictions always reposes. What 
he ought to do, what his party demands of him, again depends not on 
him, but also not on the degree of development of the class struggle 
and its conditions. He is bound to the doctrines and demands 
hitherto propounded which, again, do not follow from the class 
relations of the moment, or from the more or less accidental level of 
production and commerce, but from his more or less penetrating 
insight into the general result of the sociala and political movement. 
Thus,  he necessarily finds himself in an unsolvable dilemma. What 
he can do contradicts all his previous actions and principles and the 
immediate interests of his party, and what he ought to do cannot be 
done. In a word, he is compelled to represent not his party or his 
class,  but the class for whose domination the movement is then ripe. 
In the interests of the movement he is compelled to advance the 
interests of an alien class, and to feed his own class with talk and 
promises, and with the asseveration that the interests of that alien 
class are their own interests. He who is put into this awkward position 
is irrevocably lost. We have seen examples of this in recent times, and 
need only recall the position in the last French Provisional 
Government of the representatives of the proletariat,338 though they 
themselves represented only a very low stage of development of the 
proletariat. He who can still speculate with official posts after the 
experiences of the February government—to say nothing of our 
own noble German provisional governments and imperial regen­
cies339—is either foolish beyond measure or belongs to the extreme 
revolutionary party at best in word only. 
Münzer's position at the head of the "eternal council" of 
Mühlhausen was indeed much more precarious than that of any 
modern revolutionary regent. Not only the movement of his time, 
but also the age, were not ripe for the ideas of which he himself had 
only a faint notion. The class which he represented was still in its 
birth throes. It was far from developed enough to assume leadership 
over, and to transform^ society. The social changes of his fancy had 
little root in the then existing economic conditions. What is more, 
these conditions were paving the way for a social system that was 
diametrically opposite to what he envisioned. Nevertheless, he was 
still committed to his early sermons of Christian equality and 
evangelical community of property, and was compelled at least to 
a The 1850 edition has "industrial" instead of "social".— Ed. 
The words "and to transform" are missing in the 1850 edition.— Ed. 

=====第494页=====
The Peasant War  in Germany  471 
attempt their realisation. Community of property, the equal 
obligation of all to work, and abolition of all authority were 
proclaimed. But in reality Mühlhausen remained a republican 
imperial city with a somewhat democratised constitution, a senate 
elected by universal suffrage and controlled by a forum, and with a 
hastily improvised system of care for the poor. The social upheaval 
that so horrified its Protestant burgher contemporaries actually 
never went beyond a feeble, unconscious and premature attempt to 
establish the bourgeois  [bürgerliche]  society of a later period. 
Münzer himself seems to have sensed the chasm between his 
theories and the surrounding realities, a chasm that he must have felt 
the more keenly, the more his visionary aspirations were distorted in 
the crude minds of his mass of followers. He devoted himself to 
extending and organising the movement with a zeal rare even for 
him. He wrote letters and sent messengers and emissaries in all 
directions. His writings and sermons breathed a revolutionary fa­
naticism astonishing even when compared with his former works. 
The naive youthful humour of Münzer's revolutionary" pamphlets 
was totally gone. The placid explicative language of the thinker 
typical of his earlier years was gone too. Münzer became a positive 
prophet of the revolution. He untiringly fanned hatred against the 
ruling classes, he stimulated the wildest passions, and used only the 
forceful language that the religious and nationalist delirium had put 
into the mouths of the Old Testament prophets. The style he now 
had to adopt reflected the educational level of the public he sought 
to influence. 
The example of Mühlhausen and Münzer's propaganda had  a rapid 
and far-reaching effect. In Thuringia,  Eichsfeld,  the Harz,  the duchies 
of Saxony,  in Hesse  and Fulda,  in Upper Franconia  and in  Vogtland,  the 
peasants arose, assembled in troops, and set fire to castles and 
monasteries. Münzer was recognised as the leader of more or less the 
entire movement, and Mühlhausen remained its centre, while a 
purely burgher movement won in Erfurt and the ruling party there 
kept acting ambiguously towards the peasants. 
The princes in Thuringia were at first just as perplexed and 
helpless against the peasants as they had been in Franconia and 
Swabia. Only in the last days of April did the Landgrave of Hesse 
succeed in assembling a corps. It was the same Landgrave Philip 
whose piety is praised so much by the Protestant and bourgeois 
histories of the Reformation, and of whose infamies against the 
;l The  1850 edition  has  "prerevolutionary" instead  of "revolutionary".— Ed. 
17* 

=====第495页=====
472 Frederick Engels 
peasants we shall presently have a word to say. By a series of swift 
movements and decisive actions, Landgrave Philip quickly subdued 
the major part of his land, called up new contingents, and then 
marched into the region belonging to the Abbot of Fulda, 3 who had 
hitherto been his feudal lord. On May 3 he defeated the Fulda 
peasant troop at Frauenberg, subdued the whole land, and seized the 
opportunity not only for freeing himself from the sovereignty of the 
Abbot, but also for making the Abbey of Fulda a vassalage of Hesse, 
naturally pending its subsequent secularisation. He then took 
Eisenach and Langensalza, and advanced against Mühlhausen, the 
headquarters of the rebellion, jointly with the ducal Saxon troops. 
Münzer assembled his forces, comprising some  8,000  men and 
several cannon, at Frankenhausen. The Thuringian troop had little 
of the fighting power which a part of the Upper Swabian and 
Franconian troops had developed in their struggle with Truchsess. It 
was poorly armed and badly disciplined; it had few ex-soldiers in its 
ranks and lacked sorely in leadership. It appears Münzer himself 
had not the slightest military knowledge. All the same, the princes 
thought it best to use the same tactics against him that so often 
helped Truchsess to victory: breach of faith. They launched 
negotiations on May 16, concluded an armistice, and then suddenly 
attacked the peasants before the armistice had elapsed. 
Münzer had stationed his people on a mountain still called 
Schlachtberg, b behind a barricade of wagons. Discouragement was 
spreading rapidly among his men. The princes promised them 
indulgence if they delivered Münzer alive. Münzer called a general 
assembly to debate the princes' proposals. A knight and a priest 
spoke in favour of surrender. Münzer had them both brought inside 
the circle and decapitated. This act of terrorist energy, jubilantly 
received by resolute revolutionaries, instilled a certain order among 
the troop, but most of the men would still have gone away without 
resistance had it not been noticed that the princes' mercenaries, who 
had encircled the mountain, were approaching in closed columns in 
spite of the armistice. A front was hurriedly formed behind the 
wagons, but already shells and bullets were showering upon the 
half-defenseless peasants unaccustomed to battle, and the mer­
cenaries had reached the barricade. After a brief resistance the line 
of wagons was breached, the peasant cannon captured, and the 
peasants dispersed. They fled in wild disorder to fall into the hands 
a Johann Henrieberg.— Ed. 
b Mount Battle.— Ed 

=====第496页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 473 
of the enveloping columns and the cavalry, who loosened an 
appalling massacre. Out of  8,000  peasants over  5,000  were 
slaughtered. The survivors went to Frankenhausen, and the princes' 
cavalry came hot on their heels. The city was captured. Münzer, 
wounded in the head, was discovered in a house and taken prisoner. 
On May 25 Mühlhausen also surrendered. Pfeifer, who had 
remained there, escaped, but was captured in the region of Eisenach. 
Münzer was put on the rack in the presence of the princes, and 
then decapitated. He went to his death with the courage he had 
shown throughout his life. He was twenty-eight at the most when 
executed. Pfeifer was also beheaded, and many others besides. In 
Fulda Philip of Hesse, that holy man, opened his bloody court. He 
and the Saxon princes had many killed by the sword, among them in 
Eisenach, 24; in Langensalza, 41; after the battle of Frankenhausen, 
300;  in Mühlhausen, more than 100; at Görmar, 26; at Tüngeda, 50; 
at Sangerhausen, 12; in Leipzig, 8, not to speak of mutilations and 
more moderate measures, pillaging and burning of villages and 
towns. 
Mühlhausen was compelled to give up its imperial liberty, and was 
incorporated in the Saxon lands just as the Abbey of Fulda was 
incorporated in the Landgraviate of Hesse. 
The princes now marched through the forest of Thuringia, where 
Franconian peasants of the Bildhausen camp had joined the 
Thuringians and had burned many castles. A battle took place 
outside Meiningen. The peasants were beaten and withdrew towards 
the town, which suddenly closed its gates to them and threatened to 
attack them from the rear. Thrown into confusion by its allies' 
betrayal, the troop surrendered to the princes and ran off in 
all directions while the negotiations were still under way. The 
Bildhausen camp had long since dispersed, and after the troop's 
defeat the remaining insurgents in Saxony, Hesse, Thuringia and 
Upper Franconia were annihilated. 
In Alsace the rebellion broke out later than on the right bank of the 
Rhine. The peasants of the Bishopric of Strassburg rose up as late as 
the middle of April. Soon after, there was an uprising of peasants in 
Upper Alsace and Sundgau. On April 18 a contingent of Lower 
Alsace peasants pillaged the monastery of  Altdorf.  Other troops 
formed near Ebersheim and Barr, as well as in the Wilier and Urbis 
valleys. These soon amalgamated into a large Lower Alsace troop 
and seized towns and hamlets and destroyed monasteries. 
Everywhere, one out of every three men was called to serve in the 
troop.  The troop's Twelve Articles were much more radical than 
those of the Swabians and Franconians. 340 

=====第497页=====
474 Frederick Engels 
While early in May one column of Lower Alsatians concentrated 
near St. Hippolite and after a futile attempt to take that town 
occupied Bercken on May 10, Rappoltsweiler on May 13, and 
Reichenweier on May 14 by an understanding with their citizens, a 
second column under Erasmus Gerber moved in for a surprise attack 
on Strassburg. The attempt failed, and the column now turned 
towards the Vosges, destroyed the monastery of Mauersmünster and 
besieged Zabern, which surrendered on May 13. From here it moved 
towards the Lorraine frontier and roused the adjacent section of the 
duchy, and at the same time fortified the mountain passes. Big 
camps were formed at Herbitzheim on the Saar and at Neuburg. 
Nearly 4,000 German-Lorraine peasants entrenched themselves at 
Saargemünd. Finally, two advanced troops, the Kolben troop in the 
Vosges at Stürzelbronn and the Kleeburg troop at Weissenburg, 
covered the front and the right flank, while the left flank hugged the 
Upper Alsatians. 
The latter, on the march since April 20, had forced Sulz into the 
peasant brotherhood on May 10, Gebweiler on May 12, and 
Sennheim and its vicinity on May 15. Though the Austrian 
Government and the surrounding imperial towns lost no time to join 
forces against them, they were too weak to offer serious resistance, 
not to speak of attacking. Thus, the whole of Alsace, with the 
exception of a few towns, fell into the hands of the insurgents by the 
middle of May. 
But the army that was to break the mischievous spirit of the 
Alsatians was already approaching. It was the French who here 
restored the power of the nobility. On May 6 Duke Anton of 
Lorraine marched with an army of 30,000, among them the flower 
of the French nobility and Spanish, Piedmontese, Lombardic, Greek 
and Albanian auxiliaries. On May 16 at Lützelstein he engaged 4,000 
peasants, whom he defeated without effort, and on May 17 he forced 
Zabern, which was occupied by the peasants, to surrender. But even 
while the Lorrainers were entering the city and the peasants were 
being disarmed, the terms of the surrender were violated. The 
defenseless peasants were attacked by the mercenaries and most of 
them slain. The remaining Lower Alsace columns disbanded, and 
Duke Anton marched on to engage the Upper Alsatians. The latter, 
who had refused to reinforce the Lower Alsatians at Zabern, were 
now attacked at Scherweiler by the entire force of Lorrainers. They 
put up a plucky fight, but the enormous numerical superiority of 
30,000 against 7,000, and betrayal by a number of knights, especially 
that of the magistrate of Reichenweier, reduced their daring to 
nought. They were beaten and dispersed to the last man. The Duke 

=====第498页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 475 
now proceeded to subdue the whole of Alsace with the usual cruelty. 
Only Sundgau was spared his presence. By threatening to call him 
into the land, the Austrian Government persuaded the peasants to 
conclude the Ensisheim agreement early in June. But it broke the 
agreement very soon and hanged the preachers and leaders of the 
movement en masse. The peasants rebelled anew, and Sundgau was 
finally drawn into the Offenburg agreement (September 18). 
Now it only remains to describe the Peasant War in the Alpine 
regions of Austria. These regions and the adjoining Archbishopric of 
Salzburg had been in continuous opposition to the government and 
the nobility since the Stara Prawa* As a result, the Reformation 
doctrines found a fertile soil there. Religious persecution and 
arbitrary oppressive taxation precipitated a rebellion. 
The city of Salzburg, supported by peasants and pitmen, had been 
in conflict with the Archbishopb  since 1522 over its city privileges 
and religious practices. Late in 1524 the Archbishop attacked the city 
with recruited mercenaries, terrorised it with the cannon of the 
castle, and persecuted the heretical preachers. At the same time he 
imposed new crushing taxes and thereby irritated the population 
to the extreme. In the spring of 1525, simultaneously with the 
Swabian-Franconian and Thuringian uprisings, the peasants and 
pitmen of the whole country suddenly rose up in arms, organised 
under the commanders Prassler and Weitmoser, liberated the city and 
besieged the castle of Salzburg. Like the West-German peasants, they 
organised a Christian Alliance and formulated their demands in 
articles, of which they had fourteen. 341 
In Styria, Upper Austria, Carinthia and Carniola, where new 
extortionate taxes, duties and edicts had severely injured the basic 
interests of the people, the peasants rose up in the spring of 1525. 
They took a number of castles and at Goyss defeated Dietrichstein, 
the old field commander and conqueror of the Stara Prawa. 
Although the government succeeded in placating some of the 
insurgents with false promises, the bulk of them stayed together and 
united with the Salzburg peasants, so that the entire region of 
Salzburg and the bigger portion of Upper Austria, Styria, Carinthia 
and Carniola were in the hands of the peasants and pitmen. 
In Tirol the Reformation doctrines had also found numerous 
adherents. Münzer's emissaries had been successfully active here, 
even more so than in the other Alpine regions of Austria. As 
elsewhere, Archduke Ferdinand persecuted the preachers of the 
a See this volume, p. 439.— Ed. 
b Matthäus Lang. — Ed. 

=====第499页=====
476 Frederick Engels 
new doctrine and impinged on the rights of the population by means 
of new arbitrary financial regulation«. The result, as everywhere, was 
an uprising that broke out in the spring of 1525. The insurgents 
commanded by Geismaier, a Münzer man who was the only one of 
the peasant chiefs to possess any military talent, took a great number 
of castles, and carried on energetically against the priests, particular­
ly in the South, in the Etsch a region. The Vorarlberg peasants also 
rose up and joined the Allgäu peasants. 
The Archduke, hard pressed from all sides, now began to make 
concession after concession to the rebels whom a short time before 
he had wished to annihilate by fire and destruction, plunder and 
carnage. He summoned the Diets of the hereditary lands and 
pending their opening concluded an armistice with the peasants. In 
the meantime he was arming for all he was worth, in order to be able 
to speak to the blasphemers in a different tongue in the nearest 
possible future. 
Naturally, the armistice was not observed for long. Having run 
short of cash, Dietrichstein began to levy contributions in the 
duchies; besides, his Slavic and Magyar troops indulged in the most 
disgraceful brutalities against the population. This incited the 
Styrians to a new revolt. The peasants attacked Dietrichstein at 
Schladming in the night of July 3, and slaughtered everybody who 
did not speak German. Dictrichstein himself was captured. In the 
morning of July 3 the peasants called a jury and sentenced to death 
forty Czech and Croatian nobles among their prisoners. They were 
beheaded on the spot. That had its effect; the Archduke immediately 
consented to all the demands of the estates of the five duchies 
(Upper and Lower Austria, Styria, Carinthia and Carniola). 
The demands of the Diet were also granted in Tirol, and thus the 
North was pacified. The South, however, stood firm on its original 
demands, scorning the much more moderate decisions of the Diet, 
and remained under arms. Only in December was the Archduke able 
to restore order by force. He did not fail to execute a great number 
of the instigators and leaders of the upheaval who fell into his hands. 
Ten thousand Bavarians moved in August against Salzburg under 
Georg von Frundsberg. This impressive show of strength and the 
quarrels that broke out in their ranks persuaded the Salzburg 
peasants to conclude an agreement with the archbishop on 
September 1, which was also accepted by the Archduke. However, 
the two princes, who had meanwhile considerably strengthened their 
troops, soon violated the agreement and thereby compelled the 
a The Italian name is Adige.— Ed. 

=====第500页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 477 
Salzburg peasants to start a new uprising. The insurgents held their 
own throughout the winter. In the spring Geismaier came to them 
and launched a splendid campaign against the forces approaching 
from every side. In a series of brilliant battles in May and June 1526, 
he successively defeated the Bavarian, Austrian and Swabian League 
troops and the mercenaries of the Archbishop of Salzburg, and for a 
long time prevented the various corps from uniting. He also found 
time to besiege Radstadt. Surrounded finally by superior forces, he 
was compelled to withdraw and fought his way out of the encir­
clement, leading the remnants of his troop across the Austrian Alps 
into Venetian territory. The Republic of Venice and Switzerland 
served the indefatigable peasant chief as starting points for new in­
trigues. For a whole year he endeavoured to involve them in a war 
with Austria, which would have given him an opportunity to begin a 
new peasant uprising. The hand of an assassin struck him down, 
however, in the course of these negotiations. Archduke Ferdinand 
and the Archbishop of Salzburg could not rest as long as Geismaier 
was alive. They hired an assassin who succeeded in ending the life of 
the dangerous rebel in 1527.a 
a According to more precise data Geismaier was assassinated on April 15, 
1532.—  Ed. 

=====第501页=====
478 
VII 
The epilogue of the Peasant War closed with Geismaier's 
withdrawal into Venetian territory. The peasants were everywhere 
brought back under the sway of their ecclesiastical, noble or patrician 
overlords. The agreements concluded with them here and there 
were violated and the heavy services augmented by the enormous 
indemnities imposed by the victors on the vanquished. The most 
magnificent revolutionary effort of the German people ended in 
ignominious defeat and, for the time being, in redoubled oppres­
sion. In the long run, however, the situation of the peasants was not 
made any worse by the suppression of the uprising. Whatever the 
nobility, princes and priests could wring out of the peasants year 
after year, had been wrung out even before the war. The German 
peasant of that time has this in common with the present-day 
proletarian, that his share in the products of his labour was limited 
to a subsistence minimum necessary for his maintenance and the 
propagation of the peasant race. On the whole, nothing more could 
be wrung out of the peasants. True, some of the better-off middle 
peasants were ruined, hosts of bondsmen were forced into serfdom, 
whole stretches of community land were confiscated, and a great 
many peasants were forced into vagabondage or became city 
plebeians due to the destruction of their homes, the devastation of 
their fields and the general dislocation. But war and devastation 
were everyday phenomena at that time and, in general, the peasant 
class was at too low a level for increased taxation to cause any lasting 
deterioration of its condition. The subsequent religious wars and, 
finally, the Thirty Years' War342 with its recurrent general devasta­
tion and depopulation affected the peasants much more painfully 
than the Peasant War. Notably, it was the Thirty Years' War which 

=====第502页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 479 
destroyed the most important part of the productive forces in 
agriculture, through which, as well as through the simultaneous 
destruction of many towns, the peasants, plebeians and ruined 
burghers were for a long time reduced to a state of Irish misery at its 
worst. 
Those who suffered most from the Peasant War were the clergy. 
Their monasteries and endowments were burned, their treasures 
plundered, sold abroad or melted down, and their stores consumed. 
They were everywhere the least capable of resistance, and yet they 
were the main target of the people's wrath. The other estates— 
princes, nobles and burghers—even experienced a secret joy at the 
distress of the hated prelates. The Peasant War had made popular 
the idea of secularising the church estates in favour of the peasants. 
The lay princes, and partly the towns, determined to secularise the 
estates for their own benefit, and soon the possessions of the prelates 
in Protestant regions were in the hands of the princes or the 
honourables. But the power of the ecclesiastical princes, too, was 
impaired, and the lay princes knew how to exploit the people's 
hatred in this respect. We have seen, for instance, how the Abbot of 
Fulda 3 was relegated from feudal lord to vassal of Philip of Hesse. 
The town of Kempten forced its prince-abbot b to sell it a number of 
the precious privileges he had enjoyed in the town for a ridiculous 
trifle. 
The nobility had also suffered considerably. Most of the noble­
men's castles were destroyed and some of the most respected families 
were ruined and found a living only in the employ of the princes. 
Their weakness in face of the peasantry had been proved. They had 
been beaten everywhere and had been forced to surrender. Only 
the armies of the princes had saved them. The nobility was bound to 
lose more and more of its significance as an estate of the Empire, 
and to fall under the dominion of the princes. 
The towns, too, generally gained nothing from the Peasant War. 
The rule of the honourables was almost everywhere re-established; 
the burgher opposition was broken for a long time. The old patrician 
routine dragged on in this way, tying up commerce and industry 
hand and foot up to the time of the French Revolution. Moreover, 
the towns were made responsible by the princes for the momentary 
successes the burgher or plebeian parties had gained within their 
borders during the struggle. The towns that had even previously 
belonged to princely estates had to pay heavy indemnities, to give up 
their privileges, and became defenceless prey to the avarice and 
a Johann Henneberg. — Ed. 
b Sebastian von Breitenstein. — Ed. 

=====第503页=====
480 Frederick Engels 
whims of the princes (Frankenhausen, Arnstadt, Schmalkalden, 
Würzburg, etc.). Towns of the Empire were incorporated into the 
territories of the princes (Mühlhausen, for example) or at least made 
morally dependent on the neighbouring princes, as was the case with 
many imperial towns in Franconia. 
Under the circumstances, the princes alone had benefited from 
the Peasant War. We have seen at the very beginning of our account 
that the deficient development of industry, commerce and agricul­
ture in Germany ruled out any centralisation of Germans into a 
nation, that it allowed only local and provincial centralisation, and 
that the princes, representatives of centralisation within disruption, 
were the only estate to profit from all the changes in the existing 
social and political conditions. The development of Germany in 
those days was at so low a level and at the same time so dissimilar in 
the various provinces that alongside the lay principalities there could 
still exist ecclesiastical sovereignties, city republics, and sovereign 
counts and barons. Simultaneously, however, this development was 
continually, though slowly and feebly, pressing for provincial 
centralisation, i.e. for the subordination of all the other imperial 
estates to the princes. That is why only the princes could have gained 
from the outcome of the Peasant War. And that is exactly what had 
happened. They gained not only relatively, from a weakening of 
their opponents—the clergy, nobility and the towns—but also 
absolutely, since they carried off the spolia opima (the main spoils) of 
all the other estates. The church estates were secularised in their 
favour; part of the nobility, fully or partly ruined, was obliged 
gradually to accept vassalage; the indemnities they received from the 
towns and peasant communities swelled their treasuries and, 
furthermore, the abolition of so many town privileges now afforded 
much greater scope to their favourite financial operations. 
The chief result of the Peasant War, the deepening and 
consolidation of German disunity, was also the reason for its failure. 
We have seen that Germany was split not only into countless 
independent, almost totally alien provinces, but that in every one of 
these provinces the nation was broken up into a multifold structure 
of estates and fractions of estates. Besides princes and priests we 
< ir;d nobles and peasants in the countryside, and in the towns we find 
patricians, burghers and plebeians, whose interests as estates 
differed radically even where they did not cross each other or come 
into conflict. Besides all these complicated interests there were still 
the interests of the Emperor and the Pope. We have seen how 
ponderously, imperfectly, and how differently in the various 
localities, all these interests finally gave shape to three major groups. 

=====第504页=====
The Peasant War in Germany 481 
We have seen that in spite of this painful grouping each estate 
opposed the line indicated by circumstances for the national 
development, that each estate acted on its own, coming into conflict 
not only with all the conservative, but also with the other opposition 
estates, and that it was bound to fail in the end. That was the fate of 
the nobility in Sickingen's uprising, of the peasants in the Peasant 
War, and of the burghers in all of their insipid Reformation. Thus, 
even the peasants and plebeians in most parts of Germany failed to 
unite for joint action and stood in each other's way. We have also 
seen the causes of this fragmentation of the class struggle and the 
resulting total defeat of the revolutionary and partial defeat of the 
burgher movements. 
How local and provincial disunity and the consequently inevitable 
local and provincial narrow-mindedness ruined the whole move­
ment; how neither burghers, peasants nor plebeians could unite for 
concerted national action; how the peasants of every province acted 
only for themselves, as a rule refusing aid to the insurgent peasants 
of the neighbouring regions, and were consequendy annihilated in 
separate battles one after another by armies which in most cases were 
hardly one-tenth the total number of the insurgent masses—all this 
should be sufficiently clear from this account. The various armistices 
and agreements concluded by individual troops with their adver­
saries represent just as many acts of betrayal of the common cause, 
and the fact that the only co-operation possible between the different 
troops was not according to the greater or lesser unity of their action, 
but to that of the particular enemy to whom they succumbed, is the 
most striking proof of the degree of the peasants' mutual alienation 
in the various provinces. 
Here also the analogy with the movement of 1848-50 leaps to 
the eye. In 1848 as well, the interests of the opposition classes 
conflicted and each class acted on its own. The bourgeoisie, too 
developed to suffer any longer the feudal and bureaucratic 
absolutism, was, however, not as yet powerful enough at once to 
subordinate the claims of other classes to its own interests. The 
proletariat, much too weak to count on a rapid passage through the 
bourgeois period and on an early conquest of power, had already 
learned too well under absolutism the honeyed sweetness of the 
bourgeois regime and was generally much too developed to iden­
tify for even a moment its own emancipation with that of the 
bourgeoisie. The mass of the nation—petty burghers, their as­
sociates (artisans), and peasants—was left in the lurch by its as yet 
natural ally, the bourgeoisie, because it was too revolutionary, and 
partly by the proletariat, because it was not sufficiently advanced. 

=====第505页=====
482 Frederick Engels 
Divided against itself the mass achieved nothing and opposed fellow 
opponents on the Right and Left. As to provincial narrow-
mindedness, it could hardly have been greater among the peasants in 
1525 than it was among the classes participating in the movement of 
1848.  The hundred local revolutions as well as the consequent and 
unhindered hundred local reactions, survival of the separation of 
numerous small states, etc., etc.—all this is eloquent testimony 
indeed. He who still dreams of a federated republic after the two German 
revolutions of 1525 and 1848 and their  results,  belongs nowhere else  but in a 
lunatic asylum. 
Still the two revolutions, that of the sixteenth century and that of 
1848-50, are, in spite of all analogies, essentially different. The 
Revolution of 1848 speaks for the progress of Europe, if not of 
Germany. 
Who profited from the Revolution of 1525? The princes. Who 
profited from the Revolution of 1848? The big princes, Austria and 
Prussia. Behind the minor princes of 1525 stood the petty burghers, 
who chained the princes to themselves by taxes. Behind the big 
princes of 1850, behind Austria and Prussia, there stand the modern 
big bourgeois, rapidly getting them under their yoke by means of the 
national debt. And behind the big bourgeois stand the proletarians. 
The Revolution of 1525 was a domestic German affair. The 
English, French, Bohemians and Hungarians had already had their 
peasant wars when the Germans began theirs. If Germany was 
disunited, Europe was much more so. The Revolution of 1848, on 
the other hand, was not a domestic German affair, and was an 
episode in a great European event. Its motive forces throughout its 
duration transcended the narrow limits of one country and even 
those of one part of the world. In fact, the countries which were the 
arena of revolution were the least active in producing it. They were 
more or less unconscious ancl hesitant raw material, moulded in the 
course of the movement in which the entire world participates today, 
a movement which under the existing social conditions may appear 
to us only as an alien power but which, in the end, is nothing but our 
own. This is why the Revolution of 1848-50 cannot end like the 
Revolution of 1525. 

=====第506页=====
483 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
[STATEMENT ON RESIGNATION FROM THE GERMAN 
WORKERS' EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY IN LONDON] 343 
To the Tuesday President of the Society in Great Windmill Street. 
Sir, 
The undersigned herewith give notice of their resignation from 
the Society. 
London, September 17, 1850 
H. Bauer, K. Pfänder, 
J. G. Eccarius, S. Seiler, 
K. Marx, K. Schramm, F. Engels, 
F. Wolff,  W. Liebknecht, 
Hain,  Haupt, G. Klose 
First published in the Anklageschrift Printed according to the manu-
gegen P. G. Roeser, J. H. G. Bürgers, script in Engels' hand 
P. Nothjung,... [Köln, 1852] 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第507页=====
484 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
[A LETTER TO ADAM, BARTHÉLÉMY 
AND VIDIL] 344 
TO MESSRS. ADAM, BARTHÉLÉMY AND VIDIL 
Gentlemen, 
We have the honour of informing you that we have, long since, 
considered the association you speak of as dissolved by fact. The only 
thing remaining to be done would be the destruction of the 
fundamental contract.3  Perhaps Mr. Adam or Mr. Vidil will have the 
kindness to call on Sunday next October 13th at noon, on Mr. Engels 
at Nr. 6, Macclesfield Street Soho, in order to witness the burning of 
the same. 
We have the honour to be, Gentlemen, 
your most obedient servants, 
London, October 9th, 1850 EnZds> Ma™> Harm? 
First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, Reprinted according to the rough 
Works, second Russ. ed., Vol. 7, 1956 copy in Engels' hand 
Published in English for the first 
time 
See this volume, pp.  614-15.—  Ed. 

=====第508页=====
485 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
[EDITORIAL COMMENT ON THE ARTICLE 
"TAILORING IN LONDON OR THE STRUGGLE 
BETWEEN BIG AND SMALL CAPITAL" 
BY J. G. ECCARIUS] 345 
The author of this article is himself a worker in one of London's 
tailoring shops.3 We ask the German bourgeoisie how many authors 
it numbers capable of grasping the real movement in a similar 
manner? 
Before the proletariat fights out its victories on the barricades and 
in the battle lines it gives notice of its impending rule with a series of 
intellectual victories. 
The reader will note how here, instead of the sentimental, moral 
and psychological criticism employed against existing conditions by 
Weitling and other workers who engage in authorship, a purely 
materialist understanding and a freer one, unspoilt by sentimental 
whims, confronts bourgeois society and its movement. Whereas 
craftsmen resist the collapse of their semi-medieval position and 
would like to unite as craftsmen, particularly in Germany and to a 
great extent also in France, the subjection of craft labour to 
large-scale industry is comprehended here as a step forward and 
celebrated, while at the same time, in the results and productions of 
large-scale industry, the real preconditions of the proletarian 
revolution, generated by history itself and daily generating them­
selves anew, are recognised and revealed. 
Written in October 1850 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue No. 5-6, 
1850,  marked by the editors "Editorial 
Comment" Published in English for the first 
time 
The word Schneidershop used in the original is a mixture of the German Schneider 
and the English  "shop".—  Ed. 

=====第509页=====
486 
Frederick Engels 
[ON THE SLOGAN OF THE ABOLITION 
OF THE STATE AND THE GERMAN 
"FRIENDS OF ANARCHY"]346 
"The abolition of the state has meaning with the Communists, only 
as the necessary consequence of the abolition of classes, with which 
the need for the organised might of one class to keep the others 
down automatically disappears. In  bourgeois  countries the abolition 
of the state means that the power of the state is reduced to the level 
found in North America. There, the class contradictions are but 
incompletely developed; every clash between the classes is concealed 
by the outflow of the surplus proletarian population to the west; 
intervention by the power of the state, reduced to a minimum in the 
east, does not exist at all in the west. In feudal countries the 
abolition of the state means the abolition of feudalism and the 
creation of an ordinary bourgeois state. In Germany it conceals 
either a cowardly flight from the struggles that lie immediately 
ahead, a spurious inflating of bourgeois freedom into absolute 
independence and autonomy of the individual, or, finally, the 
indifference of the bourgeois towards all forms of state, provided the 
development of bourgeois interests is not obstructed. It is of course 
not the fault of the Berliners Stirner and Faucher that this abolition 
of the state 'in the higher sense' is being preached in so fatuous a 
way. La plus  belle  fille de la France ne peut donner  que ce qu'elle  a." a (Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 4, p. 58. b) 
The abolition of the state, anarchy, has meanwhile become a 
universal catchword in Germany. The scattered German disciples of 
Proudhon, the "higher" democracy of Berlin and even the "noblest 
minds of the nation" of the Stuttgart parliament and the Imperial 
a The most beautiful girl in France can only give what she has.— Ed. 
See this volume, pp. 333-34.— Ed. 

=====第510页=====
On the Slogan of the Abolition of the State 487 
Regency,347 now altogether vanished, have appropriated to them­
selves, each in his own fashion, this savage-looking slogan. 
All of these factions agree in the maintenance of existing bourgeois 
society. Along with bourgeois society they therefore necessarily 
advocate the rule of the bourgeoisie and in Germany even the 
conquest ofa power by the bourgeoisie; they are distinguished from 
the true representatives of the bourgeoisie only by the strange form 
which gives them the appearance of "going further", of "going 
further than anybody". In all practical collisions this appearance 
vanished; confronted by the real anarchy of revolutionary crises,b 
where the massesc  [and the state power] fought each other with 
'brute force', these representatives of anarchy on each occasion did 
their best to control the anarchy. In the end the content of this 
much-vaunted "anarchy" amounted to the same thing as is 
expressed by the word "order" in more developed countries. The 
"Friends of Anarchy" in Germany are in complete entente cordiale 
with the "Friends of Order" in France. 
Insofar as the friends of anarchy are independent of the 
Frenchmen Proudhon and Girardin, insofar as their way of viewing 
things is of German origin, they all have a common source: Stirner. 
The period of dissolution of German philosophy has in general 
supplied the democratic party in Germany with most of its rhetorical 
commonplaces. The notions and phrases of the last of the German 
scripturists, namely Feuerbach and Stirner, had already before 
February, 0 in a somewhat dissolute form, passed into the general 
literary awareness and journalistic writing, and these again formed 
the principal source for the post-March democratic spokesmen. 
Stirner's sermon on statelessness in particular is excellently suited to 
give the 'superior consecration' of German philosophy to Proudhon's 
anarchy and Girardin's abolition of the state. Stirner's book Der 
Einzige und sein Eigenthum is forgotten, it is true, but its manner of 
thinking, especially its criticism of the state, appears again in the 
friends of anarchy. Although we have already investigated the 
Here the word "political" is crossed out in the manuscript.— Ed. 
The words "where the state power disappeared before the might of the people" 
(wo die Staatsmacht vor der Macht der Massen verschwand) are crossed out in the 
manuscript.— Ed. 
In the manuscript the following words are crossed out here; "have taken power 
into their own hands" (sich der Gewalt bemächtigen); judging from the context it 
should be replaced by: "und die Staatsmacht" (and the state power) as is reproduced 
by the editors in square brackets.— Ed. 
i.e. before the February 1848 Revolution in France.— Ed. 

=====第511页=====
488 Frederick Engels 
sources of these gentlemen insofar as they are of French origin,8 we 
are once more constrained to descend into the depths of antedilu­
vian German philosophy to examine their German sources. If one 
must, for one reason or another, concern oneself with day-to-day 
German polemics, it is always more pleasant to deal with the original 
inventor of a conception than with its second-hand pedlars. 
Saddle me my Hippogryph once more, O Muse, 
For a ride into th' old, romantic land! 
Before we take up Stirner's above-mentioned book we carry 
ourselves back into the "old, romantic land" and into the forgotten 
time in which this book appeared. The Prussian bourgeoisie, 
fastening upon the financial embarrassments of the government, 
began to conquer political power while simultaneously, alongside the 
bourgeois-constitutional movement, the communist movement of 
the proletariat was daily gaining ground. The bourgeois elements of 
society, still needing proletarian support to attain their own goals, 
had everywhere to affect a kind of socialism; the conservative and 
feudal party was similarly forced to make promises to the proletariat. 
Alongside the struggle of the bourgeois and the peasants against 
feudal aristocracy and bureaucracy, we had the struggle of the 
proletariat against the bourgeoisie, and in between these a series of 
intermediate stages of socialism, embracing all kinds of socialism, 
reactionary, petty-bourgeois and bourgeois socialism; all these 
struggles and endeavours held down damped down in their 
expression by the pressure of the ruling power, by the censorship, by 
the prohibition of associations and assemblies—such was the 
situation of the parties in the period in which German philosophy 
celebrated its last meagre triumphs. 
Right from the start the censorship forced the most abstract mode 
of expression upon all more or less unpopular elements; the Ger­
man philosophical tradition, which had just reached the complete 
dissolution of the Hegelian school, provided this expression. The 
struggle against religion was still being pursued. The more difficult 
the political struggle against established power became in the press, 
the more eagerly it was carried on in the form of the religious and 
philosophical struggle. German philosophy in its most dissolute form 
became the common property of the "educated", and the more it 
became common property, the more dissolute, confused and stale 
the philosophers became, and this dissoluteness and staleness 
See this volume, pp.  326-37.—  Ed. 
From Wieland 's poem "Oberon".— Ed. 

=====第512页=====
On the Slogan of the Abolition of the State 489 
again gave it a so much higher reputation in the eyes of the 
"educated" public. 
The confusion in the heads of the "educated" was terrifying, and 
it increased with every moment. It was a real mongrelising of ideas of 
German, French, English, antique, medieval and modern origin. 
The confusion was so much the greater because all the ideas were 
only possessed at second, third and fourth hand, and thus circulated 
in a form distorted beyond recognition. This fate was not only 
shared by the thoughts of the French and English liberals and 
socialists, but also by the ideas of Germans, for instance of Hegel. 
The whole literature of this period, and especially, as we shall see, 
Stirner's book, provides countless proofs of this, and present-day 
German literature is still labouring under the consequences. 
In this confusion, the philosophical shadow-boxing served as an 
image of the real struggles. Every "new turn" in philosophy excited 
the general attention of the "educated", who in Germany comprised 
a vast number of idle heads, articled clerks, aspirants to school posts, 
failed theologians, out-of-work medicos, literati, etc., etc. For these 
people a historical stage of development was superseded and done 
for for ever with every such "new turn". Bourgeois liberalism, for 
instance, as soon as any philosopher had criticised it in any way, was 
dead, erased from historical development and also annihilated as far 
as practice was concerned. Likewise republicanism, socialism and 
so on. How far these stages of development were "annihilated", 
"dissolved" and "done for" was subsequently shown in the 
revolution, when they played the most important part and when 
there was suddenly no more talk of their philosophical annihilators. 
The slovenliness in form and content, the arrogant platitudes and 
inflated insipidity, the unfathomable triviality and dialectical poverty 
of these latest German philosophers exceed anything that has 
previously existed in this discipline. It is only equalled by the 
unbelievable gullibility of the public, which took all these things at 
face value, for brand new, for "never seen before". The German 
nation, the "thorough" ...a 
Written not later than October 1850 Printed according to the manu­
script First published in Russian in the journal 
Pod Znamenem Marksizma No. 6, 1927 Published in English for the first 
time 
a The manuscript breaks off here.— Ed. 

=====第513页=====
490 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
REVIEW 
May to October [1850] 348 
The political turmoil of the last six months is fundamentally 
different from that which immediately preceded it. Everywhere the 
revolutionary party has been forced off the stage and the victors are 
quarrelling over the fruits of victory. Thus it is in France with the 
various factions of the bourgeoisie and in Germany with the various 
princes. The quarrel is being conducted with a great deal of noise, 
and it appears inevitable that there will be an open break and that the 
issue will be decided by force of arms; however what is inevitable is 
that the arms will remain unused and that peace treaties will time 
and again be used to conceal the indecision, so as to prepare for 
another sham war. 
Let us first examine the underlying reality beneath this superfi­
cial turbulence. 
The years 1843-45 were years of industrial and commercial 
prosperity, necessary consequences of the almost uninterrupted 
depression of industry in the period 1837-42. As always, prosperity 
very rapidly gave rise to speculation. Speculation regularly occurs at 
times when over-production is already in full swing. It provides 
channels by which this over-production may temporarily be diverted, 
whilst by this very process hastening the onset of the crisis and 
magnifying its impact. The crisis itself first breaks out in the field 
of speculation and only seizes hold of production later. Not 
over-production, but over-speculation, itself only a symptom of 
over-production, therefore appears to the superficial view as the 
cause of the crisis. The subsequent disruption of production appears 
not as a necessary consequence of its own previous exuberance, but 
merely as a repercussion of the collapse of speculation. However, as 
we cannot at the present moment give a complete history of the 

=====第514页=====
Review 491 
crisis 3 [after] 1843-45, we shall simply list the most significant of these 
same symptoms of over-production. 
In the years of prosperity from 1843 to 1845 the principal targets 
for speculation were railways, where it was based on a real need; 
corn, following the price rises of 1845 and the potato blight; cotton, 
after the bad harvest of 1846; and trade with East India and China, 
where it followed hard upon the opening up of the Chinese market 
by Great Britain. 
The expansion of the British railway system had already begun in 
1844 but did not develop fully until 1845. In that year alone the 
number of registered bills b for the setting up of railway companies 
amounted to  1,035.  In February 1846, after a vast number of these 
registered projects had already been abandoned, the moneys which 
were required to be deposited with the government for the 
remaining projects still totalled the enormous sum of £14,000,000 
and even in 1847 the sum total of moneys called for exceeded 
£42,000,000, of which over 36 million were for railways in Britain 
and laterC5V2 million for those abroad. This speculation had its 
heyday in the summer and autumn of 1845. Share prices rose 
continuously, and the speculators' profits soon drew every class of 
society into the whirlpool. Dukes and earls vied with merchants and 
manufacturers for the lucrative honour of sitting on the boards of 
the various lines; the members of the Lower House, the Bar and the 
Church were represented in strength on these bodies. Anybody who 
had a penny in savings, or who had the merest glimmer of credit to 
dispose of, speculated in railway shares. The number of railway 
newspapers rose from 3 to more than 20. Some large daily 
newspapers would often earn £14,000 in a week from railway 
advertisements and prospectuses. Engineers were simply not to be 
had in sufficient numbers and received enormous salaries. Printers, 
lithographers, bookbinders, stationers, etc., etc., who were set to 
preparing prospectuses, plans, maps, etc., etc., and furniture 
manufacturers who furnished the spate of offices of the countless 
new boards of management, provisional committees and the like, 
were paid munificently. Based on the real expansion of the British 
and continental railway systems and the speculation which was 
bound up with it, there gradually arose during this period a 
superstructure of fraud reminiscent of the time of Law and of the 
In a copy of the "Review" containing Engels' corrections the word "crisis" is 
replaced by the word "period".— Ed. 
The authors use the English word.— Ed. 
In a copy of the "Review" containing Engels' corrections the word später (later) is 
replaced by über (over).— Ed. 

=====第515页=====
492 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
South Sea Company.349 There were projects for hundreds of lines 
which had not the slightest chance of success, which their very 
authors never had any intention of really carrying out, and whose 
sole purpose indeed was to enable the directors to squander the 
deposits, and to make fraudulent profits from the sale of the shares. 
In October 1845 the reaction set in and grew in intensity until it 
soon became complete panic. Even before February 1846, when the 
deposits had to be paid to the government, the least viable projects 
had gone bankrupt. In April 1846 the repercussion had already 
reached the continental share markets. In Paris, Hamburg, 
Frankfurt and Amsterdam there was forced selling at very reduced 
prices, which brought bankruptcies of bankers and brokers in its 
train. The railway crisis dragged on into the autumn of 1848, 
prolonged by successive bankruptcies even of less unsound projects, 
as these were gradually affected by the general pressure and as 
invested money was called in, and accentuated by the spreading of 
the crisis to the other areas of speculation, trade and industry, as 
well, which progressively depressed the price of the older and 
sounder shares until these reached their lowest level in October 
1848. 
It was in August 1845 that the public first became aware of the 
potato blight which was appearing not only in Great Britain and 
Ireland but on the Continent as well—the first symptom that the 
roots of existing society were rotten. At the same time reports were 
coming in which no longer left any room for doubt about the 
expected grave deficiency in the corn harvest too. The price of corn 
rose significantly on all European markets as a result of these two 
circumstances; in Ireland there was universal famine which forced 
the British Government to make a loan of £8 million to that 
province—exactly one pound sterling for each Irishman. In France, 
where the calamity was further aggravated by the floods which 
caused damage to the value of some £4 million, the harvest failure 
was unusually severe. No less so in Holland and Belgium. The poor 
harvest of 1845 was followed by a worse one in 1846, and the potato 
blight also reappeared, although on a smaller scale. Thus speculation 
in grain was given an entirely real basis and it developed all the more 
powerfully since the abundant harvests of 1842-44 had long held 
it down almost completely. In the years 1845-47 more grain was 
imported into Britain than ever before. The price of corn rose con­
tinuously until the spring of 1847, when varying reports from the 
different countries .about the new harvest and the measures taken by 
various governments (opening of the ports to the free import of corn, 
etc., etc.) ushered in a period of fluctuation, and prices finally 

=====第516页=====
Review 493 
reached their peak in May 1847. In that month the average price of a 
quarter of wheat in Great Britain rose to  IO2V2  shillings and on some 
days to 115 and 124 shillings. But soon decidedly favourable reports 
came in about the weather and the ripening harvest; prices fell, and 
by mid-July the average price stood at only 74 shillings. Less 
favourable weather in some parts caused prices to rise again 
somewhat, until it was finally clear towards the middle of August that 
the 1847 harvest would be above average. The downward trend was 
now no longer to be contained; supplies to Great Britain increased 
beyond all expectation, and by September 18 the average price had 
been reduced to 49Vz shillings. Within the space of 16 weeks the 
average price had thus fluctuated by no less than 53 shillings. 
Throughout this period there had not only been a continua­
tion of the railway crisis, but at the very moment when corn prices 
were at their highest, in April and May 1847, the credit system was 
also completely dislocated and the money market completely dis­
rupted. The speculators in corn nevertheless withstood the fall in 
prices until August 2. On that day the Bank raised its lowest rate of 
discount to 5 per cent and for all bills of exchange at over two 
months to 6 per cent. There immediately followed a series of the 
most sensational bankruptcies on the Corn Exchange, headed by that 
of Mr. Robinson, Governor of the Bank of England. In London 
alone eight large corn companies failed, their liabilities together 
amounting to more than £172 million. The provincial corn markets 
were completely paralysed; bankruptcies followed hard upon each 
other here, especially in Liverpool, with equal speed. The 
corresponding business failures on the Continent in this field 
occurred with greater or lesser rapidity, depending on the distance 
from London. By September 18, the date of the lowest corn prices, 
the corn crisis in England can however be regarded as over. 
We now come to the commercial crisis proper, the money crisis. In 
the first four months of 1847 the general condition of trade and 
industry still appeared satisfactory, with the exception however of 
iron production and the cotton industry. Iron production, inflated 
to an enormous degree by the railway bubble of 1845, naturally 
suffered in proportion as the outlets diminished for the excess 
quantity of iron produced. In the cotton industry, the main branch 
of industry for the East Indian and Chinese markets, there had been 
over-production for these markets as early as 1845, and a relative 
recession had occurred very soon. The poor cotton harvest of 1846, 
the rise in the price both of the raw material and of the finished 
product, and the reduced consumption this entailed, increased the 
pressure on this industry. In the early months of 1847 production 

=====第517页=====
494 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
was cut back considerably throughout Lancashire, and the cotton 
workers were already affected by the crisis. 
On April 15, 1847, the Bank of England raised its lowest rate of 
discount on very short bills to 5 per cent; it restricted the total value 
of the bills to be discounted, and this without regard to the nature of 
the businesses on which the bills were drawn; finally it abruptly 
announced to the merchants to whom it had made advances that it 
would no longer renew these advances when they fell due, as it had 
usually done before, but [would] demand repayment. Two days later 
the publication of its weekly balance showed that the reserve fund of 
the Banking Department3 had fallen to £21/z million. The Bank had 
thus taken the above measures to stem the outflow of gold from its 
vaults and increase its liquidity once more. 
Various causes underlay the outflow of gold and silver from the 
Bank. Firstly, consumption and the significantly higher prices of 
almost all goods required an increase in circulation, especially of gold 
and silver, for retail trade. Then the continuing investment in 
railway construction, which in April alone had totalled £4,314,000, 
had made necessary the withdrawal of a mass of deposits from the 
Bank. A portion of the money called in, being destined for railways 
abroad, flowed directly overseas. The significant excess of imported 
sugar, coffee and other colonial products, whose consumption and 
whose prices had been pushed up even more by speculation,15 of 
cotton following speculative buying now that a poor harvest had 
become a certainty, and especially of corn following the repeated 
crop failures, had to be paid for largely in cash or bullion, which also 
resulted in a significant outflow of gold and silver overseas. This 
outflow of precious metals from Great Britain incidentally continued 
until the end of August despite the above measures taken by the 
Bank. 
The Bank's decisions and the news of the low level of its reserves 
immediately created pressure on the money market and panic 
throughout commerce in Great Britain of an intensity only seen in 
1845.  In the last weeks of April and the first four days of May almost 
all credit transactions were paralysed. There were, however, no 
abnormal bankruptcies; businesses survived by enormous interest 
payments and forced sales of stocks, government securities, etc., 
at ruinous prices. Even some of the sounder businesses merely 
prepared the ground for their later collapse by their escape from this 
first act of the crisis. The overcoming of the first, most menacing 
a The authors use the English words "Banking Department".— Ed 
In Engels' copy: "whose consumption and especially whose prices had been 
pushed up by speculation".— Ed. 

=====第518页=====
Review 495 
danger contributed considerably to an increase of confidence; from 
May 5 the pressure on the money market slackened visibly, and 
towards the end of May the alarm was more or less over. 
A few months later, however, at the beginning of August, there 
occurred the above-mentioned bankruptcies in the corn trade, which 
continued into September, and hardly had they run their course 
when the crisis broke out with redoubled fury throughout 
commerce, especially in the East Indian, West Indian and Mauritius 
trade, and indeed simultaneously in London, Liverpool, Manchester 
and Glasgow. During September twenty businesses failed in London 
alone, their total liabilities amounting to between £9 and £10 million. 
"There were uprootings of commercial dynasties in England not less striking than 
the fall of those political houses" on the Continent "of which we have lately heard so 
much," said Disraeli on August 30, 1848, in the Lower House. 
The failures in the East Indian business continued without respite 
until the end of the year and began again in the early months of 1848 
when the news came in of the bankruptcy of corresponding com­
panies in Calcutta, Bombay, Madras and Mauritius. 
This series of bankruptcies, unprecedented in the history of 
commerce, was caused by the general over-speculation and by the 
excessive importing of colonial products that this involved. The 
prices of these goods, which had long been kept artificially high, fell 
in some cases even before the panic of April 1847, but fell generally 
and significantly only after this panic, when the whole credit system 
collapsed and one business after another was driven to make massive 
forced sales. This downward trend was so steep, especially from June 
and July until November, that even the oldest and soundest busi­
nesses could not escape being ruined by it. 
The bankruptcies in September were still confined exclusively to 
actual commercial  enterprises.  On October 1 the Bank raised its lowest 
discount for short bills to  5lA?  per cent and declared at the same time 
that henceforth it would make no more advances on any government 
securities of whatever kind. Now the joint-stock banks and private 
bankers could no longer withstand the pressure either. The Royal 
Bank of Liverpool, the Liverpool Banking Company, the North and 
South Wales Bank, the Newcastle Union Joint-Stock Bank, etc., etc., 
succumbed one after the other within a few days. At the same time 
declarations of insolvency were made by a number of minor private 
bankers in every corner of Great Britain. 
Consequent upon this general closure of the banks which 
characterised October in particular, there followed in Liverpool, 
Manchester, Oldham, Halifax, Glasgow,etc., a significant number of 

=====第519页=====
496 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
bankruptcies of stock-, bill-, share-, ship-, tea- and cotton-brokers, 
iron producers and iron-merchants, cotton and wool spinners, 
calico-printers, etc. According to Mr. Tooke these bankruptcies were 
unprecedented in the history of British commerce, both in terms of 
their number and the amount of capital involved, and far exceeded 
those of the 1825 crisis. 3 The crisis had reached its peak on October 
23-25,  and all commercial transactions had come to a complete 
standstill. At this point a deputation from the City obtained a 
suspension of the Bank Act of 1844, that brainchild of the late Sir 
Robert Peel.350  This suspension temporarily put an end to the 
division of the Bank into two completely independent departments 
with two separate cash accounts; if the old system had continued 
for a few days longer, one of these departments, the Banking 
Department, 6 would inevitably have failed, whilst the Issue 
Department b had gold reserves of six million. 
The first repercussions of the crisis appeared on the Continent as 
early as October. Major bankruptcies occurred simultaneously in 
Brussels, Hamburg, Bremen, Elberfeld, Genoa, Leghorn, Courtrai, 
St. Petersburg, Lisbon and Venice. As the crisis abated in intensity in 
Great Britain, so it increased on the Continent and affected places 
that it had not hitherto reached. In the worst period the exchange 
rate favoured Great Britain, which consequently attracted a 
constantly increasing flow of gold and silver from November 
onwards, not only from Russia and the Continent, but also from 
America. The immediate result of this was that as the money market 
eased in Great Britain, it contracted elsewhere in the commercial 
world and the crisis spread there to an equal extent. The number of 
bankruptcies outside Great Britain thus rose in November; major 
insolvencies now also occurred in New York, Rotterdam, Amster­
dam, Le Havre, Bayonne, Antwerp, Mons, Trieste, Madrid and 
Stockholm. In December the crisis also broke out in Marseilles and 
Algiers, and acquired renewed vigour in Germany. 
We have now reached the point at which the February Revolution 
broke out in France. If one looks at the list of bankruptcies which Mr. 
D. M. Evans gives as an appendix to his Commercial Crisis 1847-1848 
(London, 1848),c one finds that in Britain not a single business of any 
note collapsed as a result of this revolution. The only insolvencies 
connected with it occurred on the stock market, as a result of the 
a Th. Tooke, A History of Prices,  and of  the State of  the Circulation, from 1839  to 1847 
inclusive, London, 1848, p. 316.— Ed. 
The names of the Bank departments are given in English in the original.— Ed. 
c D. M. Evans, The Commercial Crisis 1847-1848, Appendix, pp. LXX-LXXX.— Ed. 

=====第520页=====
Review 497 
sudden devaluation of all continental government stock. Similar 
bankruptcies of stock-brokers in Amsterdam, Hamburg, etc., as well, 
of course. British consols fell by 6 per cent, whereas they had fallen 
by 3 per cent after the July Revolution.3 For stockjobbers therefore 
the Republic of February was only twice as dangerous as the July 
monarchy. 
The panic which broke out in Paris after February and spread 
throughout the Continent at the same time as the revolutions, had a 
great deal of similarity to the London panic of April 1847. Credit 
suddenly vanished, and business transactions almost all came to a 
halt; in Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam everybody rushed to the 
Bank to exchange notes for gold; by and large,however,very few 
bankruptcies occurred outside the stock market, and even these few 
cannot easily be shown to be necessary consequences of the February 
Revolution. The Paris bank closures, which were mostly only of brief 
duration, were in part connected with the stock market, in part 
merely precautionary measures and certainly not the result of real 
insolvency, and finally in part the product of deliberate machinations 
to harass the Provisional Government and compel it to make 
concessions. In the case of failures of bankers and traders in other 
places on the Continent, it is impossible to decide to what extent they 
arose from the continuation and gradual spread of the commercial 
crisis,  to what extent the conditions of the day were at the same 
time used by businesses which had long been on the road to ruin in 
order to effect a judicious exit, or to what extent they were 
really consequences of losses resulting from the revolution panic. 
However, this much at least is certain, that the commercial crisis 
contributed infinitely more to the revolutions of 1848 than the 
revolution to the commercial crisis. Already between March and May 
Britain derived direct advantage from the revolution, which brought 
her large amounts of continental capital. From this moment on the 
crisis there must be regarded as over; in every branch of business an 
improvement came about, and the new industrial cycle began with a 
marked tendency towards prosperity. Just how little the revolution 
on the Continent hindered this upsurge of industry and trade in 
Great Britain is demonstrated by the fact that the quantity of cotton 
manufactured there'rose from £475 million (1847) to £713 million 
(1848). 
This renewed prosperity made visible progress in Great Britain 
during the three years 1848, 1849 and 1850. For the eight months 
from January to August, Great Britain's total exports amounted to 
a Of 1830.—Ed. 

=====第521页=====
498 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
£31,633,214 in 1848; to £39,263,322 in 1849; to £43,851,568 in 
1850.  Besides this significant rise, which was manifest in all branches 
of business with the exception of iron production, there were also the 
universally good harvests of these three years. The average price of 
wheat for 1848-50 fell to 36 shillings per quarter in Great Britain 
and to 32 shillings in France. What distinguishes this period of 
prosperity is that three main outlets for speculation were blocked. 
Railway construction had reverted to the slow development of an 
ordinary industry; with a series of abundant harvests, grain offered 
no scope; the revolutions had deprived government stock of its 
characteristic reliability, which is a prerequisite for the large-scale 
speculative turnover of stock. In every period of prosperity, capital 
is increased. On the one hand, increased production creates new 
capital; on the other hand, existing capital which was lying dormant 
during the crisis, is brought out of its inactivity and cast on to the 
market. In the absence of outlets for speculation between 1848 and 
1850,  this additional capital was of necessity injected into industry 
itself,  and thus increased production even more rapidly. How 
striking this is in Great Britain, although no one can explain it, is 
demonstrated by the naive observations of The Economist on October 
19, 1850. 
"It is remarked that the present prosperity differs substantially from that of all 
former periods, in all of which there was some baseless speculation exciting hopes that 
were destined not to be realised. At one time it was foreign mines, at another more 
railways than could be conveniendy made in half a century. Even when such 
speculations were well founded, they contemplated a realisation of income, from 
raising metals or creating new conveniences and markets, at the end of a considerable 
period, and afforded no immediate reward. But at present our prosperity is founded 
on the production of things immediately useful, and that go into consumption nearly 
as fast as they are brought to market, returning to the producers a fair remuneration 
and stimulating more production." 
The most striking demonstration of the great increase in industrial 
production in 1848 and 1849 is provided by the most important 
sector of industry, cotton manufacturing. The cotton harvest of 1849 
in the United States was more abundant than any previous one. It 
amounted to 2% million bales or approximately 1,200 million 
pounds. The expansion of the cotton industry kept pace with this 
increased supply to such an extent that at the end of 1849 stocks 
were lower than they had been even after years of bad harvest. In 
1849 over 775 million pounds of cotton were spun, whereas in 1845, 
The words "and markets" were added by the authors.— Ed. 

=====第522页=====
Review 499 
the year of the greatest prosperity hitherto, only 721 million had 
been manufactured. The expansion of the cotton industry is further 
demonstrated by the great rise in the price of cotton (55 per cent) as 
a result of a comparatively insignificant decline in the yield in 1850. 
At least equal progress is manifested in all the other branches, such 
as spinning and weaving of silk, wool, mixtures and linen. The 
export of the products of these industries rose so considerably, 
especially in 1850, that it brought about the great rise in overall 
exports of that year (12 million compared with 1848, 4 million 
compared with the first eight months of 1849), although the export 
of cotton goods decreased noticeably in 1850 as a result of the poor 
cotton harvest. Despite the significant rise in the price of wool, which 
speculation appeared to be causing as early as 1849 and which has 
nevertheless continued until the present, the woollen industry has 
been continuously expanding and new looms are brought into 
commission daily. In 1844, the year of the highest linen exports 
hitherto, exports of linen fabrics totalled 91 million yards, having a 
value of £2,800,000, and in 1849 they reached the level of 107 
million yards, having a value of over £3,000,000. 
Another demonstration of the growth of British industry is 
provided by the constandy increasing consumption of the main 
colonial products, especially of coffee, sugar and tea, at a time of 
continuously rising prices, at least of the first two items. This increase 
in consumption is all the more directly a consequence of the 
expansion of industry as the exceptional market since 1845, which 
was produced by the extraordinary investment in railways, has long 
been reduced to its normal dimensions, and the low corn prices of 
the last few years have not permitted any increased consumption in 
agricultural areas. 
The great expansion in the cotton industry in 1849 led in the last 
few months of that year to a renewed attempt to make use of the East 
Indian and Chinese markets. But the quantity of old stocks that 
had not yet been disposed of in those areas soon imposed restraints 
on this attempt once more. At the same time, with the rising 
consumption of raw materials and colonial products, an attempt 
was made to speculate also in these articles, but that too was soon 
terminated by a temporary increase in supplies and by the memory 
of the still too recent wounds of 1847. 
The prosperity of industry will be further increased by the recent 
opening up of the Dutch colonies, by the imminent establishment of 
new lines of communication in the Pacific Ocean, of which we shall 
have more to say, and by the great industrial exhibition of 1851. This 
exhibition had already been announced by the British bourgeoisie in 

=====第523页=====
500 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
1849,  with the most astounding sang-froid, when the dreams of the 
whole Continent were still haunted by revolution. Under its auspices 
the British bourgeoisie is summoning every one of its vassals from 
France to China to gather for a great examination at which they 
will have to show how they have used their time; and even the 
omnipotent Tsar of Russia3 cannot but command his subjects to 
appear in large numbers at this great test. This great world congress 
of products and producers has an altogether different significance 
from the absolutist congresses of Bregenz and Warsaw,351 which are 
putting our democratic philistines on the Continent into such a 
sweat, or the European democratic congresses which the various 
provisional governments in partibush are constantly planning anew 
for the salvation of the world. This exhibition is a striking dem­
onstration of the concentrated power with which modern large-
scale industry is breaking down national barriers everywhere 
and increasingly blurring local peculiarities of production, social 
relations and the character of each individual nation. By displaying, 
narrowly confined within a small space, the whole mass of the 
productive forces of modern industry, precisely at a time when 
modern bourgeois relations have already been undermined from 
every side, it is at the same time exposing to view the material which 
has been produced amidst these conditions of decay and is still being 
produced each day for the building of a new society. By means of this 
exhibition the bourgeoisie of the world is erecting in the modern 
Rome its Pantheon in which to exhibit with proud self-satisfaction 
the gods it has made to itself .In so doing it is proving in practice that 
the "impotence and annoyance of the citizen", about which German 
ideologists have been preaching year in, year out, is only the 
impotence of these gentlemen themselves to comprehend the 
modern movement, and their own annoyance at this impotence. The 
bourgeoisie is celebrating this, its greatest festival, at a moment 
when the collapse of all its glory is at hand, a collapse which will 
demonstrate more conclusively than ever to it that the powers it has 
brought into being have grown beyond its control. At a future 
exhibition the bourgeois will perhaps no longer figure as owners of 
these productive forces but only as their ciceroni. 
Just as the potato blight in 1845 and 1846, since the beginning of 
this year the deficiency of the cotton harvest is spreading universal 
terror amongst the bourgeoisie. This terror has been further 
a Nicholas I.— Ed. 
Here governments in partibus means governments with nobody to govern, by 
analogy with Roman Catholic bishops in partibus infidelium, i. e. bishops appointed to 
dioceses in non-Christian countries.— Ed. 

=====第524页=====
Review 501 
considerably intensified since it has become clear that the cotton 
harvest of 1851 will certainly not prove to be much more abundant 
than that of 1850 either. The deficiency, which would have been 
insignificant in former times, is of major proportions in view of the 
present size of the cotton industry and has already had a most 
restrictive effect on its activity. The bourgeoisie, which had scarcely 
recovered from the depressing discovery that one of the basic pillars 
of its whole social order, the potato, was in danger, now sees its 
second pillar, cotton, threatened as well. If but a single moderately 
poor cotton harvest and the prospect of a second one could provoke 
grave alarm amid the jubilation of prosperity, a few years in 
succession of outright failure in cotton will inevitably hurl the whole 
of civilised society temporarily back into barbarism. The golden age 
and the iron age are long past; it remained for the nineteenth 
century with its intelligence, its world market and its colossal 
productive forces to create the cotton age.  The British bourgeoisie at 
the same time felt more than ever before what an oppressive 
domination the United States has over them through its as yet 
unbroken monopoly of cotton production. They at once set about 
the business of breaking this monopoly. Not only in East India but 
also in Natal and the northern parts of Australia and indeed in every 
part of the world where climate and conditions permit the cultivation 
of cotton, they have decided to promote it by every means. At 
the same time the British bourgeoisie who sympathise with 
the Negroes are discovering that "the prosperity of Manchester 
dependent on the treatment of slaves in Texas, Alabama and 
Louisiana, is as curious as it is alarming". (The Economist,September 
21, 1850.a) The fact that the crucial sector of British industry is based 
on the existence of slavery in the southern states of the American 
Union and that a Negro revolt in those areas can ruin the whole 
present system of production is of course very depressing for the 
people who a few years ago spent £20 million on the emancipation of 
the Negroes in their own colonies.352 This fact, however, at the same 
time leads to the only feasible solution to the slave question, which 
has now once more led to such long and heated debates in the 
American Congress. American cotton production is based on slavery. 
As soon as industry has developed to the point when the cotton 
monopoly of the United States has become intolerable to it, cotton 
will be successfully produced in vast quantities in other countries, 
which almost everywhere can now only be done through free  workers. 
a "Slavery in the United States. To the Editor of The Economist", The Economist No. 
369, September 21, 1850.— Ed. 
19-1124 

=====第525页=====
502 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
But as soon as the free labour of other countries provides industry 
with its cotton supplies in sufficient quantity and more cheaply than 
the slave labour of the United States, American slavery will have 
been broken at the same time as the American cotton monopoly, and 
the slaves will be emancipated because as slaves they will have 
become unusable. In exactly the same way wage labour will be 
abolished in Europe as soon as it not only ceases to be a necessary 
form of production, but has even become a hindrance to it. 
If the new cycle of industrial development which began in 1848 
follows the same course as that of 1843-47, the crisis would break out 
in 1852. As a symptom of the fact that the over-speculation which is 
produced by over-production, and which precedes every crisis, can 
no longer be far away, we would mention here that for two years the 
Bank of England's rate of discount has stood no higher than 3 per 
cent.3 If however the Bank of England keeps its interest rate low in 
times of prosperity, the other money merchants must set theirs even 
lower, just as in times of crisis, when the Bank raises the interest rate 
significantly, they keep it above that of the Bank. The additional 
capital which, as we saw above, is regularly cast on to the loan market 
in times of prosperity, by itself depresses the rate of interest 
significantly, according to the laws of competition; this rate is 
however reduced to a much greater degree by the credit, which has 
been enormously swollen by the general prosperity, as this 
diminishes the demand for capital. In these periods the government 
is enabled to bring down the interest rate on its consolidated debts 
and the landowner to renew his mortgages on more favourable 
conditions. Thus, at a time when the income of all the other classes is 
rising, the capitalists of the loan market see their own diminished by 
a third or more. The longer this state of affairs lasts, the more they 
are compelled to look around for a more profitable investment for 
their capital. Over-production gives rise to numerous new projects, 
and the success of a few of them suffices to propel a whole series of 
capital investments in the same direction, until the bubble gradually 
becomes universal. At this moment there are, however, as we have 
seen, only two possible major outlets for speculation: cotton growing 
and the new world market links which have been created by the 
development of California and Australia. One can see that it will 
have vastly greater scope for its activity this time than it had in any 
previous period of prosperity. 
Let us also take a look at the situation in the agricultural areas of 
Great Britain. Here the abolition of the duty on corn and the 
a The text of the "Review" mistakenly has 2 per cent.— Ed. 

=====第526页=====
Review 503 
simultaneous abundant harvests have made the general pressure 
chronic, though to some extent reduced by the significantly 
increased consumption resulting from prosperity. Furthermore, 
farm workers at least always find themselves in a relatively improved 
position when corn prices are low, although this improvement is less 
marked in Great Britain than in countries where fragmentation of 
landed property predominates. In these conditions the protectionists 
continue to agitate in the farming districts for restoration of the duty 
on corn, although less explicitly, more covertly than before. It is 
obvious that their agitation will have no significance at all as long as 
industrial prosperity and the relatively more tolerable situation of 
the farm workers last. However as soon as the crisis breaks out 
and has repercussions on the farming districts, the depression in 
agriculture will rouse feelings in the countryside to an unusually 
high degree. On this occasion for the first time the industrial and 
commercial crisis will coincide with a crisis in agriculture, and in all 
questions in which town and country, manufacturers and landown­
ers are opposed to one another, both parties will be supported by 
two great armies; the manufacturers by the mass of industrial 
workers, the landowners by the mass of agricultural workers. 
We now come to the United States of North America. The crisis of 
1836,  which had its first and most violent manifestations there, lasted 
almost without interruption until 1842 and resulted in a complete 
revolution in the American credit system. On this sounder basis, 
trade in the United States recovered, admittedly very slowly at first, 
until from 1844 and 1845 onwards prosperity grew there significant­
ly too. Both the rise in prices and the revolutions in Europe were for 
America simply sources of profit. From 1845 to 1847 it profited 
from the enormous export of corn and from the increased price of 
cotton after 1846. It was only little affected by the crisis of 1847. The 
1849 cotton harvest was its largest yet, and in 1850 it profited by 
about $20 million from the poor cotton harvest, which coincided 
with the new upsurge in the European cotton industry. The revo­
lutions of 1848 resulted in a great outflow of European capital to the 
United States, which in part arrived with the immigrants themselves 
and in part was invested from Europe in American government 
stock. This increased demand for American consolidated stocks 
raised the price of the latter to such an extent that speculators in New 
York have recently been falling over themselves in pursuit of them. 
Despite all assurances to the contrary from the reactionary bourgeois 
press,  we therefore persist in our opinion that the only form of state 
in which our European capitalists have confidence is the bourgeois 
republic. Indeed, bourgeois confidence in any form of state only 
18* 

=====第527页=====
504 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
expresses itself in one way: by its quotation on the Stock Exchange. 
The prosperity of the United States was increased even more 
however by other factors. The inhabited area, the market of the 
North American Union, was expanding in two directions with 
surprising rapidity. The growth of the population, both by natural 
increase and by the constant rise in immigration, led to the effective 
controla of whole states and territories. Wisconsin and Iowa became 
comparatively densely populated within a few years, and all the 
upper Mississippi states received immigrants in significantly larger 
numbers. The working of the mines on Lake Superior and the rising 
corn production in the. whole area of the Lakes gave trade and 
shipping on this major inland waterway system a new impulse which 
will be further increased as a result of an act passed by the last session 
of Congress greatly facilitating trade with Canada and Nova Scotia. 
Whilst the north-western states have thus acquired importance of a 
quite new order, Oregon has been colonised within a few years, 
Texas and New Mexico annexed and California conquered. The 
discovery of the Californian gold-mines set the seal on the prosperity 
of America. In the second issue of this Revueh we have already 
pointed out, before any other European periodical, the importance 
of the discovery and the consequences it is bound to have for the 
whole of world trade. This importance lies not in the increase in the 
amount of gold through the discovery of new mines, although this 
increase in the means of exchange could certainly not fail to have a 
positive effect on trade in general either. It lies in the incentive which 
the mineral wealth of California gave to capital on the world market, 
in the activity which was generated throughout the west coast 
of America and the east coast of Asia, in the new market for goods 
which was created in California and in all the countries within 
California's influence. The Californian market  is considerable enough 
by itself;  a year ago there were 100,000 and now at least 300,000 
people there producing scarcely anything but gold, and exchang­
ing this gold for all their requirements from markets else 
where. But the Californian market is insignificant compared with 
the continuing expansion of all the markets of the Pacific Ocean, 
compared with the striking growth in trade in Chile and Peru, 
in Western Mexico and on the Sandwich Islands,c and compared 
with the sudden development of Asian and Australian traffic with 
In Engels' copy of the "Review" the word Überwachung (control) is replaced by 
Urbarmachung (reclamation).— Ed. 
See this volume, pp. 265-66.— Ed. 
Now the Hawaiian Islands.— Ed. 

=====第528页=====
Review 505 
California. California has created a need for totally new lines of 
world communication, lines which are bound shortly to exceed all 
others in importance. The main trade route to the Pacific Ocean, 
which has only now really been opened up and which is becoming 
the most important ocean in the world, will henceforth cross the 
Isthmus of Panama. The establishment of communications on this 
isthmus by means of roads, railways and canals has now become the 
most urgent requirement of world trade and is already being tackled 
in some places. The railway from Chagres to Panama is already being 
built. An American company is having the area of the San Juan de 
Nicaragua River surveyed in order to connect the two oceans initially 
by an overland route and subsequently by a canal at this point. Other 
routes, such as that across the Isthmus of Darien, the Atrato route in 
New Granada 3 and that across the Isthmus of Tehuantepee, are 
being discussed in British and American papers. In view of the whole 
civilised world's newly and suddenly revealed ignorance of the 
nature of the terrain in Central America, it is impossible to decide 
which route is the most advantageous for a large canal; to judge by 
the few facts that are known, the Atrato route and the route across 
Panama are the most promising. In connection with the communi­
cations across the isthmus, the rapid expansion of ocean steam 
navigation has become equally pressing. Steamships already ply 
between Southampton and Chagres, New York and Chagres, Val­
paraiso, Lima, Panama, Acapulco and San Francisco; but these few 
lines with their small number of steamers are far from adequate. It is 
becoming daily more necessary to supplement the steamship services 
between Europe and Chagres, and the growing traffic between Asia, 
Australia and America is demanding new, large-scale steamship 
services from Panama and San Francisco to Canton, Singapore, 
Sydney, New Zealand and the most important port-of-call in the 
Pacific Ocean, the Sandwich Islands. Of all areas of the Pacific 
Ocean, Australia and New Zealand in particular have made the 
greatest advance, both on account of the rapid progress of 
colonisation and on account of the influence of California, and will 
not stand a moment longer being isolated from the civilised world by 
a four- to six-month voyage by sail. The total population of the 
Australian colonies (not including New Zealand) rose from 170,, 676 
(1839) to 333,764 in 1848, thus increasing by 95Va per cent in 9 
years.  Great Britain herself cannot -leave these colonies without a 
steamer connection; the government is negotiating at this moment 
for a line to join up with the East Indian overland post, and whether 
Name changed to Colombia in  1863.—  Ed. 

=====第529页=====
506 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
this comes about or not, the need for a steamer connection with 
America and especially California, which was the destination of 
3,500 emigrants from Australia last year, will soon take care of  itself. 
One can really say that the earth has only begun to become round 
since this world-wide ocean steam navigation has become necessary. 
This imminent expansion of steamship services will be further 
intensified by the above-mentioned opening up of the Dutch 
colonies and by the increased number of propeller-driven steam­
ships which, it is becoming more and more evident, can transport 
emigrants faster, relatively more cheaply and more conveniently 
than sailing ships. In addition to the propeller-driven steamers which 
already go from Glasgow and Liverpool to New York, new ones are 
to be brought into service on this line, and a line is to be established 
between Rotterdam and New York. The extent indeed to which 
ocean steam navigation at present tends to be a target for capital is 
demonstrated by the continuing increase in the number of steamers 
competing on the run between Liverpool and New York, the 
establishment of quite new lines from Great Britain to the Cape and 
from New York to Le Havre, and a whole series of similar projects 
which are now being peddled about in New York. 
With this flow of capital into overseas steamship services and the 
canalisation of the American isthmus, the foundation has already 
been laid for over-speculation in this field. The centre for this 
speculation is inevitably New York, which receives the bulk of the 
gold from California and which has already attracted most of the 
trade with California to itself and indeed plays the same role relative 
to the whole of America as London does relative to Europe. New 
York is already the centre for all the transatlantic steamship serv­
ices; all the steamships in the Pacific Ocean belong to New York 
companies, and almost all new projects in this field emanate from 
New York. Speculation in overseas steamer services has already 
begun in New York. The Nicaragua Company, which originated in 
New York, likewise represents the beginning of speculation in the 
isthmus canals. Over-speculation will develop very soon, and even 
if British capital becomes involved on a large scale in all such 
undertakings, even if the London Stock Exchange is overwhelmed 
with similar projects of every kind, nevertheless this time New York 
will remain the centre of the whole swindle3 and, as in 1836, will be 
the first to suffer when it collapses. Countless projects will be ruined, 
but like the British railway system in 1845, this time the outline 
at least of world-wide steam navigation will emerge from this 
Here Engels' copy has "1857" in the margin.— Ed. 

=====第530页=====
Review 507 
over-speculation. However many companies go bankrupt, the 
steamships which are doubling traffic across the Atlantic, which are 
opening up the Pacific Ocean and are linking Australia, New 
Zealand, Singapore and China with America and reducing the 
length of a voyage round the world to four months—these will 
remain. 
The prosperity of Great Britain and America soon had repercus­
sions on the European continent. As early as the summer of 1849 
factories in Germany, especially in the Rhine Province, were once 
more fairly busy, and from the end of 1849 the revival of business 
was general. This renewed prosperity, which our German burghers 
naively attribute to the establishment of peace and order, is in reality 
based solely on the renewed prosperity of Great Britain and the 
increased demand for industrial goods on the American and tropical 
markets. In 1850 industry and trade made yet further advances; 
exactly as in Great Britain there occurred a momentary surplus of 
capital and an extraordinary easing of the money market, and 
reports on the autumn fairs in Frankfurt and Leipzig sound ex­
tremely satisfactory to those members of the bourgeoisie who have a 
stake in them. Not for an instant were the disturbances in Schles­
wig-Holstein and Hesse-Cassel, the disputes concerning the union 
and the threatening notes sent by Austria and Prussia 353 able to 
hold up the development of all these symptoms of prosperity, as The 
Economist indeed observed3 in its supercilious cockneyb way. 
The same symptoms have shown themselves in France since 1849, 
and particularly since the beginning of 1850.° The Parisian 
industries are abundantly employed and the cotton factories of 
Rouen and Mulhouse are also doing pretty well, although here, as in 
England, the high prices of the raw material have exercised a 
retarding influence. The development of prosperity in France was, 
in addition, especially promoted by the comprehensive tariff reform 
in Spain and by the reduction of the duties on various luxury articles 
in Mexico; the export of French commodities to both markets has 
considerably increased. The growth of capital in France led to a 
series of speculations, for which the large-scale exploitation of 
the Californian gold-mines served as a pretext. A swarm of 
companies has sprung up, the low denomination of whose shares 
"Spirit of the Trade Circulars", The Economist No. 366, August 31, 1850. 
The authors use the English word.— Ed. 
In 1895 Engels included the section on the economic position of France 
up to the words "We now come to the political events..." in Chapter IV of 
Marx's The Class Struggles in France (see this volume, pp. 132-35).— Ed. 

=====第531页=====
508 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
and whose socialist-coloured prospectuses appeal directly to the 
purses of the petty bourgeois and the workers, but which one and 
all result in that sheer swindling which is characteristic of the 
French and Chinese alone. One of these companies is even 
patronised directly by the government. The import duties in France 
during the first nine months of 1848 amounted to 63,000,000 francs, 
of 1849 to 95,000,000 francs and of 1850 to 93,000,000 francs. 
Moreover, in the month of September 1850, they again rose by more 
than a million compared with the same month of 1849. Exports also 
rose in 1849, and still more in 1850. 
The most striking proof of restored prosperity is the bank's 
reintroduction of specie payment by the law of August 6, 1850. On 
March 15, 1848, the bank had been authorised to suspend specie 
payment. Its note circulation, including the provincial banks, 
amounted at that time to 373,000,000 francs (£14,920,000). On 
November 2, 1849, this circulation amounted to 482,000,000 francs, 
or £19,280,000, an increase of £4,360,000, and on September 2, 
1850,  to 496,000,000 francs, or £19,840,000, an increase of about 
£5,000,000. This was not accompanied by any devaluation of the 
notes;  on the contrary, the increased circulation of the notes was 
accompanied by the steadily increasing accumulation of gold and 
silver in the vaults of the bank, so that in the summer of 1850 its 
metallic reserve amounted to about £14,000,000, an unprecedented 
sum in France. That the bank was thus placed in a position to 
increase its circulation and therewith its active capital by 123,000,000 
francs, or £5,000,000, is striking proof of the correctness of our 
assertion in an earlier issue 3 that the finance aristocracy has not only 
not been overthrown by the revolution, but has even been 
strengthened. This result becomes still more evident from the 
following survey of French bank legislation during the last few years. 
On June 10, 1847, the bank was authorised to issue notes of 200 
francs; hitherto the smallest denomination had been 500 francs. A 
decree of March 15, 1848, declared the notes of the Bank of France 
legal tender and relieved the bank of the obligation of redeeming 
them in specie. Its note issue was limited to 350,000,000 francs. It 
was simultaneously authorised to issue notes of 100 francs. A decree 
of April 27 prescribed the merging of the departmental banks in the 
Bank of France; another decree, of May 2, 1848, increased the 
latter's note issue to 452,000,000 francs. A decree of December 22, 
1849,  raised the maximum of the note issue to 525,000,000 francs. 
See pp. 114-18 (the reference is to the third issue of the  Revue).—  Ed. 

=====第532页=====
Review 509 
Finally, the law of August 6, 1850, re-established the exchangeability 
of notes for specie. These facts, the continual increase in the 
circulation, the concentration of the whole of French credit in the 
hands of the bank and the accumulation of all French gold and silver 
in the bank's vaults, led M. Proudhon to the conclusion that the bank 
must now shed its old snakeskin and metamorphose itself into a 
Proudhonist people's bank.354 He did not even need to know the 
history of the restriction on the English bank from 1797-1819355; 
he only needed to direct his glance across the Channel to see that 
this fact, for him unprecedented in the history of bourgeois society, 
was nothing more than a very normal bourgeois event, which now 
only occurred in France for the first time. One sees that the allegedly 
revolutionary theoreticians who, after the Provisional Government, 
talked big in Paris, were just as ignorant of the nature and the results 
of the measures taken as the gentlemen of the Provisional 
Government themselves. 
In spite of the industrial and commercial prosperity that France 
momentarily enjoys, the mass of the people, the twenty-five million 
peasants, suffer from a great depression. The good harvests of the 
last few years have forced the prices of corn in France much lower 
even than in England, and the position of the peasants under such 
circumstances, in debt, sucked dry by usury and crushed by taxes, 
must be anything but splendid. The history of the last three years 
has, however, provided sufficient proof that this class of the 
population is absolutely incapable of any revolutionary initiative. 
Just as the period of crisis occurs later on the Continent than in 
England, so does that of prosperity. The original process always 
takes place in England; it is the demiurge of the bourgeois cosmos. 
On the Continent, the different phases of the cycle through which 
bourgeois society is ever speeding anew occur in secondary and 
tertiary form. First, the Continent exported incomparably more to 
England than to any other country. This export to England, 
however, in turn depends on the position of England, particularly 
with regard to the overseas market. Then England exports to the 
overseas lands incomparably more than the entire Continent, so that 
the quantity of Continental exports to these lands is always 
dependent on England's overseas exports at the time. While, 
therefore, the crises first produce revolutions on the Continent, the 
foundation for these is, nevertheless, always laid in England. Violent 
outbreaks must naturally occur rather in the extremities of the 
bourgeois body than in its heart, since the possibility of adjustment is 
greater here than there. On the other hand, the degree to which 
Continental revolutions react on England is at the same time the 

=====第533页=====
510 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
barometer which indicates how far these revolutions really call in 
question the bourgeois conditions of life, or how far they only hit 
their political formations. 
With this general prosperity, in which the productive forces of 
bourgeois society develop as luxuriantly as is at all possible within 
bourgeois relationships, there can be no talk of a real revolution. 
Such a revolution is only possible in the periods when both  these  fac­
tors, the modern productive forces and the bourgeois forms of production, 
come in collision with each other. The various quarrels in which the 
representatives of the individual factions of the Continental party of 
Order now indulge and mutually compromise themselves, far from 
providing the occasion for new revolutions are, on the contrary, 
possible only because the basis of the relationships is momentarily so 
secure and, what the reaction does not know, so bourgeois. All 
reactionary attempts to hold up bourgeois development will rebound 
off it just as certainly as all moral indignation and all enthusiastic 
proclamations of the democrats. A new revolution is possible only in 
consequence  of a new crisis. It is, however, just as certain as this crisis. 
We now come to the political events of the last six months. 
As far as Great Britain is concerned, each spell of prosperity is a 
time when Whiggery comes into its own, having its proper incar­
nation in Lord John Russell, the smallest man in the kingdom. 
The ministry brings before Parliament little hole-and-corner reform 
bills which it knows will be rejected by the Upper House or which 
it withdraws itself at the end of the session on the pretext of 
insufficient time. The lack of time however always arises because of 
the preceding superabundance of tedium and empty talk, which the 
Speaker terminates as late as possible with the observation that that is 
not the matter before the House. The struggle between Free-traders 
and Protectionists degenerates into pure humbug at such times. The 
majority of Free-traders are too busy with the material exploitation 
of free trade to have the time or inclination to fight more astutely3 
for its political implications; the Protectionists, faced with the 
upsurge of urban industry, are reduced to the most absurd cries of 
woe and threats. The parties continue their war simply for the sake 
of appearances, so that neither side shall ever forget the existence of 
the other. Before the last session the industrial bourgeoisie made a 
great noise in favour of financial reform; in Parliament itself they 
confined themselves to theoretical expostulations. Before the session 
Mr. Cobden repeated his declaration of war on the Tsar apropos of 
Engels in his copy replaced the word weiser (more astutely) by weiter 
(further).— Ed. 

=====第534页=====
Review 511 
the Russian loan and could not find sarcasms enough to heap on the 
great paupera of Petersburg; six months later he descended to the 
scandalous farce of the Peace Congress,356 whose only outcome was 
that an Ojibway Indianb  handed a pipe of peace to Mr. Jaup, to the 
great horror of Herr Haynau, who was present on the platform, 
and that the Yankee moderation-monger Elihu Burritt went to 
Schleswig-Holstein and Copenhagen to assure the governments 
concerned of his good intentions. As though the whole Schleswig-
Holstein war could ever take à serious turn as long as Herr von Ga-
gern is involved in it and Venedey is not! 
In fact the great political issue of the past session was the Greek 
debate.357 All the absolutist reactionaries on the Continent had 
formed a coalition with the British Tories to overthrow Palmerston. 
Louis Napoleon had even recalled the French Ambassadorc from 
London, as much to flatter Tsar Nicholas as French national vanity. 
The whole National Assembly fanatically applauded this bold break 
with the traditional British alliance. The affair gave Mr. Palmerston 
the opportunity to present himself in the Lower House as the 
champion of civil liberty throughout Europe; he obtained a majority 
of 46 votes, and the result of the coalition, which was as powerless as 
it was silly, was the non-renewal of the Alien Bill.358 
If in his display against Greece and in his speech in Parliament 
Palmerston adopted a bourgeois-liberal stand vis-à-vis the reac­
tionaries of Europe, the British people used the presence of Herr 
Haynau in London for a striking display of their foreign pol-
359 
icy. 
If the people harried Austria's military representative through the 
streets of London, Prussia experienced in the person of its 
diplomatic representative a misfortune equally appropriate to its 
position. One remembers how Britain's most comic figure, the 
loquacious littérateur Brougham, drove the littérateur JBims^nfrom 
the galleries of the Upper House for his tactlessly importunate 
behaviour, amid general laughter from all the ladies. Herr Bunsen, 
very much in the spirit of the Great Power he was representing, took 
this humiliation calmly. He refuses to leave Britain, come what may. 
All his private interests bind him to Great Britain; he will continue to 
exploit his diplomatic post for the purpose of speculation in English 
religion and to find a niche for his sons in the English Church and 
for his daughters in one of the echelons of the English gentry. 
a "Mr. Cobden and the Russian Loan", The Times No. 20390, January 19, 
1850.—  Ed. 
b Kah-Ge-Ga-Gah-Bowh.— Ed. 
c Drouyn de Lhuys.— Ed. 

=====第535页=====
512 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
The death of Sir Robert Peel significantly helped to hasten the 
dissolution of the old parties. The party which formed his main 
support since 1845, the so-called Peelites, has subsequently fallen 
apart completely. Since his death Peel himself has been most 
fulsomely apotheosised by almost all the parties as Britain's greatest 
statesman. It is true he has the advantage over the "statesmen" of the 
Continent of not being merely a job-hunter. Apart from that, the 
statesmanship of this son of the bourgeoisie who rose to be leader of 
the landed aristocracy consisted in the realisation that nowadays 
there remains only one real aristocracy, and that is the bourgeoisie. 
Having this in mind, he continually used his leadership of the landed 
aristocracy to force it to make concessions to the bourgeoisie. Thus it 
was with the Catholic emancipation and the police reform, by which 
he increased the political power of the bourgeoisie; with the bank 
laws of 1818 and 1844, which strengthened the finance aristocracy; 
with the tariff reform of 1842 and the free-trade laws of 1846, by 
which the landed aristocracy was positively sacrificed to the 
industrial bourgeoisie. 360 The second main pillar of the aristocracy, 
the "Iron Duke", the hero of Waterloo, stood like a disappointed 
Don Quixote loyally by the side of the cotton-knight Peel. From 1845 
Peel was treated as a traitor by the Tory party. Peel's power over the 
Lower House was based on the unusual plausibility of  his eloquence.  If 
one reads his most famous speeches, one finds that they consist of a 
massive accumulation of commonplaces, skilfully interspersed with a 
number of statistical data. There is scarcely a town in England which 
does not want to set up a monument to the man who abolished 
customs duty on corn. A Chartist paper, alluding to the police force 
developed by Peel in 1829, observed: What need have we of all these 
monuments to Peel? Every policeman in Britain and Ireland is a 
living monument to him.3 
The most recent event to have excited public interest in Great 
Britain is the appointment of Mr. Wiseman as Cardinal Archbishop 
of Westminster and the division of Britain into thirteen Catholic 
bishoprics by the Pope.b This act of Christ's vicar on earth, which 
caused the Church of England great astonishment, is a further 
demonstration of the illusion to which all the reactionaries on the 
Continent are prey, as though the victories which they have recently 
won in the service of the bourgeoisie would automatically entail the 
establishment of a whole feudal-absolutist social order with all its 
religious trappings. Catholicism's sole support in Britain is to be 
"The Peel Monument", The Red Republican No. 9, August 17, 1850.— Ed. 
b Pius IX.— Ed. 

=====第536页=====
Review 513 
found at the two extremes of society, the aristocracy and the lumpen-
proletariat. The lumpenproletariat, the riff-raff of Irish origin or 
descended from Irishmen, is Catholic by descent. The aristocra­
cy has for so long, indulged in the fashionable flirtation with 
Puseyism 361 that ultimately actual conversion to the Catholic Church 
began to become the fashion. At a time when the struggle against the 
advancing bourgeoisie was increasingly driving the British aristocra­
cy to display its feudal character, the struggle against the theologians 
of the bourgeois dissenting religion362 was of course increasing­
ly forcing the aristocracy's religious ideologists, the orthodox 
theologians of the High Church, inevitably to acknowledge the 
implications of their semi-Catholic dogma and rites, and actual 
conversions of individual reactionary Anglicans to that first Church 
which alone assures salvation inevitably became more and more 
common. These insignificant events generated the most sanguine 
hopes in the minds of Catholic priests in Britain that the whole of 
Great Britain would soon be converted. The recent Papal Bull3 
which already treats Great Britain once more as a province of Rome 
and which was intended to lend new impetus to this wave of 
conversions, is however producing precisely the contrary effect. The 
Puseyites, suddenly confronted with the grave consequences of their 
medieval dairyings, are starting back in horror, and the Puseyite 
bishop of Londonb has at once issued a declaration in which he 
recants all his errors and declares a war to the death on the 
papacy.0—As far as the bourgeoisie is concerned the whole farce is 
of interest only insofar as it provides an opportunity for new attacks 
on the High Church and its universities. The Commission of Enquiry 
which is to report on the state of the universities will provoke violent 
debates in the next session. The mass of the people has of course no 
feelings either for or against Cardinal Wiseman. The newspapers, on 
the other hand, find the material he is providing for long articles and 
violent diatribes against Pio Nonod most welcome, in view of the 
present dearth of news. The Times even demanded that by way of 
punishment for his presumption the government should incite an 
insurrection in the Papal States and let loose Mr. Mazzini and the 
Italian emigres on him.e The Globe, Palmerston's paper, drew an 
extremely witty parallel between the Papal Bull and Mazzini's latest 
a Of September 29, 1850.— Ed. 
Charles James Blomfield.— Ed. 
c Reply of the Bishop of London to the Memorial from the Westminster Clergy.—Ed. 
d Pius IX.— Ed. 
e The Times No. 20634, October 31, 1850.— Ed. 

=====第537页=====
514 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
manifesto.3  The Pope, it said, lays claim to spiritual supremacy over 
Great Britain and is appointing bishops in partions infidelium. Here in 
London there is an Italian Government in partibus infidelium, with the 
Antipope, Mr Mazzini, at its head. The supremacy which Mr.Mazzini 
not merely lays claim to but actually exercises in the Papal States, is at 
present likewise purely spiritual. The Papal Bulls are purely religious 
in content; Mazzini's manifestos likewise. They preach a religion, 
they appeal to faith, their motto is: Dio ed il popolo, God and the 
people. We would ask, is there any other difference between the 
claims of the two parties than this, that Mr. Mazzini at least 
represents the religion of the majority of the people he is ad­
dressing—for there is scarcely any other religion left in Italy now 
than that of Dio ed il popolo—whereas the Pope does not? Mazzini 
incidentally has used this opportunity to progress a step further. In 
conjunction with the other members of the Italian National Com­
mittee, he has in fact now announced from London the 10 million 
fr. loan, approved by the Constituent Assembly in Rome, 363 in the 
form of 100 fr. shares, for the express purpose of obtaining arms 
and military equipment. It cannot be denied that this loan has a 
greater chance of success than the Austrian Government's unsuccess­
ful voluntary loan in Lombardy.364 
A really serious blow which Great Britain has recently dealt Rome 
and Austria is its trade agreement with Sardinia. This agreement 
shatters Austria's project for an Italian customs union and ensures 
an important field of activity for British trade and Britain's bour­
geois policies in Upper Italy. 
The present organisation of the Chartist Party is similarly in a state 
of dissolution. The members of the petty bourgeoisie who still 
adhere to the party, together with the labour aristocracy, form 
a purely democratic faction whose programme is limited to the 
People's Charter and a number of other petty-bourgeois reforms. 
The mass of the workers who live in truly proletarian conditions 
belong to the revolutionary Chartist faction. The leader of the 
former faction is Feargus O'Connor, and the leaders of the latter are 
Julian Harney and Ernest Jones. The elderly O'Connor, an Irish 
squire and self-styled descendant of the old kings of Munster, is a 
true representative of Old England, despite his origin and his 
political tendencies. His whole nature is conservative and he most 
emphatically hates both industrial progress and revolution. All his 
ideals are patriarchal and petty-bourgeois to the core. He unites in 
The Globe and Traveller No. 15318, October 26,  1850.—Erf. 

=====第538页=====
Review 515 
himself countless contradictions which are resolved and harmonised 
in the form of a certain banal common sense3  and which enable him 
year in, year out to write his endless weekly letters in The Northern 
Star, each of which is in open conflict with its predecessor. And that is 
precisely why O'Connor claims to be the most consistent man in the 
three kingdoms and to have predicted every event for the past 
twenty years. His shoulders, his bellowing voice, his enormous skill as 
a boxer, with which he is reputed to have once held his own against 
over twenty thousand people at Nottingham market, all make him a 
typical representative of Old England. It is obvious that a man like 
O'Connor is bound to be a great obstacle in a revolutionary move­
ment; but such people are useful precisely because with them and 
against them a number of ingrained prejudices are frittered away, 
and because the movement, if it eventually prevails against these 
people, is once and for all rid also of the prejudices they represent. 
O'Connor's fate is sealed in the movement, but for that reason he will 
be able to lay claim to the title of a "martyr to the good cause" with 
as much right as Messrs. Lamartine and Marrast. 
The main bone of contention between the two Chartist factions is 
the land question. O'Connor and his party want to use the Charter to 
accommodate some of the workers on small plots of land and 
eventually to parcel out all the land in Great Britain. We know how 
his attempt to organise this parcelling out on a small scale by means 
of a joint-stock company failed.365 That propensity which every 
bourgeois revolution has to break up large landed estates gave the 
British workers the impression for a while that this parcelling out 
was something revolutionary, although its regular corollary is the 
unfailing tendency of small properties to become concentrated and 
succumb in the face of large-scale farming. The revolutionary 
faction of the Chartists opposes this demand for parcelling out with 
the demand for the confiscation of all landed property, and insists 
that it should not be distributed but remain national property. 
Despite this split and their more extreme demands, the memory of 
the circumstances in which the abolition of the Corn Laws went 
through is responsible for the Chartists' persisting notion that in the 
next crisis they will once again have to ally themselves with the 
industrial bourgeoisie, the financial reformers, and help them to 
crush their enemies, in return for which they will have to extract 
concessions from them for themselves. This will in any case be the 
Chartists' position in the approaching crisis. The revolutionary 
movement proper cannot begin in Britain until the Charter has been 
a The authors give the words "common sense" in English.— Ed. 

=====第539页=====
516 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
carried through, just as in France the battle of June only became 
possible when the republic had been won. 
Let us now turn to France* 
The victory that the people, in conjunction with the petty 
bourgeois, had won in the elections of March 10 was annulled by 
it itself when it provoked the new election of April 28. Vidal was 
elected not only in Paris, but also in the Lower Rhine. The Paris 
Committee, in which the Montagne and the petty bourgeoisie were 
strongly represented, induced him to accept for the Lower Rhine. 
The victory of March 10 ceased to be a decisive one; the date of 
the decision was once more postponed; the tension of the people 
was relaxed; it became accustomed to legal triumphs instead 
of revolutionary ones. The revolutionary meaning of March 10, 
the rehabilitation of the June insurrection, was finally completely 
annihilated by the candidature of Eugène Sue, the sentimental 
petty-bourgeois social-fantasist, which the proletariat could at best 
accept as a joke to amuse the grisettes. As against this well-meaning 
candidature, the party of Order, emboldened by the vacillating 
policy of its opponents, put up a candidate who was to represent the 
June victory. This comic candidate was the Spartan pater familias 
Leclerc, 366 from whose person, however, the heroic armour was torn 
piece by piece by the press, and who experienced a crushing defeat in 
the election. The new election victory on April 28 put the Montagne 
and the petty bourgeoisie in high feather. They already exulted in 
the thought of being able to arrive at the goal of their wishes in a 
purely legal way and without again pushing the proletariat into the 
foreground through a new revolution; they reckoned positively on 
bringing M. Ledru-Rollin into the presidential chair and a majority 
of Montagnards into the Assembly through universal suffrage in the 
new elections of 1852. The party of Order, rendered perfectly 
certain, by the prospective elections, by Sue's candidature and by the 
mood of the Montagne and the petty bourgeoisie, that the latter were 
resolved to remain quiet no matter what happened, answered the 
two election victories with an election law which abolished universal 
suffrage. 
The government took good care not to make this legislative pro­
posal on its own responsibility. It made an apparent concession to the 
majority by entrusting the drafting of the bill to the high dig­
nitaries of this majority, to the seventeen burgraves.367 Thus, it was 
not the government that proposed the repeal of universal suffrage 
to the Assembly; the majority of the Assembly proposed it to  itself. 
a In 1895 Engels included the passage relating to the events in France in Chapter 
IV of Marx's The Class Struggles in France (see pp. 135-45 of this volume).— Ed. 

=====第540页=====
Review 517 
On May 8, the project was brought into the Chamber. The entire 
social-democratic press rose as one man in order to preach to the 
people dignified composure, calme majestueux* passivity and trust in 
its representatives. Every article of these journals was a confession 
that a revolution would, above all, annihilate the so-called revolu­
tionary press and that, therefore, it was now a question of its 
self-preservation. The allegedly revolutionary press betrayed its 
whole secret. It signed its own death warrant. 
On May 21, the Montagne put the preliminary question to debate 
and moved the rejection of the whole project on the ground that it 
violated the constitution. The party of Order answered that the 
constitution would be violated if it were necessary; there was, how­
ever, no need for this at present, because the constitution was 
capable of every interpretation, and because the majority alone was 
competent to decide on the correct interpretation. To the unbridled, 
savage attacks of Thiers and Montalembert the Montagne opposed a 
decorous and refined humanism. It took its stand on the ground of 
law; the party of Order referred it to the ground on which the law 
grows, to bourgeois property. The Montagne whimpered: Did they 
really want, then, to conjure up revolutions by main force? The party 
of Order replied: One should await them. 
On May 22, the preliminary question was settled by 462 votes to 
227. The same men who had proved with such solemn profundity 
that the National Assembly and every individual deputy would be 
renouncing his mandate if he renounced the people, his mandator, 
stuck to their seats and now suddenly sought to let the country act, 
through petitions at that, instead of acting themselves; and still sat 
there unmoved when, on May 31, the law went through in splendid 
fashion.368 They sought to revenge themselves by a protest in which 
they recorded their innocence of the rape of the constitution, a 
protest which they did not even submit openly, but smuggled into 
the President'sb pocket behind his back. 
An army of 150,000 men in Paris, the long deferment of the 
decision, the appeasing attitude of the press, the pusillanimity of the 
Montagne and of the newly elected representatives, the majestic calm 
of the petty bourgeois, but, above all, the commercial and industrial 
prosperity, prevented any attempt at revolution on the part of the 
proletariat. 
Universal suffrage had fulfilled its mission. The majority of the 
people had passed through the school of development, which is all 
a An allusion to Victor Hugo's appeal to keep "majestic calm", made in his speech 
in the Legislative Assembly on May 21, 1850.— Ed. 
The President of the Assembly.—Ed. 

=====第541页=====
518 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
that universal suffrage can serve for in a revolutionary period. It had 
to be set aside by a revolution or by the reaction. 
The Montagne developed a still greater display of energy on an 
occasion that arose soon afterwards. From the tribune War Minister 
d'Hautpoul had termed the February Revolution a baneful catas­
trophe. 3 The orators of the Montagne, who, as always, distinguished 
themselves by their morally indignant bluster, were not allowed by 
the President, Dupin, to speak. Girardin proposed to the Montagne 
that it should walk out at once en masse. Result: the Montagne re­
mained seated, but Girardin was cast out from its midst as un­
worthy. 
The election law still needed one thing to complete it, a new press 
law. This was not long in coming. A proposal of the government, 
made many times more drastic by amendments of the party of 
Order, increased the caution money, put an extra stamp on 
feuilleton novels (answer to the election of Eugène Sue), taxed all 
publications appearing weekly or monthly up to a certain number of 
sheets and finally provided that every article of a journal must bear 
the signature of the author. The provisions concerning the caution 
money killed the so-called revolutionary press; the people regarded 
its extinction as satisfaction for the abolition of universal suffrage. 
However, neither the tendency nor the effect of the new law ex­
tended only to this section of the press. As long as the newspaper 
press was anonymous, it appeared as the organ of a numberless and 
nameless public opinion; it was the third power in the state. Through 
the signature of every article, a newspaper became a mere collection 
of literary contributions from more or less known individuals. Ev­
ery article sank to the level of an advertisement. Hitherto the 
newspapers had circulated as the paper money of public opinion; 
now they were resolved into more or less bad  solo  bills, whose worth 
and circulation depended on the credit not only of the drawer but 
also of the endorser. The press of the party of Order had agitated 
not only for the repeal of universal suffrage but also for the most 
extreme measures against the bad press. However, in its sinister 
anonymity even the good press was irksome to the party of Order 
and still more to its individual provincial representatives. As for 
itself,  it demanded only the paid writer, with name, address and 
description. In vain the good press bemoaned the ingratitude with 
which its services were rewarded. The law went through; the 
specification of the names of authors hit it hardest of all. The 
names of republican journalists were pretty well known; but the 
This statement was made by the Minister of Justice Eugène Rouher .—Ed. 

=====第542页=====
Review 519 
respectable firms of the Journal des Débats, the Assemblée nationale, 
the Constitutionnel, etc., etc., cut a sorry figure in their high 
protestations of state wisdom, when the mysterious company all at 
once disintegrated into purchasable penny-a-liners 3 of long practice, 
who had defended all possible causes for cash, like Granier de 
Cassagnac, or into old milksops who called themselves statesmen, like 
Capefigue, or into coquettish fops, like M. Lemoinne of the Débats. 
In the debate on the press law the Montagne had already sunk to 
such a level of moral degeneracy that it had to confine itself to 
applauding the brilliant tirades of an old notability of Louis Phi­
lippe's time, M. Victor Hugo. 
With the election law and the press law the revolutionary and 
democratic party exits from the official stage. Before their departure 
home, shortly after the end of the session, the two factions of the 
Montagne, the socialist democrats and the democratic Socialists, 
issued two manifestos, two testimonia paupertatis, in which they 
proved that while power and success were never on their side, they 
nonetheless had ever been on the side of eternal justice and all 
the other eternal truths. b 
Let us now consider the party of Order. The Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung had said (Heft 3, p. 16): "As against the hankering for 
restoration on the part of the united Orleanists and Legitimists, 
Bonaparte defends his title to his actual power, the republic; as 
against the hankering for restoration on the part of Bonaparte, the 
party of Order defends its title to its common rule, the republic. As 
against the Orleanists, the Legitimists, and as against the Legitimists, 
the Orleanists, defend the status quo, the republic. All these factions 
of the party of Order, each of which has its own king and its 
own restoration in petto, mutually enforce, as against their rivals' 
hankering for usurpation and revolt, the common rule of the 
bourgeoisie, the form in which the special claims remain neutralised 
and reserved—the republic... And Thiers spoke more truly than he 
suspected when he said: 'We, the royalists, are the true pillars of the 
constitutional republic.'" 0 
This comedy of the républicains malgré eux, d the antipathy to the 
status quo and the constant consolidation of it; the incessant friction 
a This expression is given in English in the original.— Ed. 
"Compte-rendu de la Montagne au Peuple" and "Au Peuple!", published in the 
newspaper Le Peuple de 1850 No. 6, August 11, and No. 7, August 14, 1850.— Ed. 
c See this volume, p. 113-14.— Ed. 
Republicans in spite of themselves. (Allusion to Molière's comedy Le Médecin 
malgré  lui.) —Ed. 

=====第543页=====
520 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
between Bonaparte and the National Assembly; the ever renewed 
threat of the party of Order to split into its separate component 
parts,  and the ever repeated conjugation of its factions; the attempt 
of each faction to transform each victory over the common foe into a 
defeat for its temporary allies; the mutual petty jealousy, chicanery, 
harassment, the tireless drawing of swords that ever and again ends 
with a baiser-Lamourette 369—this whole unedifying comedy of errors 
never developed more classically than during the last six months. 
The party of Order regarded the election law at the same time as a 
victory over Bonaparte. Had not the government abdicated when it 
handed over the editing of and responsibility for its own proposal to 
the Commission of Seventeen? And did not the chief strength of 
Bonaparte as against the Assembly lie in the fact that he was the 
chosen of six millions? — Bonaparte, on his part, treated the election 
law as a concession to the Assembly, with which he claimed to have 
purchased harmony between the legislative and executive powers. As 
reward, the vulgar adventurer demanded an increase of three 
millions in his civil list. Dared the National Assembly enter into a 
conflict with the executive at a moment when it had excommuni­
cated the great majority of Frenchmen? It was roused to anger: it 
appeared to want to go to extremes; its Commission rejected the 
motion; the Bonapartist press threatened, and referred to the 
disinherited people, deprived of its franchise; numerous noisy 
attempts at an arrangement took place, and the Assembly finally 
gave way in fact, but at the same time revenged itself in principle. 
Instead of increasing the civil list in principle by three millions per 
annum, it granted him an accommodation of 2,160,000 francs. Not 
satisfied with this, it made even this concession only after it had been 
supported by Changarnier, the general of the party of Order and the 
protector thrust upon Bonaparte. Therefore it really granted the 
two millions not to Bonaparte, but to Changarnier. 
This sop, thrown to him de mauvaise grâce* was accepted by 
Bonaparte quite in the spirit of the donor. The Bonapartist press 
blustered anew against the National Assembly. When, now in the 
debate on the press law, the amendment was passed on the sign­
ing of names, which, in turn, was directed especially against the less 
important papers, the representatives of the private interests of 
Bonaparte, the principal Bonapartist paper, the Pouvoir, published 
an open and vehement attack on the National Assembly. The 
ministers had to disavow the paper before the Assembly; the 
managing editor of the Pouvoir was summoned before the bar of the 
a With a bad grace.— Ed. 

=====第544页=====
Review 521 
National Assembly and sentenced to pay the highest fine,  5,000 
francs. 3 Next day, the Pouvoir published a still more insolent article 
against the Assembly, and, as the government's revenge, the public 
prosecutor promptly prosecuted a number of Legitimist journals for 
violating the constitution. 
Finally there came the question ot proroguing the Chamber. 
Bonaparte desired this in order to be able to operate unhindered by 
the Assembly. The party of Order desired it, partly for the purpose 
of carrying on its factional intrigues, partly for the pursuit of the 
private interests of the individual deputies. Both needed it in order 
to consolidate and push further the victories of reaction in the 
provinces. The Assembly therefore adjourned from August 11 until 
November 11. Since, however, Bonaparte in no way concealed 
that his only concerif was to get rid of the irksome surveillance of 
the National Assembly, the Assembly imprinted on the vote of 
confidence itself the stamp of want of confidence in the Presi­
dent. All Bonapartists were kept off the permanent commission of 
twenty-eight members, who stayed on during the recess as guardians 
of the virtue of the republic.370  In their stead, even some republicans 
of the Siècle and the National were elected to it, in order to prove to 
the President the attachment of the majority to the constitutional 
republic. 
Shortly before and, especially, immediately after the prorogation 
of the Chamber, the two big factions of the party of Order, the 
Orleanists and the Legitimists, appeared to want to be reconciled, 
and this by a fusion of the two royal houses under whose flags they 
were fighting. The papers were full of reconciliation proposals that 
were said to have been discussed at the sickbed of Louis Philippe at 
St. Leonards, when the death of Louis Philippe suddenly simplified 
the situation. Louis Philippe was the usurper; Henry V, the dis­
possessed; the Count of Paris,b on the other hand, owing to the 
childlessness of Henry V, his lawful heir to the throne. Every pretext 
for objecting to a fusion of the two dynastic interests was now 
removed. But now, precisely, the two factions of the bourgeoisie first 
discovered that it was not zeal for a definite royal house that divided 
them, but that it was rather their divided class interests that kept the 
two dynasties apart. The Legitimists, who had made a pilgrimage to 
the residence of Henry V at Wiesbaden just as their competitors had 
to St. Leonards, received there the news of Louis Philippe's death. 
Forthwith they formed a ministry in partibus infidelium, which con-
See this volume, pp. 39-40 and 140.— Ed. 
Louis Philippe Albert d'Orléans. —Ed. 

=====第545页=====
522 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
sisted mostly of members of that commission of guardians of the vir­
tue of the republic 371 and which on the occasion of a squabble in the 
bosom of the party came out with the most outspoken proclamation 
of right by the grace of God. The Orleanists rejoiced over the 
compromising scandal that this manifesto372 called forth in the press, 
and did not conceal for a moment their open enmity to the 
Legitimists. 
During the adjournment of the National Assembly, the Councils 
of the Departments met. The majority of them declared for a more 
or less qualified revision of the constitution, that is, they declared for 
a not definitely specified monarchist restoration, for a "solution", and 
confessed at the same time that they were too incompetent and too 
cowardly to find this solution. The Bonapartist faction at once 
construed this desire for revision in the sense of a prolongation of 
Bonaparte's presidency. 
The constitutional solution, the retirement of Bonaparte in May 
1852,  the simultaneous election of a new President by all the electors 
of the country, the revision of the constitution by a Chamber of Revi­
sion in the first months of the new presidency, is utterly inadmis­
sible for the ruling class. The day of the new presidential election 
would be the day of rendezvous for all the hostile parties, the Le­
gitimists, the Orleanists, the bourgeois republicans, the revolu­
tionists. It would have to come to a violent decision between the 
different factions. Even if the party of Order should succeed in 
uniting round the candidature of a neutral person outside the 
dynastic families, he would still be opposed by Bonaparte. In its 
struggle with the people, the party of Order is compelled constantly 
to increase the power of the executive. Every increase of the 
executive's power increases the power of its bearer, Bonaparte. In 
the same measure, therefore, as the party of Order strengthens its 
joint might, it strengthens the fighting resources of Bonaparte's 
dynastic pretensions, it strengthens his chance of frustrating a 
constitutional solution by force on the day of the decision. He will 
then have, as against the party of Order, no more scruples about the 
one pillar of the constitution than that party had, as against the 
people, about the other pillar in the matter of the election law. He 
would, seemingly even against the Assembly, appeal to universal 
suffrage. In a word, the constitutional solution questions the entire 
political status quo and behind the jeopardising of the status quo the 
bourgeois sees chaos, anarchy, civil war. He sees his purchases and 
sales,  his promissory notes, his marriages, his agreements, duly 
acknowledged before a notary, his mortgages, his ground rents, 
house rents, profits, all his contracts and sources of income called in 

=====第546页=====
Review 523 
question on the first Sunday in May 1852, 3 3 and he cannot expose 
himself to this risk. Behind the jeopardising of the political status quo 
lurks the danger of the collapse of the entire bourgeois society. The 
only possible solution in the sense of the bourgeoisie is the post­
ponement of the solution. It can save the constitutional republic 
only by a violation of the constitution, by the prolongation of the 
power of the President. This is also the last word of the press of 
Order, after the protracted and profound debates on the "solutions" 
in which it indulged after the session of the general councils. The 
high and mighty party of Order thus finds  itself,  to its shame, 
compelled to take seriously the ridiculous, commonplace and, to it, 
odious person of the pseudo-Bonaparte. 
This dirty figure likewise deceived himself concerning the causes 
that clothed him more and more with the character of the in­
dispensable man. While his party had sufficient insight to ascribe 
the growing importance of Bonaparte to circumstances, he believed 
that he owed it solely to the magic power of his name and his 
continual caricaturing of Napoleon. He became more enterprising 
every day. To offset the pilgrimages to St. Leonards and Wiesbaden, 
he made his round trips through France. The Bonapartists had so 
little faith in the magic effect of his personality that they sent with 
him everywhere as claqueurs people from the Society of December 
10,374that organisation of the Paris lumpenproletariat, packed en  masse 
into railway trains and post-chaises. They put speeches into the 
mouth of their marionette which, according to the reception in the 
different towns, proclaimed republican resignation or perennial 
tenacity as the keynote of the President's policy. In spite of all 
manoeuvres these journeys were anything but triumphal proces­
sions. 
When Bonaparte believed he had thus enthused the people, he set 
out to win the army. He caused great reviews to be held on the plain 
of Satory, near Versailles, at which he sought to buv the soldiers 
with garlic sausages, champagne and cigars. Whereas the genuine 
Napoleon, amid the hardships of his campaigns of conquest, knew 
how to cheer up his weary soldiers with outbursts of patriarchal 
familiarity, the pseudo-Napoleon believed it was in gratitude that the 
troops shouted: Vive Napoléon, vive  le saucisson!  that is, hurrah for the 
sausage [Wwrst], hurrah for the buffoon [Hanswurst]] 
These reviews led to the outbreak of the long suppressed dis­
sension between Bonaparte and his War Minister d'Hautpoul, on 
the one hand, and Changarnier, on the other. In Changarnier, the 
party of Order had found its real neutral man, in whose case there 
could be no question of his own dynastic claims. It had designated 

=====第547页=====
524 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
him Bonaparte's successor. In addition, Changarnier had become 
the great general of the party of Order through his conduct on 
January 29 and June 13, 1849, the modern Alexander, whose brutal 
intervention had, in the eyes of the timid bourgeois, cut the Gordian 
knot of the revolution. At bottom just as ridiculous as Bonaparte, he 
had thus become a power in the very cheapest manner and was set 
up by the National Assembly to watch the President. He him­
self played the coquette, e.g., in the matter of the salary grant, with 
the protection that he gave Bonaparte, and rose up ever 
more overpoweringly against him and the ministers. When, on the 
occasion of the election law, an insurrection was expected, he 
forbade his officers to take any orders whatever from the War 
Minister or the President. The press was also instrumental in mag­
nifying the figure of Changarnier. With the complete absence of 
great personalities, the party of Order naturally found itself com­
pelled to endow a single individual with the strength lacking in 
its class as a whole and so puff up this individual to a prodigy. Thus 
arose the myth of Changarnier, the "bulwark of  society".  The arrogant 
charlatanry, the secretive air of importance with which Changarnier 
condescended to carry the world on his shoulders, forms the most 
ridiculous contrast to the events during and after the Satory review, 
which irrefutably proved that it needed only a stroke of the pen by 
Bonaparte, the infinitely little, to bring this fantastic offspring of 
bourgeois fear, the colossus Changarnier, back to the dimensions of 
mediocrity, and transform him, society's heroic saviour, into a 
pensioned-off general. 
Bonaparte had for some time been revenging himself on Chan-
garnier by provoking the War Minister to disputes in matters of 
discipline with the irksome protector. The last review of Satory 
finally brought the old animosity to a climax. The constitutional 
indignation of Changarnier knew no bounds when he saw the 
cavalry regiments file past with the unconstitutional cry: Vive 
l'Empereur! In order to forestall any unpleasant debate on this cry in 
the coming session of the Chamber, Bonaparte removed the War 
Minister d'Hautpoul by appointing him Governor of Algiers. In his 
place he put a reliable old general of the time of the empire, 3 one 
who was fully a match for Changarnier in brutality. But so that the 
dismissal of d'Hautpoul might not appear as a concession to 
Changarnier, he simultaneously transferred General Neumayer, the 
right hand of the great saviour of society, from Paris to Nantes. It 
a J. P. Schramm.— Ed. 

=====第548页=====
Review 525 
had been Neumayer who at the last review had induced the whole of 
the infantry to file past the successor of Napoleon in icy silence. 
Changarnier, himself hit in the person of Neumayer, protested and 
threatened. To no purpose. After two days' negotiations, the decree 
transferring Neumayer appeared in the Moniteur* and there was 
nothing left for the hero of order but to submit to discipline or 
resign. 
Bonaparte's struggle with Changarnier is the continuation of his 
struggle with the party of Order. The re-opening of the National 
Assembly on November 11 will, therefore, take place under threat­
ening auspices. It will be a storm in a teacup. In essence the old 
game must go on. Meanwhile the majority of the party of Order will, 
despite the clamour of the sticklers for principle of its different 
factions, be compelled to prolong the power of the President. Sim­
ilarly, Bonaparte, already humbled by lack of money, will, despite all 
preliminary protestations, accept this prolongation of power from 
the hands of the National Assembly as simply delegated to him. Thus 
the solution is postponed; the status  quo continued; one faction of the 
party of Order compromised, weakened, made impossible by the 
other; the repression of the common enemy, the mass of the nation, 
extended and exhausted, until the economic relations themselves 
have again reached the point of development where a new explosion 
blows into the air all these squabbling parties with their constitutional 
republic. 
For the peace of mind of the bourgeois it must be said, however, 
that the scandal between Bonaparte and the party of Order has the 
result of ruining a multitude of small capitalists on the Bourse and 
putting their assets into the pockets of the big wolves of the Bourse. 
In Germany the political events of the last six months are epito­
mised by the spectacle of Prussia duping the liberals and Austria 
duping Prussia. 
In 1849 it appeared to be Prussia's hegemony in Germany that was 
at issue; in 1850 it was a question of the division of power between 
Austria and Prussia; in 1851 it will only be a question of the form in 
which Prussia submits to Austria and returns as a penitent sinner to 
the fold of the totally restored Federal Diet. The Little Germany 
which the King of Prussia had hoped to negotiate as compensation 
for his disastrous imperial procession through Berlin on March 21, 
1848, 375 has turned into Little Prussia; Prussia has had to take every 
humiliation meekly and has vanished from the ranks of the Great 
a Le Moniteur universel No. 303, October 30, 1850.—Ed. 

=====第549页=====
526 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Powers. Even the modest dream of the Union has been once more 
dispelled by the usual perfidious narrow-mindedness of her policies. 
She falsely claimed a liberal character for the Union and thus duped 
the wise men of the Gotha party 376 with constitutional phantas-
magories that were never seriously meant; and yet she herself had 
become so bourgeois even by virtue of her whole industrial de­
velopment, her permanent deficit and her national debt that for 
all her squirming and struggling her surrender to constitutionalism 
was becoming increasingly irrevocable. If the wise men of Gotha at 
length discovered how disgracefully Prussia had trampled on their 
honour and their ideas, if even men like Gagern and Brüggemann 
finally turned their backs in noble indignation on a government 
which played so contemptuously with the unity and freedom of the 
fatherland, Prussia herself found no greater joy in those little chicks 
she had gathered beneath her protecting wing, the small princes. 
The petty princes had only entrusted themselves at a moment of 
extreme distress and vulnerability to the avidly mediatising 377 talons 
of the Prussian eagle; Prussian interventions, threats and demonstra­
tions to restore their subjects to their former obedience, had cost 
them dear in the form of oppressive military agreements, expensive 
quartering of troops and the prospect of imminent médiatisation by 
the constitution of the Union. But Prussia herself had taken care that 
they would once more escape this new danger. Everywhere Prussia 
had brought the forces of reaction back to power, and the greater the 
progress of the forces of reaction, the more the petty princes 
deserted Prussia and threw themselves into the arms of Austria. Once 
they were able to rule again as they had before March, they found 
absolutist Austria more congenial than a power which was as in­
capable of being absolutist as it was reluctant to be liberal. Further­
more, Austrian policy did not lead to the médiatisation of the small 
states but on the contrary to their maintenance as integral parts 
of a Federal Diet which was to be restored. Prussia thus watched 
herself being deserted by Saxony, whom Prussian troops had saved 
not many months before, by Hanover, by Hesse-Cassel, and now 
Baden too, despite her Prussian garrisons, was following the others. 
That Prussia's support for the forces of reaction in Hamburg, 
Mecklenburg, Dessau, etc., etc., was not to her advantage but to 
Austria's, she can now clearly see from the events in the two 
Hesses. 378 Thus the German Emperor manque at least learnt that his 
is an age of disloyalty, and if he now has to tolerate the amputation of 
"his right arm, the Union", this arm had already been withered for 
some considerable time. Thus Austria has now already brought the 
whole of South Germany under her hegemony, and in North 

=====第550页=====
Review 527 
Germany too the most important states are Prussia's oppo­
nents. 
Austria had now advanced sufficiently to be able with Russia's 
support to challenge Prussia openly. She did so over two issues: 
Schleswig-Holstein and Hesse-Cassel. 
In Schleswig-Holstein the "sword of Germany" had concluded a 
genuinely Prussian separate peace and delivered its allies into the 
hands of a more powerful enemy. Great Britain, Russia and France 
determined to put an end to the independence of the duchies and 
expressed this intention in a protocol, to which Austria also sub­
scribed. 379 Whilst Austria and the German governments allied to 
her advocated Federal intervention in Holstein in Denmark's favour 
at the restored Federal Diet, in accordance with the London 
protocol, 380 Prussia sought to continue her double-dealing policy and 
to persuade the parties to submit to a Federal Arbitration Court 
which was as yet completely non-existent, indefinable and rejected 
by most of the governments, including the most important, and with 
all her manoeuvres managed only to incur the suspicion of the Great 
Powers that she was indulging in revolutionary intrigues and to be 
sent a series of threatening notes which will soon spoil her taste for 
an "independent" foreign policy. The people of Schleswig-Holstein 
will shortly get their lord and master back, and a people that allows 
itself to be governed by Messrs. Beseler and Reventlow, despite the 
fact that it has the whole army on its side, shows that it still needs the 
strictness of Danish tutelage for its education. 
The movement in  Hesse-Cassel  provides us with a unique example 
of what a "rising" in a small German state can achieve. The virtuous 
burgher opposition to the fraud Hassenpflug had accomplished 
all that could be expected of such a display: the Chamber was 
unanimous, the country was unanimous, the civil service and the 
army were on the side of the citizenry, all recalcitrant elements had 
been removed, "Out with the Princes" had been realised of its own 
accord, the fraud Hassenpflug had disappeared with his whole 
ministry; everything went without a hitch, all the parties kept strictly 
within the bounds of the law, all excesses were avoided, and without 
lifting a finger the opposition had carried off the most splendid 
victory recorded in the annals of constitutional opposition. And 
now, when the burghers had all power in their hands, when their 
burghers' committee was encountering not the slightest resistance 
anywhere, only now were they really needed. Now they saw that 
instead of the Electoral troops, foreign troops were at the frontier, 
ready to move in and put an end within twenty-four hours to all this 
burgher glory. Only now did indecision and humiliation commence; 

=====第551页=====
528 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
if they had previously been unable to retreat, now they were unable 
to advance. The tax refusal in Hesse-Cassel demonstrates more 
forcibly than any previous event that all conflicts within the small 
states terminate as pure farce, their only outcome in the end being 
foreign intervention and the elimination of the conflict by the 
elimination of both the ruling prince and the constitution. It 
demonstrates how absurd all those highly important battles are in 
which the petty bourgeoisie of the small states seek with patriotic 
loyalty to their ideals to save every little achievement of March from 
its inevitable ruin. 
In Hesse-Cassel, a state which belonged to the Union and which 
was to be snatched from the Prussian embrace, Austria chal­
lenged her rival directly. It was Austria which positively incited the 
Elector3 to attack the constitution and then immediately placed 
him under the protection of her Federal Diet. With the intention 
of giving this protection greater force, using the Hesse-Cassel 
affair to break Prussia's opposition to Austrian hegemony and black­
mailing Prussia back into the Federal Diet, Austrian and South 
German troops were now mobilised in Franconia and Bohemia. 
Prussia is likewise arming. The newspapers are overflowing with 
reports of marches and countermarches of the army corps. None of 
this noise will lead to anything, any more than does the bickering of 
the French party of Order with Bonaparte. Neither the King of 
Prussia nor the Emperor of Austria is sovereign, but the Russian 
Tsarb alone. At his command rebellious Prussia will eventually 
submit without a drop of blood being shed and the parties will come 
together peaceably on the benches of the Federal Diet, without there 
being the slightest diminution in their petty mutual jealousies, nor in 
their dissensions with their subjects, nor in their irritation at Russian 
supremacy. 
We now come to the land as such, to the people of Europe, to the 
émigré people. We shall say nothing of the individual groups of 
émigrés, the German, French, Hungarian,etc.; their haute politique 
amounts to no more than pure chronique scandaleuse. But the 
European people as a whole in partibus infidelium have recently 
acquired a provisional government in the shape of the European 
Central Committee, consisting of Giuseppe Mazzini, Ledru-Rollin, 
Albert Darasz (a Pole) and—Arnold Ruge, who, to justify his 
existence, modestly puts after his name: Member of the Frankfurt 
a Frederick William I.— Ed 
b Frederick William IV, Francis Joseph I, Nicholas I.— Ed 

=====第552页=====
Review 529 
National Assembly. 381 Though there is no saying what democratic 
council summoned these four evangelists to their office, it still cannot 
be denied that their manifesto represents the credo of the great mass 
of émigrés and provides a fitting summary of the intellectual 
achievements which this mass owes to the recent revolutions. 3 
The manifesto begins with a resounding enumeration of the 
strengths of democracy. 
"What does democracy lack for victory? ... organisation.... We have sects but no 
Church, incomplete and contradictory philosophies, but no religion, no collective faith 
which rallies the faithful beneath a single banner and harmonises their labour.... The 
day on which we find ourselves all united, marching together beneath the gaze of the 
best of us ... will be the eve of the struggle. On that day we shall have counted our 
number, we shall know who we are, we shall have the consciousness of our strength." 
Why has the revolution failed so far? Because the organisation of 
revolutionary power was weaker. That is the first decree of the 
provisional émigré government. 
This deficiency is now to be remedied by the organisation of an 
army of faith and the foundation of a religion. 
"But, for this, two great obstacles must be overcome, two great errors eradicated: 
exaggeration of the rights of individuality, and petty exclusivity in matters of theory.... 
We must not say: I; we must learn to say: we; ... Those who, following their individual 
susceptibilities, refuse the small sacrifice which organisation and discipline require, 
are denying, on account of the habits of the past, the all-embracing faith they preach... 
exclusivity in point of theory is the negation of our basic dogma. Whoever says: I have 
found the political truth, and whoever makes acceptance of his system a condition of 
acceptance of fraternal association, is denying the people, the only progressive 
interpreter of the world-law, solely in order to assert his own  self.  Whoever claims in 
these days to have discovered by the isolated application of his intellect, however 
powerful it may be, the ultimate solution to the problems which agitate the masses, is 
condemning himself to error by incompleteness, because he is leaving untapped one 
of the eternal springs of truth, the collective intuition of the people immersed in 
action. The ultimate solution is the secret of victory.... Our systems can for the most 
part be no more than the dissection of corpses, a discovery of evil, an analysis of death, 
powerless to apprehend or comprehend life. Life is the people in motion, it is the 
instinct of the masses, raised to an uncommon power by mutual contact, by the 
prophetic feeling of great things which are to be accomplished, by involuntary, 
sudden, electric association in the streets; it is action, exciting to the highest point all 
capacities for hope, self-sacrifice, love and enthusiasm which are now dormant and 
which reveal man in the unity of his nature, in the full power of his procreative 
potential. The hand-clasp of a worker in one of these historic moments which 
inaugurate an epoch will teach us more about the organisation of the future than 
could be taught today by the cold and unfeeling travail of the intellect or knowledge of 
the dead magnificence of the last two millennia—the old society." 
"Aux Peuples! Organisation de la démocratie", July 22, 1850, Le Proscrit No. 2, 
August 6, 1850.— Ed. 

=====第553页=====
530 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
All this pompous nonsense thus amounts in the end to the most 
ordinary philistine view that the revolution failed because of the 
ambition and jealousy of the individual leaders and the mutually 
hostile views of the various popular educators. 
The struggles of the various classes and factions of the classes 
against each other, whose progress through their individual stages of 
development actually constitutes the revolution, are in the view of 
our evangelists only the unfortunate consequences of the existence 
of divergent systems, whilst in reality the reverse is true, the 
existence of various systems is the consequence of the existence of 
the class struggles. This itself shows that the authors of the manifesto 
deny the existence of the class struggles. Under the pretext of 
combating dogmatists, they do away with all specific content, every 
specific party point of view, and forbid the individual classes to 
formulate their interests and demands vis-à-vis the other classes. 
They expect them to forget their conflicting interests and to become 
reconciled under the flag of a vagueness as shallow as it is unblushing 
which only conceals beneath the apparent reconciliation of all party 
interests the domination of the interest of one party—the bourgeois 
party. After the experiences which these gentlemen must have ac­
quired in France, Germany and Italy in the last two years, one can­
not even say that the hypocrisy with which the bourgeois interest is 
here wrapped up in Lamartinesque clichés of fraternity is uncon­
scious. The extent of these gentlemen's acquaintance with the 
"systems" incidentally emerges even from the fact that they imagine 
each of these systems is merely a fragment of the wisdom put 
together in the manifesto and has one-sidedly taken as its basis just a 
single one of the clichés liberty, equality, etc., which are here 
collected. Their ideas of social organisations are most strikingly 
expressed: a mass gathering in the streets, a riot, a hand-clasp, and 
it's all over. In their view indeed revolution consists merely in the 
overthrow of the existing government; once this aim has been 
achieved "the victory" has been won. Movement, development and 
struggle then cease, and under the aegis of the European Central 
Committee that would then be in control, there begins the gold­
en age of the European republic and somnolence proclaimed 
for evermore. These gentlemen also abhor thinking, unfeeling 
thinking, just as they do development and struggle—as though any 
thinker, Hegel and Ricardo not excepted, had ever attained the 
degree of unfeelingness with which this sentimental drivel is poured 
over the heads of the public! The people shall have no thought for 
the morrow and must strike all ideas from its mind; come the great 
day of decision, and it will be electrified by mere contact, and the 

=====第554页=====
Review 531 
riddle of the future will be solved by a miracle. This appeal to 
mindlessness is a direct attempt at duping precisely the most op­
pressed classes of the people. 
"Are we thereby saying" (asks one member of the European Central Committee of 
another) "that we should march onward without a flag, are we saying that we intend to 
inscribe a mere negation on our banner? No such suspicion can fall on us. Being men 
of the people, long involved in its struggles, we have no intention of leading it into 
vacancy." 
In order to demonstrate on the contrary their plenitude, these 
gendemen parade before us a positively Leporellian register of 
eternal truth and the achievements of the whole of past history as the 
present common ground of "democracy". This register is summa­
rised in the following edifying paternoster: 
"We believe in the progressive development of human ability and powers towards 
the moral law which has been imposed on us. We believe in association as the only 
regular means which can attain this end. We believe that the interpretation of the 
moral law and of the rule of progress can be entrusted neither to a caste nor to an 
individual, but to the people, enlightened by national education and led by those from 
its midst whom virtue and genius show to it to be the best. We believe in the sanctity of 
both individuality and society, which may neither exclude nor conflict with each other, 
but harmonise for the betterment of all by all. We believe in liberty, without which 
there can be no human responsibility, in equality, without which liberty is only a sham, 
in fraternity, without which liberty and equality would be means without an end, in 
association, without which fraternity would only be an unrealisable programme, in 
family, community and  state  and fatherland as being a progression of as many spheres in 
which man must successively grow up in the recognition and practice of liberty, 
equality, fraternity and association. We believe in the sanctity of labour, in property 
which arises from it as its mark and fruit, in the duty of society to provide the element 
of material labour through credit and of intellectual and moral labour through 
education.... To sum up, we believe in a social condition which has God and His law as its 
highest point and the people as its base...."3 
Thus:  progress—association—moral law—liberty—equality— 
fraternity—association—family, community, state—sanctity of 
property—credit—education—God and the people—Dio e Popolo. 
These clichés figure in all the manifestos of the 1848 revolutions, 
from the French to the Wallachian, and for that very reason they 
figure here too [as] the common foundations of the new revolution. 
Nor did any of these revolutions dispense with the sanctity of 
property, which is here sanctified as the result of labour. To just 
what an extent all bourgeois property is "the fruit and mark of 
labour" Adam Smith already knew far better than our revolutionary 
initiators eighty years after him. Concerning the socialist concession 
a The italics in this excerpt are by the authors of the "Review".— Ed. 

=====第555页=====
532 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
that society shall through credit provide everyone with the material 
for his work, every manufacturer is accustomed to giving his worker 
credit for as much material as he can make up in one week, the credit 
system is as widespread nowadays as is compatible with the invio­
lability of property, and finally credit itself is only a form of bour­
geois property. 
The gist of this gospel is a social condition in which God represents 
the highest point and the people, or, as it is put later, humanity, the 
base.  In other words, they believe in present society, in which as we 
all know God represents the highest point and the mob the base. If 
Mazzini's motto, God and the people, Dio e Popolo, may have 
meaning in Italy, where God is set against the Pope and the people 
against the princes, it is going rather far to present this plagiarism 
by Johannes Ronge, the shallowest scum of the German so-called 
enlightenment, as the dictum which is to solve the riddle of the 
century. Just how easily one becomes accustomed in this school of 
thinking, incidentally, to the little sacrifices which organisation and 
discipline require, just how obligingly one gives up petty exclusivity 
in matters of theory, is demonstrated by our Arnold Winkelried 
Rüge, who on this occasion, to Leo's great delight, is prepared to pay 
proper tribute to the distinction between divinity and humanity. 382 
The manifesto ends with the words: 
"It is a question of the constitution of European democracy, the establishment of a 
budget, a treasury of the people. It is a question of the organisation of the army of 
initiators." 
Ruge, setting out to be the first initiator of this people's budget, 
has turned to "de demokratische Jantjes a van Amsterdam" and 
explained to them their special vocation for paying out money. 
Holland beware! 
London, November 1, 1850 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the journal 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 5-6, 
1850 Published in English in full for 
the first time 
a Nickname for the Dutch (from: Jan).— Ed. 

=====第556页=====
533 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
DRAFT STATEMENT BY HEINRICH BAUER 
AND KARL PFÄNDER ON THE FUNDS OF THE GERMAN 
WORKERS' EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY IN LONDON 383 
1) The Society3  has been totally changed in character by the 
emigration, caused by the political situation, of members who were 
for financial reasons readily accepted by Messrs. Schapper and 
Willich, and by honorary members accepted with the right to vote, 
who pay no contributions at all. The payment of moneys to the 
Society would only lead to their being used for purposes entirely 
contrary to the original intention. 
2) We have taken over the moneys as Trustees of the Society. The 
position of trustees is laid down in English law. A trustee can use the 
money at his discretion provided he is able to pay it after the 
customary notice. 
3) Concerning the present use of the moneys, Citizens Schapper 
and Willich, who now for private considerations insist on the 
repayment of the moneys, know very well that at all times the Society 
has been backed, without the prior knowledge of most members, by a 
secret committee with unlimited powers to dispose of the Society's 
funds.  Herr Schapper knows this the better as he has more than once 
received money from the Society for personal purposes through the 
medium of the committee. 
4) The money was nevertheless offered to the Society by us and as 
the Society, after seemingly accepting our proposals, suddenly took 
us to court—without success—we have deposited the money with a 
London citizen b in whose hands it will remain until the Society offers 
adequate guarantees for its use in accordance with the original 
intention. 
a The German Workers' Educational Society in London.— Ed. 
b Probably with W. P. Roberts.—Ed. 
18-1124 

=====第557页=====
534 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
5) Concerning the refusal to put things in writing, such writing 
would have no validity in law. Even a written declaration would not 
bind the signatories legally vis-à-vis a moral person. Such a written 
declaration would have no other purpose than to be put to a use 
contrary to contract. 
The undersigned are workers and not used to live by exploiting 
the Society, like Herr Schapper, or by using the refugee fund like 
Herr von Willich. 
Written at the end of 1850 
First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, 
Works, Vol 44, second Russ. ed., 1977 Printed according to the manu­
script in Engels' hand 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第558页=====
535 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
STATEMENT384 
In an article from London dated January 13 the Bremer Tages-
Chronik of January 17 this year has imported a whole cargo of badly-
written stupidities, of fabricated and misunderstood gossip, of 
clumsy insinuations and moral posturing against the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung and against the undersigned. 
"Prominent and decided men"3  of the calibre of this London 
correspondent have from time immemorial responded to superior 
criticism in the manner of apes. They bombard their enemy with 
their own excrement. Chacun selon  ses facultés} 3 
We let this "decided and prominent" man off with his nicely 
fabricated little stories about the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. In answer 
to his well-meaning insinuations on our resignation from the Great 
Windmill Society 0 we declare: 
Neither before nor after their resignation from this Society have 
Engels and Marx ever had the slightest connection with the man­
agement of its funds. They took part in the management of the 
refugee fund, and resigned only after their administration up to that 
point had been audited and found correct. 0 That the resigna­
tion occurred to avoid the payment of a monthly contribution of 
ninepence—this is the notion of a Reichs-Stiibere which has been 
thrown out of circulation! And for this purpose one of them is said to 
have moved to Manchester and the other to have wished to travel 
a Quoted from Ruge's article.—Ed, 
Each according to his capabilities.— Ed. 
c German Workers' Educational Society in London.— Ed. 
d See this volume, p.  632.—  Ed. 
e Small coin of the Lower Rhine, in circulation until 1824.— Ed. 
19* 

=====第559页=====
536 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
overseas. What pure pearls rest in the depths of morally incensed 
souls! 
The real motives for our resignation from the Society and for 
our parting with its leaders are known to our party comrades in 
Germany. They are approved and shared by them, they do not 
concern the general public. Under existing German conditions a 
more skilful agent provocateur would not have given us cause for 
further explanations, much less the bearishlya clumsy one of the 
Bremer Tages-Chronik. 
It suffices in conclusion to indicate that the man besmirching the 
Bremer Tages-Chronik from London with his own guano is none other 
than that Pomeranian thinker to whom the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
has constantly returned with a kind of artistic preference, whom we 
have characterised elsewhere on the basis of his writings as "the 
gutter into which all the rhetorical refuse and all the contradictions 
of German democracy flow together", in a word, that the fellow in 
Bremen is no less a person than "Arnold Winkelried Ruge", the fifth 
wheel on the carriage of state of European central democracy. 385 
Now one can understand the depravity of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. 
London, January 27, 1851 
Karl Marx, Frederick Engels 
First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, Printed according to the manu-
Works, first Russ. ed., Vol. VIII, script 
Moscow-Leningrad, 1930 
Published in English for the first 
time 
Allusion to Arnold Ruge, who was represented as a trained bear in Heinrich 
Heine's "Atta Troll".— Ed. 

=====第560页=====
537 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
INTRODUCTION TO THE LEAFLET 
OF L. A. BLANQUI'S TOAST SENT TO THE REFUGEE 
COMMITTEE386 
Some wretched deceivers of the people, the so-called Central 
Committee of European Social-Democrats, in truth a committee 
of the European central mob, presided over by Messrs. Willich, 
Schapper, etc., celebrated in London the anniversary of the Feb­
ruary Revolution. Louis Blanc, representative of sentimental phrase-
socialism, joined this clique of second-rate pretenders in an 
intrigue against another traitor to the people, Ledru-Rollin. At their 
banquet they read out various addresses supposedly received by 
them. All their efforts notwithstanding, they had not succeeded in 
wheedling a single address from Germany. A propitious sign of the 
development of the German proletariat! 
They wrote also to Blanqui, the noble martyr of revolutionary 
communism, requesting an address. He replied with the following 
toast: 
WARNING TO THE PEOPLE 
What is the pitfall that menaces tomorrow's revolution? The same which caused 
the dpwnfall of yesterday's, the deplorable popularity of bourgeois disguised as 
champions of the people. 
Ledru-Rollin, Louis Blanc, Crémieux, Marie, Lamartine, Garnier-Pagès, Dupont 
(de l'Eure), Flocon, Albert, Arago, Marrast! 
An ominous list! Sinister names written in letters of blood on all the streets of 
democratic Europe. 
The Provisional Government has killed the Revolution! On its head rests 
the responsibility for all the disasters, for the blood of so many thousands of 
victims! 

=====第561页=====
538 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Reaction only did its job when it strangled democracy. The crime lies with the 
traitors whom the trusting people accepted as leaders and who delivered the people 
up to reaction. 
Miserable government! In spite of all the entreaties and cries of anguish it hurls at 
the peasants the 45-centime tax and drives them to desperation and insurrection. 
It kept in being the royalist general staffs, the royalist magistrates, and the royalist 
law. Treason! 
It fell on the workers of Paris on April 16, it imprisoned those of Limoges, 
fired on those of Rouen on the 27th; it let loose all its hounds, it tracked down all true 
republicans. Treason! Treason! 
It, and it alone, bears the terrible responsibility for all the calamities which have 
almost annihilated the 1848 Revolution! 
Ah, they are very guilty men, but the guiltiest of all are those in whom the people, 
deceived by their fine phrases, saw its sword and shield; those whom it enthusiastically 
proclaimed the arbiters of its future. 
Woe betide if on the day of the approaching triumph of the people the forgetful 
indulgence of the masses were to allow to regain power a single one of the men who 
have forfeited their mandate! That would be the end of the revolution for the second 
time! 
May the workers always keep in mind this list of cursed names, and if a single one, 
yes, a single one were ever to appear again in a revolutionary government, let them 
all cry with one voice: Treason! 
Speeches, sermons, programmes would again be nothing but lies and deceit; the 
same conjurers would only come back to produce the same tricks from the same bag; 
they would form the first link in a new chain of more ferocious reaction. Curse and 
vengeance upon them, should they ever dare to appear again! Shame and pity on the 
simple masses who would be caught in their nets again! 
But it is not enough that the conjurers of February are for ever banned from 
the Hôtel de Ville; one must insure against new traitors. 
Rulers would be traitors if, raised to power on the workers' shoulders,they did not 
at once put in practice: 
1) the general disarming of the bourgeois guards; 
2) the arming and military organisation of all the workers. 
No doubt there are many other indispensable measures, but they naturally flow 
from this first act which is the preliminary guarantee, the sole pledge of security for 
the people. 
Not a single weapon must remain in the hands of the bourgeoisie. Without that 
there is no salvation! 
The various doctrines which today vie for the sympathy of the masses may well one 
day be able to keep their promises of improvements and well-being, but only on 
condition that they do not abandon the prize for the shadow. 
They would lead to nothing but a miserable miscarriage if the people, exclusively 
preoccupied with theories, were to neglect the only practical element of security: 
force. 
Arms and organisation are the decisive ingredients of progress, and the only 
serious means of putting an end to misery! 
He who has arms has bread. One falls on one's knees before bayonets; unarmed 
crowds are swept away like  chaff.  France bristling with workers in arms, that is 
the coming of socialism. 
In the face of armed proletarians all obstacles, all resistance, all impossibilities will 
disappear. 
But proletarians who let themselves be amused by ridiculous promenades on the 

=====第562页=====
Introduction to the Leaflet of Blanqui's Toast 539 
streets, by the planting of "trees of liberty", by the ringing phrases of lawyers, must 
expect holy water to begin with, injuries to follow, eventually bullets, and always 
misery. 
Let the people choose! 
Prison of Belle-île-en-Mer 
February 10, 1851 
First published as a leaflet: 
Trinkspruch gesandt durch den Bürger 
L. A. Blanqui an die Kommission 
der Flüchtlinge zu London 
für die Jahresfeier des 24. Februar  1851. 
Veröffentlicht durch die Freunde 
der Gleichheit, Bern, 1851 
(real place of publication: Cologne) Printed according to the leaflet 
The introduction is published 
in English for the first time 

=====第563页=====
540 
Frederick Engels 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE TIMES 
i 
Sir, 
In your paper of to-day, I find a letter from M. Louis Blanc,3 
referring to the Banquet des Egaux, held in London on the 24th of 
February, and to^ a certain toast sent thither by M. Blanqui, the 
prisoner in Belle-Ile-en-mer. Allow me to make a few observations 
upon this letter. 
At the banquet the name of Blanqui was inscribed in large 
characters on the wall, amongst the names of other heroes and 
martyrs of democracy. At that same meeting, a toast was brought 
forward to "the martyrs to calumny": to Marat, Robespierre... 
and—Blanqui! All the toasts and speeches brought forward on this 
occasion, had to be submitted to the committee of the organisers of 
that beautiful and imposing manifestation as early as the 15th of 
February. M. Blanc was a member of that committee, he must, 
therefore, have approved beforehand of this toast to M. Blanqui. 
How can M. Blanc now make M. Blanqui again "a martyr to 
calumny" by calling him 
"one of those unhappy beings, who in their rage attempt violence against renown, 
and who would lose the best of causes if it were possible to lose them"? 
M. Blanc states the toast not to be sent by the prisoners of Belle 
lie, but to be the exclusive work of M. Blanqui. Of course, 
M. Blanqui is to be presumed the author of toasts and documents put 
forward under his name. But the toast in question, as is well known 
in France, was adopted and published by the Société des amis de 
a The Times No.  20741,  March 5, 1851.—Ed. 

=====第564页=====
To the Editor of The Times 541 
l'Egalité which society comprises those prisoners of Belle lie, who 
hold with M. Blanqui; for this gentleman has his friends amongst the 
prisoners quite as well as M. Barbes, the protector of M. Louis Blanc. 
As to the "imposing and beautiful manifestation" and the 
"union of more than a thousand individuals belonging to different 
nations", it should not be forgotten that this touching scene was, as 
far as M. Blanc was concerned, nothing but a "fraternal" demonstra­
tion against M. Ledru-Rollin, in order to take vengeance—as he, 
M. Blanc, has publicly stated — for having been excluded from the 
Central European Democratic Committee of Messrs. Ledru-Rollin, 
Mazzini and others. 
As respects the "renown" of M. Louis Blanc, it would be more 
prudent for him not to touch upon that delicate subject, until 
this "renown" had recovered from the terrible blows which 
M.Proudhon, some time ago, inflicted upon it.388 
M. Blanc, it seems, would shelter himself from the attacks of 
M. Blanqui by blazoning forth his capacity of exile and proscribed. 
And are not the sons of Louis Philippe exiles too? And has M. Blanc 
restrained the violence of his attack against that same M. Proudhon, 
who was, not an exile living comfortably at 87 Piccadilly—an abode 
certainly far from being fit for Ovidian Tristia to be written in, but 
who was a prisoner in the hands of the law?389 
M. Blanc seems to reproach M. Blanqui with having given publicity 
to his toast in "counter-revolutionary journals". M. Blanc knows well 
enough that since May 1850 a "revolutionary" press exists no longer 
in France. And pray, M. Louis Blanc, you who address yourself with 
all your "civilities" to the Editor of The Times, since when is The 
Times, in your eyes, a democratic, socialist and revolutionary paper? 
In order, however, to enable the public to judge of that extra­
ordinary document which so excites the indignation of M. Blanc, 
and which even now forms the general theme of the French 
press,  I submit to you a translation in full and hope that it will be not 
without interest to the English public. 
I am, Sir, your most ob-t servant 
Veritas 
Written on March 5, 1851 Reprinted from Engels' rough 
draft 
First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, 
Works, first Russ. ed., Vol. XXV, Published in English for the first 
Moscow, 1934 time 

=====第565页=====
542 
Frederick Engels 
[CONDITIONS AND PROSPECTS OF A WAR 
OF THE HOLY ALLIANCE AGAINST FRANCE IN 1852] 
I take it for granted that any victorious Parisian revolution in 1852 
will immediately result in a war of the Holy Alliance against France. 
This war will be quite different from that of 1792-94, and the 
events which occurred at that time can in no way serve as a parallel. 
I 
The miracles of the Convention in the military defeat of the 
Coalition are much diminished on closer examination, and Na­
poleon's contempt for the fourteen armies of the Convention is 
comprehensible and in many respects even justified; Napoleon used 
to say that the chief part was played by the blunders of the Coalition, 
which is quite correct, and even when on St. Helena he still regarded 
Carnot as a mediocrity. 
In August 1792, 90,000 Prussians and Austrians swooped down on 
France. The King of Prussia3 wanted to march directly on Paris, but 
Brunswick and the Austrian generals did not want to. There was no 
unity of command; sometimes hesitation, sometimes rapid advance, 
plans always being changed. After the Allies had passed through the 
Argonne defiles, they were opposed by Dumouriez at Valmy and St. 
Menehould. They could have bypassed him and left him where he 
was;  he would have had to follow them to Paris, and with any 
moderately sensible procedure he would not have been a danger to 
them even in the rear. But they could also have acted more safely 
and defeated him in battle, which was not difficult since they had 
more and better troops, as the French themselves admit. Instead 
a Frederick William II.— Ed. 

=====第566页=====
Conditions and Prospects of War of Holy Alliance against France 543 
they unleashed the ridiculous cannonade of Valmy, where during 
the battle, indeed even during the attack by the columns, more than 
once the generals jumped from a more audacious to a more hesitant 
attitude. The two attacks themselves were pitiful as regards mass, 
vigour and spirit.3 It was not the soldiers who were to blame, but the 
vacillations in the command; the attacks were hardly worthy of the 
name, they were at most demonstrations. A resolute advance along 
the whole line would certainly have overthrown the French vol­
unteers and the demoralised regiments. After the battle, the Al­
lies again remained where they were without knowing what to do, 
until the soldiers became ill. 
In the Jemappes campaign, Dumouriez triumphed because he at 
first half instinctively counterposed a mass concentration of forces to 
the Austrian system of cordons and endlessly long fronts (from 
Ostende to the Maas). 391 In the following spring, however, he 
committed the same mistake—owing to his whim of wanting to 
conquer Holland; the Austrians, on the other hand, advanced in 
concentrated formation; the result was the battle of Neerwinden and 
the loss of Belgium. 392 At Neerwinden, and particularly also in the 
smaller engagements of this campaign, it was seen that when the 
French volunteers, these much vaunted heroes, were not constantly 
under the eye of Dumouriez they did not fight better than the South 
German "people's militia" of 1849. 
Then, in addition, Dumouriez defected, Vendée revolted, the 
army was split and discouraged, and if the 130,000 Austrians and 
British had marched determinedly on Paris, the revolution would 
have been bankrupt and Paris conquered—exactly as in the previ­
ous year, if such stupidities had not taken place. Instead, these 
gentlemen laid siege to the fortresses and set about achieving the 
most minute advantages en détail, one after the other, with the 
greatest expenditure of strategic pedantry, and frittered away six 
whole months. 
The French army, which still held together after Lafayette's 
defection, can be estimated at 120,000 men, and the volunteers of 
1792 at 60,000. In March 1793, 300,000 men were conscripted. In 
August therefore, when the levée en  masse  was decreed, the French 
army must have been at least 300,000-350,000 strong. The levée en 
masse raised it by about 700,000. Taking into account all deductions, 
in the beginning of 1794 the French put about 750,000 men in the 
field against the Coalition, considerably more than the Coalition put 
against France. 
a This word is in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第567页=====
544 Frederick Engels 
From April 1793 until October, the French were beaten ev­
erywhere, only the blows had no decisive effect thanks to the 
Coalition's systematic delays. From October onwards there were 
alternating successes. In winter the campaign was suspended, in the 
spring of 1794 the levées'en  masse  came into the line of battle with full 
effect; the result was victories in all areas in May, until finally in June 
the victory of Fleurus decided the fate of the revolution. 393 
Therefore the Convention, and the Ministry of August  10394 
before it, had time enough for arming. From August 10, 1792, to 
March 1793 nothing happened—the volunteers hardly count. In 
March 1793, the 300,000 men were conscripted—from then until 
the following March the Convention had plenty of time and free­
dom for arming, a whole year, during ten months of which the 
revolutionary party was freed from all obstacles by the overthrow of 
the Girondists. And in a country of 25 million, which had the normal 
proportion of the population capable of bearing arms, when a whole 
year was available, it did not require a miracle to mobilise a million 
soldiers, 750,000 being active combatants (3 per cent of the 
population), against a foreign foe, however much of a novelty it was 
at that time. 
With the exception of the Vendée, I consider the internal revolts 
of no account from the military point of view. Except Lyons and 
Toulon, they were quelled within six weeks without a blow being 
struck. Lyons was captured by the levées en masse, Toulon owing to 
Napoleon's striking incursion by means of a resolute storm and 
because of the mistakes of the defenders. 
The 750,000 men who were led against the Coalition in 1794 
included at least 100,000 old soldiers from the time of the monarchy 
and 150,000 other soldiers, derived partly from the volunteers and 
partly from the  levée  of 300,000, who had become accustomed to war 
in the continual fighting for eighteen or twelve months respectively. 
In addition, at least half of the 500,000 new recruits had already 
taken part in the fighting during September, October and November 
of 1793, and the youngest of them must have been at least three 
months in the battalions when they were led against the enemy. 
In his Spanish campaign, Napoleon estimated at 3-4 weeks the 
time required for training: the école de bataillon? Not counting the 
subalterns and staff officers, who at that time were on the average 
certainly better among the Coalition forces, the French army of 
Engels apparently refers to Napoleon's "Note sur la position actuelle de l'armée 
en Espagne", Bayonne, 1808, in the book: W. F. P. Napier, History of the War in the 
Peninsula...,Vol. I.— Ed. 

=====第568页=====
Conditions and Prospects of War of Holy Alliance against France 545 
1794,  thanks to the time allowed it for organisation, and thanks to 
the Allies' eternally inconclusive system of combat—a system which 
demoralises a well-tried, particularly aggressive army, and which 
disciplines that of the enemy, if it is a young army and on the 
defensive, and makes it accustomed to war—the French army of 
1794 was therefore no raw, noisy, enthusiastic band of volunteers 
ready "to die for the Republic", but a very fair army,3  certainly a 
match for the enemy. In 1794, the French generals were in any case 
much superior, although they made blunders enough; but the 
guillotine ensured unity of command and harmonious operations 
where the representatives [of the Convention] did not commit 
stupidities on their own account, which only exceptionally occurred. 
Le noble Saint-Just en fit plusieurs. b 
Marginal notes on mass tactics: 
1. The first crude notion of them arose from the successful 
manoeuvre at Jemappes, which was the result of instinct rather than 
military calculation. It arose from the chaotic state of the French 
army, which needed numerical superiority in order to have any 
degree of military self-confidence; mass had to take the place of 
discipline. Carnot's share in this discovery is not at all clear. 
2. These mass tactics remained in the crudest of states and in 1794 
at Tourcoing 395 and Fleurus, for example, were not applied at 
all (the French, and Carnot  himself,  committed the most flagrant 
blunders), until finally Napoleon in 1796 by the six days' Piedmont 
campaign and the actual annihilation en détail of a superior force 396 
showed people the goal towards which they were moving without 
having previously had any clear idea of it. 
3. As regards Carnot  himself,  he is a fellow about whom I am 
increasingly suspicious. Of course, I cannot make a definitive 
judgment, I do not have his dispatches to the generals. But from 
what is available his chief merit seems to have consisted in the 
boundless ignorance and incapacity of his predecessors Pache and 
Bouchotte, and in the total unfamiliarity with military matters of all 
the rest of the Comité de salut public. 397 Dans le royaume  des aveugles, le 
borgne est roi. c Carnot, an old officer of the Engineers, who himself 
had been a representative [of the Convention] with the Northern 
Army, knew what a fortress or an army required in the way of 
material etc., and particularly what the French lacked. He had 
necessarily, too, a certain understanding of the way to mobilise the 
a Engels gives this phrase in English.— Ed. 
The noble Saint-Just committed several.— Ed. 
c In the kingdom of the blind the one-eyed man is king.— Ed. 

=====第569页=====
546 Frederick Engels 
military resources of a country like France, and since, in connection 
with a revolutionary levée en masse, where in any case there is 
considerable waste, 3 a certain amount of squandering of resources 
does not matter as long as the main aim, the speedy mobilisation of 
these resources, is achieved, it follows that there is no need to ascribe 
to Carnot any great degree of genius to explain his results. What 
makes me doubtful poursapartb  in the invention of mass warfare that 
is ascribed to him is, in particular, that his most far-reaching plans of 
1793-94 were based on precisely the opposite mode of warfare; he 
divided the French armies instead of concentrating them, and he 
operated against the flanks of the enemy in such a way that the latter 
himself became concentrated. And then there is his later career, his 
display of knightly virtue under the Consulate, etc., his vaunted 
defence of Antwerp—the defence of a fortress is on the average 
the best post in which an officer who is mediocre, methodical but 
endowed with a certain tenacity can achieve distinction, and after all 
the siege of Antwerp in 1814 did not last three months, and finally 
his attempt to force the methods of 1793 on Napoleon in 1815 when 
confronted by the centralised  1,200,000  soldiers of the Coalition, 
and that under a totally altered system of warfare, and his phi-
listinism in general; all that does not testify to Carnot's genius. 
And then, when has a decent fellow been known to have bluffed his 
way, as he did, through Thermidor, Fructidor, Brumaire, 398 etc. 
Summa summarum. The Convention was saved solely and exclusive­
ly because the Coalition was not centralised and therefore the 
Convention was given a full year in which to arm. It was saved, as old 
Fritz c was saved in the Seven Years' War,399 and as Wellington was 
saved in Spain in 1809, although the French were quantitatively 
and qualitatively at least three times as strong as all their opponents 
together, and their colossal power was paralysed only because in 
Napoleon's absence the marshals played all kinds of dirty tricks on 
one another. 
II 
By now the Coalition has long ago got over the stupidities 
of 1793. It is splendidly centralised. It was centralised already in 
1813.  The Russian campaign of 1812 made Russia the centre of 
gravity of the entire Holy Alliance for a war on the Continent. 
a Engels uses the English "waste".— Ed. 
For his part.— Ed. 
c Frederick  II.—  Ed. 

=====第570页=====
Conditions and Prospects of War of Holy Alliance against France 547 
Russian troops formed the main mass around which only later the 
Prussians, Austrians, etc., were grouped, and they continued to be 
the main mass all the way to Paris. Alexander was in fact the 
commander-in-chief of all the armies (that is to say, the Russian 
general staff behind Alexander). But since 1848 the Holy Alliance 
has been built on an even much more solid basis. The development 
of the counter-revolution in 1849-51 had reduced the Continent, 
apart from France, to the same position in relation to Russia as that 
of the Rhenish Federation400  and Italy in relation to Napoleon, one 
of pure vassalage. Nicholas, i.e. Paskevich, is the inevitable dictator of 
the Holy Alliance en cas de guerre* just as Nesselrode is en temps de 
paix. h 
Furthermore, as far as the modern art of war is concerned, it has 
been completely developed by Napoleon. Until certain conditions 
come into effect, which we shall deal with below, there remains no 
other course than to imitate Napoleon as far as conditions allow. This 
modern art of war, however, is universally known. In Prussia it has 
been drilled into every second lieutenant already before his ensign's 
examination, insofar as it can be drilled in. As for the Austrians, 
they came to know their bad, specifically Austrian, generals in the 
Hungarian campaign and got rid of them — such as Windischgrätz, 
Weiden, Götz and other old women. On the other hand — since we 
no longer have any Neue Rheinische Zeitungin which to write, we need 
no longer harbour any illusions—there are Radetzky's two cam­
paigns in Italy', the first excellent, the second a masterly one. 401 Who 
helped him in this connection is of no consequence, in any case the 
old fellow has bon sens c enough to grasp the excellent ideas of other 
people. His defensive position in 1848 between the four fortresses of 
Peschiera, Mantua, Legnago and Verona, all four sides of the 
rectangle well protected, and his defence of this position until help 
arrived, in the midst of an insurgent country, would be a masterpiece 
if his ability to hold out had not been tremendously facilitated 
by the pitiful leadership, disunity and endless vacillation of the 
Italian generals, the intrigues of Charles Albert and the support of 
the reactionary aristocrats and clergy in the enemy camp. Nor should 
it be forgotten that he was sitting in the most fertile country in the 
world and had no worries over provisions for his army. 
For the Austrians, however, the campaign of 1849 was unprecedented. 
The Piedmontese, instead of barring the road to Turin at Novara 
a In case of war.— Ed. 
In time of peace.— Ed. 
c Common sense.— Ed. 

=====第571页=====
548 Frederick Engels 
and Mortara (a line three miles long) with a concentrated mass of 
troops, which would have been the best course, or of advancing from 
there on Milan in two or three columns, took up positions from Sesto 
to Piacenza—a line of twenty miles—with 70,000 men, only 3,500 
men per German mile,3  and involving 3 to 4 days' hard march from 
one wing to the other. A miserable concentric operation against 
Milan, for which they were everywhere too weak. Radetzky, seeing 
that the Italians were using the old Austrian system of 1792, 
operated against them exactly as Napoleon would have done. The 
Piedmontese line was cut into two pieces by the Po, a glaring blunder. 
Radetzky broke through the line close to the Po, separated the two 
southern from the three northern divisions by driving in between 
them a wedge of 60,000 men, swiftly attacked the three northern 
divisions (a concentration of scarcely 35,000 men) with his whole 
force, threw them back into the Alps, and separated the two corps 
of the Piedmontese army from each other and from Turin. This 
manoeuvre, which ended the campaign in three days, and was al­
most literally copied from that conducted by Napoleon in 1809 at 
Abensberg and Eggmiihl, 402 the most brilliant of all Napoleon's 
manoeuvres, proves at any rate that the Austrians are far from 
continuing to act in accordance with the old motto "always slowly 
forward" . It was precisely speed that decided everything here. The 
treacherous acts of the aristocrats and Ramorino made things easier, 
especially owing to accurate information about the position and 
plans of the Italians, and also because of the meanness of the Savoy 
brigade at Novara, which did not fight but plundered. But from the 
military aspect, the pitiful disposition of the Piedmontese forces and 
Radetzky's manoeuvre fully suffice to explain the latter's success. 
Under all circumstances, these two facts were bound to have this 
result. 
Finally, by the very nature of their army, the Russians are com­
pelled to adopt a system of warfare which comes very close to the 
modern one. The main strength of their army consists of massed, 
semi-barbaric, and therefore clumsy, infantry, and a numerous force 
of semi-barbaric, light, irregular cavalry (Cossacks). In decisive 
encounters, in large-scale battles, the Russians have never operated 
with other than massed forces; Suvorov understood that already 
when storming Ismail and Ochakov.403 The mobility they lack is 
partly made up for by the irregular cavalry, which swarms around 
7,420 metres; 1 German mile equals 4.87 English miles.— Ed. 
From the refrain to a German song popular during the liberation war of 
1813.—  Ed. 

=====第572页=====
Conditions and Prospects of War of Holy Alliance against France 549 
them on all sides and masks any movement of the army. But it is 
precisely this ponderous massive character of the Russian army that 
makes it pre-eminently suited to form the core and backbone, the 
pivot, of a coalition army, the operations of which are always bound 
to be slower than those of a national army. This role the Russians 
played with distinction in 1813 and 1814 and in those years hardly 
any battle plan occurs in which the massive Russian columns do not 
at once stand out from all others by their depth and density. 
Since 1812 the French can hardly be regarded as the pre-eminent 
bearers of the Napoleonic tradition. This tradition has more or less 
passed to all the big European armies; in each of them, for the most 
part already in the last years of the Empire, it has resulted in a 
revolution; each of these armies in its strategy and tactics has 
adopted the Napoleonic system, insofar as this is in harmony with 
the character of the army. The levelling influence of the bourgeois 
epoch is also apparent here; the old national peculiarities are 
disappearing in the armies as well, and the French, Austrian and 
Prussian armies, and even to a great extent the British army, are 
more or less equally well-organised machines for carrying out 
Napoleonic manoeuvres. This does not prevent them from having 
very diverse qualities in regard to fighting, and so on. Of all the (big) 
European armies, however, only the Russian, semi-barbaric, army is 
capable of having its own tactics and strategy, for it alone is not yet 
ripe for the completely developed modern system of warfare. 
As for the French, owing to the little war in Algeria404  they 
have interrupted even the continuity of the Napoleonic tradition of 
large-scale war. It remains to be seen whether in this predatory war 
the disadvantageous consequences for discipline are outweighed by 
the advantages of inuredness to war, whether the war accustoms men 
to hardship or breaks them by over-exertion; and finally, whether it 
does not also ruin the generals' coup  d'œil*  in a large-scale war. In any 
case,  the French cavalry is being ruined in Algeria, it is forgetting 
what constitutes its force, the compact choc, h and it is becoming 
accustomed to a system of harassment in which the Cossacks, 
Hungarians, and Poles will always remain superior to it. Among the 
generals, Oudinot made a fool of himself before Rome, and only 
Cavaignac distinguished himself in June—but all that still does not 
amount to any grandes épreuves. 0 
a Sure-sightedness.— Ed. 
b Onslaught.— Ed. 
c Great tests.— Ed. 

=====第573页=====
550 Frederick Engels 
On the whole, therefore, the chances of superiority in strategy and 
tactics are at least as much in favour of the Coalition as in favour of 
the revolution. 
Ill 
But will not a new revolution which brings to power an entirely 
new class give rise, like the first one, to new means and ways of 
waging war, compared with which the present Napoleonic ones will 
appear just as obsolete and ineffective as those of the Seven Years' 
War compared with those of the first Revolution? 
The modern warfare is the necessary product of the French 
Revolution. Its precondition is the social and political emancipation 
of the bourgeoisie and small peasants. The bourgeoisie provides the 
money, the small peasants supply the soldiers. The emancipation of 
both classes from feudal and guild fetters is required in order to 
provide the colossal armies of the present day; and the degree of 
wealth and education connected with this stage of social develop­
ment is equally required in order to provide the material in the way 
of weapons, munitions, provisions, and so on, necessary for modern 
armies, and in order to provide the required number of trained 
officers and to give the soldier himself the required degree of 
intelligence. 
I deal with the modern system of war as fully developed by 
Napoleon. Its two pivots are: the mass character of means of attack in 
men, horses and guns, and the mobility of these means of attack. 
Mobility is the essential consequence of massiveness. Modern armies 
cannot, like the small armies of the Seven Years' War, march to and 
fro for months on an area of twenty miles. They cannot bring in their 
train stores containing their total food requirements. They must 
swoop down on a region like a swarm of locusts, ravage all its 
food supplies within reach of the cavalry, and must depart when 
everything has been devoured. The stores are adequate if they 
suffice only for unforeseen contingencies; they are continually 
depleted and replenished; they have to follow the rapid march of the 
army and therefore seldom suffice to cover the needs of the army 
even for a single month. The modern system of war is, therefore, 
impossible for a long period in a poor, semi-barbaric, thinly pop­
ulated country. Owing to this impossibility, the French perished 
slowly in Spain and rapidly in Russia. On the other hand, however, 
the Spaniards were also ruined owing to the French, their country 
was very largely sucked dry. Even in Poland the Russians cannot 
make use of their own clumsy system of mass warfare for a long 

=====第574页=====
Conditions and Prospects of War of Holy Alliance against France 551 
period, and in Russia itself they cannot make use of it at all as long as 
they have no railways. The defensive at the Dnieper and the Dvina 
would spell ruin for Russia. 
But this degree of mobility requires also a certain degree of 
education of the soldier, who in many cases must know how to look 
after  himself.  The considerable extension of patrol and foraging 
expeditions, outpost duties, etc., the greater activity demanded of 
every soldier, the more frequent recurrence of cases in which the 
soldier has to act on his own and has to rely on his own intellectual 
resources, and, finally, the great importance of skirmish engage­
ments in the fighting, the success of which depends on the 
intelligence, the coup d'œil and the energy of each individual sol­
dier—all this presupposes a greater degree of education of the 
non-commissioned officer and rank-and-file soldier than was the 
case under old Fritz. A barbaric or semi-barbaric nation, however, is 
unable to offer a degree of education of the masses such that 
500,000-600,000 men recruited at random could, on the one hand, 
become disciplined and trained to act like machines, and at the same 
time acquire or retain this coup d'œil for small-scale warfare. The 
barbarians, e.g. the Cossacks, are by nature gifted with this coup d'œil 
of the robber; but on the other hand, they are as much incapable of 
regular military duties as the Russian serf infantrymen, on the 
contrary, are proper skirmishing. 
This universal average degree of education which the modern 
system of war requires in every soldier is to be found only in the most 
developed countries: in Britain, where the soldier, however raw a 
yokel he was, goes through the civilising school of the towns; in 
France, where the emancipated small peasants and the astute mob of 
the towns (remplaçants*) constitute the army; in North Germany, 
where feudalism likewise has either been destroyed or has assumed 
plus ou moins h bourgeois forms, and where the towns provide a 
considerable contingent for the army; finally, after the last wars, it 
seems to exist also in at least that part of the Austrian army which 
is recruited from the least feudal areas. Apart from Britain, small 
peasant farming is everywhere the basis of the army, and the army is 
the more fitted for the modern system of war the closer the position 
of the small peasant comes to that of the free owner. 
But the mobility of the masses, as well as that of the individual 
soldier, presupposes the degree of civilisation of the bourgeois 
epoch. The sluggishness of the pre-revolutionary armies is closely 
a Substitutes for those who have bought exemption from military service.-—Ed. 
More or less.— Ed. 

=====第575页=====
552 Frederick Engels 
bound up with feudalism. The mass of officers' conveyances was by 
itself a hindrance to all movement. The armies crawled along just as 
slowly as all movement. The rising bureaucracy of the absolute 
monarchies introduced rather more order into the management of 
army materials, but at the same time its alliance with haute finance led 
to organised fraud en gros,  and where the bureaucracy was of some 
benefit to the armies it did them twice as much harm by infecting 
them with a spirit of schematism and pedantry. Witness 3 the All-
Highest old Fritz  himself.  Even now Russia is suffering from all 
these evils; the Russian army, which is everywhere cheated and 
fleeced, is starving, and on the march the men die like flies. Only a 
bourgeois state feeds its troops tolerably and therefore can count on 
the mobility of its army. 
As regards mobility, therefore,' this is in every respect a char­
acteristic of the bourgeois armies. But mobility is not only the 
necessary complement to the mass character of the army, it often 
replaces it (Napoleon in Piedmont, 1796). 
Mass character, however, is just as much a special characteristic of 
modern civilised armies as is mobility. 
However diverse the methods of recruitment may be—conscrip­
tion, the Prussian army reserve, the Swiss militia, the levée en 
masse—the experience of the last sixty years proves that under the 
regime of the bourgeoisie and free small peasants not more than 7 
per cent of the population can be put under arms in any people's 
war; hence about 5 per cent can be actively utilised. Accordingly 
France in the autumn of 1793, with an estimated population of 25 
million, could have mustered  1,750,000  soldiers and  1,250,000  active 
combatants. At that time, these  1,250,000  were more or less present 
at the frontiers, before Toulon, and in the Vendée, taking both sides 
into account here. In Prussia—with at present 16 million inhabit­
ants—  7 per cent and 5 per cent would amount to  1,120,000  and 
800,000 men respectively. But the entire Prussian forces, regular 
army and army reserve, hardly amount to 600,000 men. This 
example shows how much even 5 per cent involves for a nation. 
Eh bien—whereas France and Prussia can easily call under arms 
5 per cent of their population, and in case of need even 7 per cent, 
Austria in the most extreme case can call up at most 5 per cent, and 
Russia hardly 3 per cent. For Austria, 5 per cent would be 1,750,000, 
out of an estimated 35 million. In 1849, Austria strained itself to the 
utmost. It had about 550,000 men. The Hungarians, whose forces 
had been doubled as the result of the Kossuth notes, had perhaps 
This word is in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第576页=====
Conditions and Prospects of War of Holy Alliance against France 553 
350,000. I calculate in addition 50,000 Lombards who had escaped 
conscription or were serving in the Piedmontese army—making a 
total of 950,000 men, consequently not even 22/3 per cent of the 
population; at the same time the Croat borderers,405 who lived under 
exceptional conditions, furnished at least 15 per cent of their 
population. Russia, at a low estimate, has 72 million inhabitants; 
therefore at 5 per cent it should be able to raise 3,600,000 men. 
Instead of this, it has never been able to muster more than 1,500,000, 
including both regular and irregular troops, and in its own country it 
has been able to lead at most  1,000,000  of these against the enemy, 
i.e. its total force was never above 2Vi2 per cent, and its active force 
never above  l7/is  or 1.39 per cent. The sparse population over an 
enormous area, the lack of communications and the small national 
production explain this easily enough. 
Like mobility, the mass character of means of attack is necessarily 
the result of a higher stage of civilisation, and, in particular, the 
modern proportion of the armed mass to the total population is 
incompatible with any state of society inferior to that of the 
emancipated bourgeoisie. 
Hence modern warfare presupposes the emancipation of the 
bourgeois and peasants; it is the military  expression  of this emancipa­
tion. 
The emancipation of the proletariat, too, will have its particular 
military expression, it will give rise to a specific, new method of 
warfare. Cela est clair. It is even possible already to determine the 
kind of material basis this new warfare will have. 
But just as the mere conquest of political power by the present 
ill-defined French and German proletariat, which partly forms the 
tail-end of other classes, is a long way from the real emancipation 
of the proletariat, which consists in the abolition of all class con­
tradictions, so the initial warfare in the coming revolution is 
equally far removed from the warfare of the truly emancipated 
proletariat. 
The real emancipation of the proletariat, the complete abolition of 
all class distinctions and the complete concentration of all the means 
of production, in Germany and France presupposes the co-operation 
of Britain and at least a doubling of the means of production now 
existing in Germany and France. But precisely that is the pre­
condition also for a new form of warfare. 
Napoleon's magnificent discoveries in the science of war cannot be 
wiped out by a miracle. The new science of war must be just as much 
a necessary product of the new social relations as the science of war 
created by the revolution and Napoleon was the necessary result of 

=====第577页=====
554 Frederick Engels 
the new relations brought about by the revolution. But just as in the 
proletarian revolution the question for industry is not one of 
abolishing steam machines but of multiplying them, so for warfare it 
is a question not of diminishing but of intensifying the mass char­
acter and mobility of armies. 
Increased productive forces were the precondition for the 
Napoleonic warfare; new productive forces must likewise be the 
precondition for every new perfection in warfare. The railways and 
the electric telegraph will already today provide a talented general or 
Minister of War with an occasion for quite new combinations in a 
European war. The gradual increase of the productive forces, and of 
the population along with them, has likewise provided the oppor­
tunity for greater accumulation of masses. In France, with 36 instead 
of 25 million inhabitants, 5 per cent yields now not  1,250,000  but 
1,800,000  men. In both cases the power of the civilised countries has 
increased compared with that of the barbaric countries. The former 
alone have large railway networks and their population has grown 
twice as fast as that of Russia, for example. 
All these calculations prove, incidentally, that a lasting subjection 
of Western Europe to Russia is quite impossible and becomes more 
impossible every day. 
The power of the new kind of warfare that will result from the 
abolition of classes cannot, however, lie in the fact that with the 
growth of the population the available 5 per cent constitute ever 
more considerable masses. It must lie in the fact that it will become 
possible to call under arms not 5 per cent or 7 per cent of the 
population, but 12-16 per cent, i.e. half or two-thirds of the male 
adults—healthy persons of from 18 to 30, or eventually 40 years of 
age. But just as Russia cannot increase its available force from 2-3 
per cent to 5 per cent without a complete revolution of its entire 
internal social and political organisation, and, above all, of its 
production, so Germany and France cannot raise their available 
force from 5 per cent to 12 per cent without revolutionising their 
production and more than doubling it. Only if, by means of ma­
chinery, etc., the labour of each individual on the average beco­
mes worth twice as much as at present, can the number of those who 
can be spared from production be doubled—even for a short time, 
for no country has ever kept the 5 per cent afoot for a long time. 
If the necessary conditions for it are fulfilled, if national 
production has been sufficiently increased and centralised, if classes 
have been abolished, which is absolutely essential—owing to his 
social, aristocratic position, the Prussian one-year volunteer,406 as 
long as he is not an N. C. O. or officer of the army reserve, will never 

=====第578页=====
Conditions and Prospects of War of Holy Alliance against France 555 
be a useful soldier alongside the peasants and workers—then the 
only restriction to the actual levy is the number of the population 
capable of bearing arms, that is to say, in an extreme emergency for a 
short time 15-20 per cent of the population can be armed and 
12-15 per cent actually led against the enemy. These enormous 
masses, however, presuppose a degree of mobility quite different 
even from that of the present-day armies. Without a complete 
railway network, they can be neither concentrated nor fed, nor can 
they be kept supplied with munitions, or able to move. And without 
the electric telegraph it is quite impossible to direct them; and since 
in the case of such masses it is impossible for the strategist and the 
tactician (who is in command on the battlefield) to be one and the 
same person, division of labour comes into effect here. Strategic 
operations, the co-operation of the various corps, have to be directed 
from the central point of the telegraph lines; tactical operations have 
to be directed by the individual generals. It is clear that under these 
conditions, wars can and must be decided in a much shorter time 
than they were even by Napoleon. The expense factor requires it, the 
necessary decisive effect of each blow with such masses makes it 
inevitable. 
In mass and strategic mobility, therefore, these armies must be 
quite unprecedentedly formidable. With such soldiers, tactical 
mobility (in patrolling, skirmishing, and on the battlefield) must 
likewise be considerably greater, they are more robust, agile and 
intelligent than anything that present-day society can offer. 
Unfortunately, however, all this can be put into effect only after a 
long period of years and at a time when, owing to lack of an adequate 
enemy, such wars on a mass scale can no longer occur. The primary 
conditions for all this do not exist in the first period of the 
proletarian revolution, least of all in the year 1852. 
The proletariat in France at present is certainly barely double the 
percentage of the population that it was in 1789. At that time—at 
least between 1792 and 1794—the proletariat was in such a state of 
ferment and tension as will only recur in the near future. At that 
time it already became evident that in revolutionary wars with violent 
internal convulsions the mass of  the proletariat is needed for  use within the 
country. The same thing will now be the case once again and probably 
more so than ever, since the chances of the immediate outbreak of 
civil wars increase as the Allies advance. Hence the proletariat will be 
able to send only a small contingent to the active army; the main 
source of the levy remains the mob and the peasants. That is to say, 
the revolution will have to wage war with the means and by the 
methods of the general modern warfare. 

=====第579页=====
556 Frederick Engels 
Only an ideological theorist could ask whether it would not be 
possible with these means, i.e. with an active army of 4-5 per cent 
of the population, to devise new combinations and discover new 
surprising methods of application. Just as it is impossible to increase 
the output of the loom fourfold without replacing the motive power, 
hand labour, by steam, without discovering a new means of 
production that has little in common with the old hand loom, so it is 
impossible in the art of war to produce new results by the old means. 
Only the production of new, more powerful means makes it possible 
to achieve new, more magnificent results. Every great general who 
marks an epoch in the history of war owing to new combinations, 
either himself invents new material means or first discovers the 
correct use of new material means invented before him. Between 
Turenne and the old Fritz lies the revolution in the use of infantry, 
the supersession of the pike and matchlock by the bayonet and 
flintlock—and old Fritz's epoch-making achievement in the 
science of war lies in the fact that in general, within the limits of the 
warfare of that time, he transformed and developed the old tactics in 
conformity with the new instruments. Just as Napoleon's epoch-
making achievement lies in the fact that he found the sole correct 
tactical and strategic application for the more colossal army masses 
made possible by the revolution, and moreover developed this 
application so completely that on the whole modern generals, far 
from being able to go further than he did, in their most brilliant and 
cleverest operations only try to copy him. 
Summa summarum, the revolution will have to fight with mod­
ern means of war and the modern art of war against modern 
means of war and the modern art of war. The chances of military 
talent are at least as great for the Coalition as they are for France: Ce 
seront alors les gros bataillons qui l'emporteront* 
IV 
Let us now see what battalions can be brought into the battle line, 
and how they can be used. 
1. Russia, The Russian army on a peace footing consists nominally 
of 1,100,000  men; in reality about 750,000. Since 1848 the 
government has continually worked to attain a force of  1,500,000 
men on a war footing, and Nicholas and Paskevich have themselves 
carried out a revision as far as possible throughout. At a low estimate, 
therefore, Russia has now actually attained its full peace time 
Then the big battalions will win.— Ed. 

=====第580页=====
Conditions and Prospects of War of Holy Alliance Against France 557 
effective of  1,100,000  men. From this must be deducted, on a high 
estimate: 
For the Caucasus 100,000 men 
„ Russia proper 150,000 y' 
,,-the Polish provinces 150,000 " 
„ the sick, detached, etc 150,000 '* 
550,000 men. 
There remain 550,000 men available for active service against 
external enemies. That is an estimate hardly greater than the 
number Russia actually sent across the frontiers in 1813. 
2. Prussia. The splendid army, if the entire army reserve of the 
first and the second call-up, the supernumeraries, and everything 
are called up, amounts to a least 650,000 men. At the present 
moment, however, the government can mobilise at most 550,000 
men. I put the figure at only 500,000. These need to detach 
only a little in excess of the second call-up (150,000 men) for 
garrisons, etc., since everywhere the gradual calling up of super­
numeraries and of the new conscripts for next year—which Nicholas 
will already be taking steps to ensure—as well as the Russian 
troops continually on the march through the country, would form 
a sufficient reserve against any internal attempt at an uprising. 
Moreover, the Prussians have fewer sick, since they are concentrated 
in their own country and have a lesser distance to march to the Rhine 
than the Russians. Nevertheless, as in the case of the Russians, I 
deduct  half,  leaving available the other  half,  amounting to 250,000 
men. 
3. Austria. At a low estimate, Austria has under arms and on leave, 
the latter being as quickly available for the army as the Prussian army 
reserve, 600,000 men. Here, too, I deduct  half,  since for at least 
two-thirds of the monarchy, until the formation of new reserves, the 
advancing Russians serve as a reserve within the country and keep 
the hotbeds of insurrection in check. There remain 300,000 men 
available for use against the enemy. 
4. The German Confederation. Since the gentlemen live close to the 
Rhine and the whole Coalition marches through their territory, they 
hardly require any garrison against the interior, all the less because 
with the first successes of the Coalition against France the reserve 
armies would take their stand right across Germany, from north to 
south. The German Confederation provides at least 120,000 men. 
5. The forces of the Italian governments, the Danes, Belgians, 
Dutch, Swedes, etc., I put for the time being at 80,000 men. 

=====第581页=====
558 Frederick Engels 
Accordingly the total mass of the Coalition troops amounts to 
1,300,000  men, who are either already under arms or can be 
immediately called up. All the estimates are intentionally put too 
low. The deductions for the sick alone are so considerable that 
merely from the convalescent, etc., two months after the beginning 
of operations a second army of 350,000 men can be formed at the 
French frontier. But as nowadays, no government is so imprudent 
as to begin a war without at the same time as it deploys the 
active army raising new levies, as strong as possible, and sending 
them in the wake of the first army, this second army should prove to 
be considerably stronger than the above figure. 
The concentration of the first army (the  1,300,000  men) can be 
completed in about two months, as follows. That the Prussians and 
Austrians can have their above-mentioned contingents available 
within two months is no longer open to doubt after the arming 
carried out last November. As regards the Russians, their three 
definitive concentration points are, in the first place, Berlin, 
Breslau 3 and Cracow or Vienna (see below). From St. Petersburg to 
Berlin is approximately 45 days' march, and from Berlin to the 
Rhine 16 days, making a total of 61 days' march, at 5 German miles 
per day. From Moscow to Breslau is 48 days' march, from Breslau to 
Mainz 20, together 68 days. Kiev to Vienna requires 40 days, Vienna 
to Basle 22, together 62 days. Add to this the rest-days, which in the 
case of the Russian troops and the above strenuous marches must on 
no account be omitted, it is clear that even the troops stationed in 
Moscow, St. Petersburg, and Kiev can comfortably reach the Rhine 
in three  months, even supposing that the troops move exclusively on 
foot and that no use is made of railways or vehicles. But such means 
can be used in Germany almost everywhere, and in Russia and 
Poland at least partially, which would in total certainly shorten the 
transport of the troops by 15-20 days. The main mass of the Russian 
troops, however, are at present already concentrated in the Polish 
provinces, and as soon as the political conditions make a crisis 
probable, more troops will be sent there, so that the starting points of 
the line of march will not be St. Petersburg, Moscow and Kiev, but 
Riga, Vilna, Minsk, Dubno and Kamieniec, which me ns that the line 
of march will be shortened by about 60 miles—12 days' march plus 4 
rest-days. Moreover, a large part of the infantry—especially that 
coming from the more remote stations—can be conveyed a distance 
of five miles on every third or rest-day at least, so that for this part of 
the infantry the rest-days will count as march-days. The railways 
The Polish name is Wroclaw.— Ed. 

=====第582页=====
Conditions and Prospects of War of Holy Alliance against France 559 
would then be kept free for artillery material, munitions and stores, 
while the artillery gun-crews and servicing personnel would either 
march or be conveyed, and thus in any case would arrive earlier than 
in the way hitherto adopted. 
In view of all the above, it seems to me that there is nothing to 
prevent the concentration of the Coalition army on the Rhine taking 
place two months after the outbreak of the revolution, as follows: 
First army 
1. First line on the Rhine and before Piedmont: Ï 
Prussians, Austrians, etc 750,000 men I  1,050,000  men 
Russians 300,000 men f 
2. Second line, reserve, > 
10 days'march behind, Russians 250,000 men 
Total  1,300,000  men 
(as above) 
Second army 
Reserve of the smaller Coalition members, 
Prussians, Austrians, etc., included in 
the concentration 200,000 men 
Russian reserve on the march, 
20 days'march behind 150,000 men 350,000 men 
Total of both armies  1,650,000  men 
Basically, under present conditions hardly 5-6 weeks are needed to 
bring 300,000 Russians to the Rhine, and in the same period Prussia, 
Austria and the smaller Allies can bring their contingents as above 
mentioned to the Rhine; but in order to take due account of the 
unforeseen obstacles which occur in every coalition, I assume a full 
two months. At the moment when Napoleon came from Elba, the 
disposition of the Allied troops in relation to a march towards France 
was hardly as favourable as the present one, yet the Russians were at 
the Rhine when Napoleon was fighting the British and Prussians at 
Waterloo.407 
What resources has France to oppose to those of the Allies? 
1. The troops of the line amount to about 450,000 men, 50,000 of 
whom cannot be spared from Algeria. From the remaining 400,000 
must be deducted the sick, the minimum necessary to garrison 
fortresses, and smaller detachments for doubtful areas of the 
interior, leaving available at most 250,000 men. 
2. The favourite means adopted by the present reds, viz. to recall 
to the colours soldiers who have served their time, can successfully be 

=====第583页=====
560 Frederick Engels 
applied by force to at most six age classes, i.e. from 27 to 32 years of 
age. Each age group on conscription amounts to 80,000 men. The 
ravages of the Algerian war and climate, the normal death-rate 
during twelve years, the deduction of those who have become unfit 
or have emigrated, and those who in one way or another have 
succeeded in evading re-enlistment at a time when in any case the 
administration gets into a state of disorder, will reduce the 480,000 
former recruits of these six age classes to at most 300,000 
re-enlisting. From these must be deducted 150,000 to garrison 
fortresses, who will be drawn mainly from this class of older, mostly 
married men, leaving 150,000 men. Given any degree of skilled 
direction, these could be mobilised without difficulty in two 
months. 
3. The people's militia, volunteers, levée en masse, or whatever 
other term is used to denote this subordinate cannon-fodder. With 
the exception of about 10,000 of the Garde Mobile who can be 
assembled, none of the above are more acquainted with weapons 
than any member of the German civic militia. The French are 
quicker at learning to handle weapons, but two months is a very short 
time,  and if Napoleon could ensure that his recruits passed through 
the battalion school in four weeks, he achieved that only with 
outstanding cadres, whereas the first result of the coming revolution 
will be the disorganisation of the cadres in the line. Moreover, our 
French revolutionaries are known to follow tradition and their first 
cry will be: Levée en masse! Deux millions d'hommes aux  frontières!*  The 
two million men would be all very well if one could again expect from 
the Coalition such stupidities as those of 1792 and 1793 and if one 
had time for gradually training these two million men. But there is 
no question of that. One must be prepared to encounter a million 
active enemy soldiers on the frontier within two months, and it is a 
matter of opposing this million with a chance of success. 
If the French comport themselves again as traditional imitators of 
1793,  they will be undertaking to repeat the experience with the two 
million, which means that they will undertake so much that the actual 
result in the short time available will come to nil. The training and 
organisation of 2,500,000 men in eight weeks without skilled ca­
dres amounts in practice to a senseless squandering of all re­
sources without strengthening the army by even a single usable 
battalion. 
If, on the other hand, the French have a good Minister of War who 
has some knowledge of revolutionary warfare and the methods of 
a Mass levy! Two million men to the frontiers! — Ed. 

=====第584页=====
Conditions and Prospects of War of Holy Alliance against France 561 
creating an army rapidly, and if no stupid obstacles due to ignorance 
and a craze for popularity are put in the way, then he will keep 
within the limits of the possible and can do a great deal. The outcome 
will have to be something more or less in accordance with the fol­
lowing plan: 
The armed forces consist, to begin with, of two components: 
1. The proletarian guard in the towns, the peasant guard in the 
countryside, insofar as the latter can be relied upon for service in the 
interior; 2. the regular army against invasion. 
Fortress duty is performed by the proletarian and peasant guard; 
the army provides only the most essential detachments. Paris, 
Strasbourg, Lyons, Metz, Lille, Valenciennes, the most important 
fortresses, which are at the same time large towns, will require for 
their defence, besides their own guard and a few peasant detach­
ments from the environs, only a few troops of the line. The 
proletarian guard available in the interior, insofar as they consist of 
unemployed workers, will be assembled in a training camp and 
trained by old officers and N. C. O.s who are unfit for service in the 
field, to fill gaps in the ranks of the active army. The camp could be 
situated near Orleans, where at the same time it would be a threat to 
the Legitimist areas. 
The troops of the line, insofar as they are in France, must be 
tripled, being brought from 400,000 to  1,100,000  men. This is done 
as follows: each battalion is converted into a regiment—the un­
avoidable general promotion will be not less effective than the 
guillotine and courts martial in inspiring respect for the revolution 
among the officers and N.C.O.s. The unavoidable extension of 
cadres is at the same time carried out as gradually as possible and 
what can be gained as regards officers is gained. This is very 
important in view of the fact that it is impossible to produce officers 
by magic in two months. Moreover, so much national sentiment still 
prevails among the middle and lower grades of the French army that 
with a certain amount of promotion, energetic management of the 
war departments and some chance of success, these men at the start 
will turn out quite well, especially if a few examples are made of 
mutineers and deserters. The pupils of the military schools and the 
officials of the  ponts-et-chaussées*  make excellent artillery and engineer 
officers, and after a few actions those talented men among the lower 
ranks,  so frequent among the French, who are capable of leading a 
company once they have been under fire, will begin to develop. 
a Administration of roads and bridges.— Ed. 

=====第585页=====
562 Frederick Engels 
As regards the soldiers themselves, there will be: 
the line 400,000 men 
those recalled to the army 300,000 men 
those still to be called up and trained 500,000 men 
Total  1,200,000  men 
deduct for the sick 100,000 men 
there remain  1,100,000  men 
Of these are available for active service: 
the line 250,000 men 
those recalled to the army 150,000 men 
recruits 400,000 men 
800,000 men 
What can be achieved with these will be seen. But the training 
within two months of 400,000-500,000 men as recruits for the army 
of the line, men who will be fused with the already existing and 
recalled soldiers in the regiments and battalions, is not so 
excessively difficult if the work is taken in hand speedily,  le lendemain 
de la révolution* All these reinforcements would accrue to the in­
fantry and artillery; in two months it is certainly possible to train an 
infantryman, or an artilleryman capable at least of simple gun duties, 
but not a cavalryman. Hence the increase of the cavalry would be 
very weak. 
The whole plan for developing the army presupposes that there 
will be a good Minister of War, who is able to assess the political 
conditions, possesses strategic, tactical and detailed knowledge of 
all weapons, has the appropriate degree of energy, speed and 
decisiveness,15  and is given a free hand by the asses who will rule 
along with him. But where has the "Red" party in France such a 
man? The odds are in favour of the opposite, that as usual an 
ignorant fellow, who is thought and thinks  himself,  of course, to be a 
bon démocrate competent to fill any part, will try to play the Carnot, 
decree mass levies, completely disorganise everything, and very soon 
be at his wit's end, whereupon he will leave everything to the routine 
of the old subordinate officials and allow the enemy armies to come 
On the morrow of the revolution.—£d. 
Engels uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第586页=====
Conditions and Prospects of War of Holy Alliance against France 563 
right up to Paris. Nowadays, however, to be able to withstand a 
European coalition, one would have to be, not Pache or Bouchotte, 
or even Carnot, but Napoleon, or to have terribly stupid enemies and 
a terribly large measure of luck. 
It should not be overlooked that all these calculations of the armed 
forces of the Coalition assume a minimum figure for the total force 
and a maximum figure for the deductions, so that with merely 
tolerably good leadership, the available mass of troops will be 
greater, and the time required for their concentration less than the 
estimates given here. In the case of France, on the other hand, the 
opposite assumptions have been made; the time available has been 
assumed as long as possible, the total force that can possibly be 
organised has been put very high, and the deductions low, and 
therefore the available mass of troops is estimated at the highest 
possible figure. In short, leaving out of account unforeseen events 
and great blunders on the part of the Allies, all these calculations 
present the most favourable case  possible  for the revolution. 
In addition, it is assumed that the revolution and invasion will not 
immediately give rise to a civil war in the interior of the country. At 
present, sixty years after the last civil war in France, it is impossible to 
determine to what extent the fanaticism of the Legitimists is capable 
of a more than ephemeral insurrection; it is clear, however, that in 
proportion as the Allies advance, the chances of an uprising like that 
of 1793 in Lyons, Toulon, etc., of a temporary alliance of all 
politically overthrown classes and factions, will also increase. Here, 
too, however, let us assume the most favourable case for the rev­
olution, namely, that the revolutionary proletarian and peasant 
guard is capable of successfully disarming the rebellious départements 
and classes. 
We shall deal presendy with the prospects which the revolution 
could be given by uprisings in Germany, Italy, etc. 
V. 
We come now to the actual conduct of the war. 
If one places one leg of a pair of compasses on the map on Paris 
and describes a circle round the city with the distance from Paris to 
Strasbourg as the radius, then in the south the circumference of this 
circle touches the French frontier between Grenoble and Chambéry 
at Pont de Beauvoisin, follows it in a northerly direction through 
Geneva, the Jura, Basle, Strasbourg and Hagenau, and then follows 
the course of the Rhine down to its estuary. If it is at a distance from 

=====第587页=====
564 Frederick Engels 
the Rhine at some points, this distance never exceeds the length of 
two days' march. If the Rhine were France's frontier, then from the 
point where the Alps cease to protect this frontier right up to the 
North Sea Paris would be at an equal distance from this frontier. The 
military system of France, with Paris at the centre, would have 
satisfied all the geographical conditions for it. This simple arc from 
Chambéry to Rotterdam, which reduces all points of France's only 
open frontier, and moreover of the frontier nearest to the capital, 
to an equal distance of about 70 German miles—14 days' 
march—from Paris, and at the same time protects the frontier by a 
broad river, this is the real military basis of the assertion that the 
Rhine is France's natural frontier. 
The same peculiar configuration of its course, however, makes the 
Rhine also the starting point of all concentric operations against 
Paris,  for in order that the various armies may arrive simultaneous­
ly in front of Paris and simultaneously threaten it from various sides, 
they must set out simultaneously from points equally distant from 
it. The operations of any counter-revolutionary coalition army 
against France must be concentric, however dangerous all concen­
tric operations are in which the concentration point lies within the 
territory of the enemy or even forms the latter's basis of operations: 
1. because with Paris the whole of France is conquered; 2. because no 
part of the frontier lying within the sphere of operations of French 
armies can be allowed to be exposed, as otherwise the French, by 
sending armed forces, could provoke insurrections in the territory of 
the Coalition, in the rear of the latter's armies; 3. because the mass 
forces which any coalition is bound to hurl against France require 
multiple lines of operation for their food supply. 
For both armies, the frontier which has to be covered runs from 
Chambéry to Rotterdam. For the time being, the Spanish frontier 
can be disregarded. The Italian frontier from Var to the Isère is 
protected by the Alps and goes farther and farther away from Paris 
since it forms the tangent to the above-mentioned circle. It can only 
come into consideration: 1. if the fortified defiles of the Savoy Alps, 
particularly of Mont Cenis, are in the hands of the French; 2. if it is 
desired to make a diversion on the coast, for which there would have 
to be special reasons; 3. if the French armies, after the frontier has 
been safeguarded at all other points, want to launch an offensive as 
Napoleon did in 1796. In all other cases it is too far away. 
Active operations, therefore, both for the Coalition and for 
France, are restricted to the line from Chambéry or the Isère up to 
the North Sea, and to the region lying between this line and Paris. 
And precisely this part of France offers a terrain which is, as it were, 

=====第588页=====
Conditions and Prospects of War*  of Holy Alliance against France 565 
created for defence, and possesses a mountain and river system 
which from a military point of view could hardly be improved upon. 
From the Rhône to the Moselle, the frontier is protected by a long 
mountain range which is crossed with difficulty and only at certain 
points—the Jura, adjoining which are the Vosges, which in turn 
have their prolongation in the Hochwald and Idarwald. Both 
mountain ranges run parallel to the frontier and, in addition, the 
Vosges are protected by the Rhine. Between the Moselle and the 
Maas,  the route to Paris is covered by the Ardennes, and on the other 
side of the Maas by the Argonnes. Only the region from the Sambre 
to the sea lies open, but here the position of any advancing army 
becomes more dangerous with every step forward—in the event of 
at all skilful operations by a strong French army, the enemy army 
risks being cut off from Belgium and driven into the sea. 
Furthermore, the whole line from the Rhône to the North Sea is 
dotted with fortresses, some of which, e.g. Strasbourg, command 
whole provinces. 
From the junction of the Jura and the Vosges, in a south-westerly 
direction towards Auvergne, runs a mountain range forming the 
watershed between the North Sea and the ocean, on the one hand, 
and the Mediterranean, on the other. From it flows to the south the 
Saône, and to the north, parallel to one another, the Moselle, the 
Maas,  the Marne, the Seine, and the Yonne. Between each two of 
these rivers, as between the Yonne and the Loire, long mountain 
chains branch off, separating the individual river valleys from one 
another and traversed by only a few roads. It is true that this whole 
mountainous territory for the most part is practicable for all arms, 
but it is very infertile and no great army can maintain itself long on it. 
If these mountains, too, have been surmounted, as well as the 
equally infertile mountainous zones of Champagne which separate 
the region of the Maas from that of the Seine, the enemy army enters 
the Seine region. And it is only here that the striking military 
advantages of the position of Paris become fully evident. 
The Seine basin downstream to the mouth of the Oise is formed by 
a number of rivers running in almost parallel arcs in a north­
westerly direction—the Yonne, the Seine, the Marne, the Oise and 
the Aisne —each of which also has tributaries running in a similar 
direction. All these arc-shaped valleys join fairly closely with one 
another, and at the centre of these junctions is Paris. The main 
roads to Paris from all land frontiers between the Mediterranean Sea 
and the Scheldt run through these river valleys and join up with 
them concentrically in Paris. Hence the army which defends Paris 
can always be concentrated and moved from one threatened point to 
20-1124 

=====第589页=====
566 Frederick Engels 
another in a shorter time than the attacking army, because of two 
concentric circles the inner one has the smaller circumference. 
Admirable utilisation of these advantages, tireless movement along 
the circumference of the inner circle, enabled Napoleon in his 
brilliant campaign of 1814 to hold the entire Coalition in check in the 
Seine region with a handful of soldiers for two whole months.3 
Written in April 1851 Printed according to the manu­
script 
First published in Die Neue Zeit Nos. 9 
and 10, December 4 and 11, 1914 Published in English for the first 
time 
a The manuscript breaks off here.— Ed. 

=====第590页=====
567 
Karl Marx 
THE CONSTITUTION OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC 
ADOPTED NOVEMBER 4, 1848 408 
A rhetorical preamble introduces the Constitution, in which the 
following passages deserve notice: 
1. France declares itself a republic. 2. The French republic is 
democratic, one and indivisible. 3. Its principles are Liberty, Equality, 
Fraternity, and its foundations are Family, Labour, Property, and 
Public Order. 5. It respects the independence of other nations, and 
will make its own respected also. It will undertake no aggressive war, 
and will never employ its force against the liberty of any people. 
[Romel409] 
Before the Insurrection of June, the National Assembly had 
drawn up a constitution, which contained among many other recog­
nitions of the rights and duties of man, the following articles. 
Art. 6. The right to education is the right possessed by all citizens to the means for 
the full development of their physical, moral, and intellectual faculties, by a gratuitous 
education at the hands of the state. 
Art. 7. The right of labour is the right of every member of society to live by labour. 
Therefore it is the duty of society to supply with work all able-bodied persons who 
cannot otherwise obtain it. 
Art. 9. The Right  to support is the right of the orphan, the infirm and the aged to be 
maintained by the state. 
After the victories of June 1848 had given courage to the 
middle-class, they erased these three articles from 
See "Projet de constitution présenté à l'Assemblée nationale", Le Moniteur 
universel No. 172, June 20, 1848. The italics are by Marx. — Ed. 
20* 

=====第591页=====
568 Karl Marx 
THE CONSTITUTION, 
which now stands as follows: — 
"Cap.  I. [§ 1.] Sovereign power rests in the entirety of French citizens. It is 
inalienable and eternal. No individual, no fraction of the people has the right to its 
exercise." 
"Cap.  II. [§21 Rights guaranteed by the constitution:—No one can be arrested or 
imprisoned, except as prescribed by the laws. 
"§ 3. The residence of every one on French territory is inviolable—and it is not , 
allowed to enter it otherwise than in the forms prescribed by law." 
Observe here and throughout that the French constitution 
guarantees liberty, but always with the proviso of  exceptions  made by 
law, or which may still be  madeX  and all the exceptions made by the 
Emperor Napoleon, by the restoration, and by Louis Philippe, have 
not only been retained, but, after the June Revolution, immeasurably 
multiplied. Thus, for instance, the law of the 9th August 1849, 
relative to the State of Siege, which the Assembly, and during its 
prorogation, the President can enact, and which gives to the military 
authorities the right of bringing all political offenders before a 
court-martial. It further grants them the power to enter and search 
any house by day or night, to seize all arms, and to remove all 
persons not having a domicile in the place declared under a state of 
siege. 
As to strangers, the only "right" they enjoy on French soil, is to be 
arrested and driven out of it, as often as the police authorities think 
proper. 
As to Frenchmen, any French citizen can be arrested, if a single 
functionary issues his mandate to that effect! 
"§ 4. No one can be judged by others than his natural judges. Exceptional 
tribunals can be formed under no denomination or pretext." 
We have already seen that, under "the state of siege", a military 
tribunal supersedes all others. Besides this, the Assembly established 
an "exceptional tribunal", called the "High Court", in 1848 for a 
portion of the political offenders; and, after the insurrection in June, 
transported 15,000 insurgents without any trial at all! 
"§ 5. Capital punishment for political offences is annulled." 
But they transport to fever-stricken settlements, where they are 
executed, only a little more slowly, and far more painfully. 
"§ 8. Citizens have a right to associate, to meet peacefully and unarmed, to 
petition, and express their opinions through the press and elsewhere. The enjoyment 
of these rights has no other limit, than the equal rights of others, and the public 
safety." 

=====第592页=====
Constitution of the French Republic 569 
That the limitation made by the "public safety", takes away the 
enjoyment of the right altogether, is clearly shewn by the following 
facts:  — 
1. The liberty of the Press.—By the laws of August 11, 1848, and of 
July 27, 1849, not only securities for newspapers were redemanded, 
but all the restrictions made by the Emperor Napoleon, and since, 
were renewed and made more stringent. 
The law of July 23, 1850,  raises  the security-money! and extends 
the enactment of all weekly journals, magazines, periodicals, &c.410 
Besides which it demands that every article be signed by the name of 
the writer, and reintroduces the stamp for newspapers. Not content­
ed with this, it imposes a stamp on the feuilleton roman, the mere 
literary pamphlet, as well; and enforces all this under the penalty of 
enormous fines! After the enactment of the last-named law, the 
revolutionary press disappeared altogether. It had long fought up 
against persecution: week by week, paper after paper and pamphlet 
after pamphlet, were accused, fined, suppressed. The middle-class 
sat in the jury-box, and they crushed the working-man's press. 
The climax was put on the system by the law of July 30, 1850, 
which restored the censorship of the drama. Thus freedom of 
opinion was banished from its last literary refuge. 
2. The right of  association  and public meeting.—By the decrees of July 
28, to August 2, 1848, the clubs are subjected to a mass of police 
regulations, denying them almost every liberty. For instance, they 
are not allowed to pass resolutions in a legislative form, &c. By the 
same law, all non-political circles and private reunions are thrown 
entirely under the supervision and caprice of the police. 
By the law of June 19-22, 1849, government is authorised, for the 
period of one year, to suppress all clubs and meetings of which it may 
not approve. By the law of June 6-12, 1850, this power is granted to 
government for another year, and actually extended to those 
reunions and meetings relative to the election of Deputies, that may 
displease the government! The result is that, virtually, since July, 
1848,  all clubs and public meetings have ceased, with the exception 
of the Royalist and Bonapartist cercles. 
By the law of November 29, 1849, imprisonment for a period not 
exceeding three months, and a fine to an amount not exceeding 
3,000 francs, is decreed against all working-men who may unite for a 
rise in wages. And, by the same law, these working-men are sub­
jected to five years' surveillance of the police (which means beggary, 
ruin, and persecution) after the completion of their sentence. 
So much for the right of association and of public meeting. 

=====第593页=====
570 Karl Marx 
"§ 9. The right of tuition is free. The freedom of tuition shall be enjoyed on the 
conditions fixed by law, and under the supervision of the state." 
Here the old joke is repeated. "Tuition is free", but "under the 
conditions fixed by law"; and these are precisely the conditions that 
take away the freedom altogether. 
By the law of March 15, 1850, the whole system of tuition is placed 
under the supervision of the clergy. 
At the head of this branch of government stands a conseil  supérieur 
de l'instruction publique, presided over by four French archbishops. It 
subjects all the provincial schoolmasters, although elected by the 
common councils or parochial councils, to the will of the  recteurs,  or 
rectors. The teachers are placed in a state similar to military 
subordination and discipline, under the rectors, mayors, and 
parsons, and the freedom of education consists according to the law 
already quoted, in this: that no one has the right to teach without the 
permission of the civil and clerical authorities. 
"§ 11. The rights of property are inviolable." 
"§ 14. The national debt is guaranteed." 
"§ 15. Taxes are levied only for the public service. Every citizen contributes 
according to his property and ability." 
CAP.  III.—ON THE AUTHORISATION OF OFFICE 
This Chapter affirms— 
"l.a That all public authority is derived from the people, and cannot be made 
hereditary." 
"2. That the division of powers is the primary condition of a free government." 
Here we have the old constitutional folly. The condition of a "free 
government" is not the division, but the unity of power. The 
machinery of government cannot be too simple. It is always the craft 
of knaves to make it complicated and mysterious. 
CAP.  IV.—ON THE LEGISLATIVE POWER 
The legislative power is vested in a single assembly of 750 
representatives, including those of Algeria and the colonies. Any 
assemblies that may be called to revise the constitution must consist 
of 900 persons. The electoral system is based on the population. 
Four paragraphs now follow, which it will be requisite to give in full: 
"§ 24. The electoral franchise is direct and universal, the form of voting, secret." 
"§ 25. All Frenchmen, 21 years of age, in possession of their political and civil 
rights,  are electors without reference to any electoral census." 
This and the next paragraph are numbered 18 and 19 in the Constitution.— Ed. 

=====第594页=====
Constitution of the French Republic 571 
"§ 26. All electors, 25 years of age, are eligible to be elected as representatives, 
without domiciliary limitation." 
"§ 27. The Electoral Law will ascertain the causes which can deprive a French 
citizen of the right to elect and to be elected." 
The above articles are conceived in exactly the same spirit, as all 
the rest of the constitution. "All Frenchmen are electors, who enjoy 
their political rights"—but "the electoral law" is to decide what 
Frenchmen shall not enjoy their political rights! 
The electoral law of March 15, 1849, reckoned under this category 
all criminals, but not political offenders. The electoral law of May 31, 
1850,  added not only the political offenders, all those who had been 
convicted of "offending against old-established opinions", and 
against the laws regulating the press, but it actually established 
domiciliary restrictions, by which two-thirds of the French people are 
incapable of voting! 
That is what "the electoral franchise, direct and universal", means 
in France. 
"§ 28. No paid public functionary can at the same time be a representative of the 
people. No representative can become the holder of a paid function dependent on the 
constitution during the continuance of the legislative assembly." 
These two provisions have been limited by later decisions, and are, 
virtually, almost nullified. 
"§ 30. The elections take place by departments, at the principal place of the 
district, and by means of voting tickets." 
"§31.  The National Assembly is elected for three years, when a new election must 
take place." 
"§ 32. -Its session is permanent, but it is empowered to adjourn, and must then 
name a commission as its representatives consisting of 25 Deputies, and the members 
of the bureau of the assembly. This commission  is empowered to summon the assembly 
in cases of emergency." 
§§ 33-38. The representatives are re-eligible. They are not to be 
bound by any fixed instructions, they are inviolable, and cannot be 
prosecuted or convicted for the opinions they may express in the 
assembly, and they receive a salary which they are not permitted to 
refuse. 
As to the "inviolability of the representative", and his "freedom of 
expressing his opinions", the majority passed a new règlement after 
the 13th of June, 3 empowering the president of the National 
Assembly to decree the censure against a representative, to fine him, 
to deprive him of his salary, and temporarily to expel him—thus 
utterly annihilating the "freedom of opinion". In 1850 the assembly 
a June 13, 1849 (see pp. 105-06 of this volume).— Ed. 

=====第595页=====
572 Karl Marx 
passed a law by which representatives can be arrested for debt even 
during the session of the house, and if they do not pay within a given 
time,  forfeit their functions as representatives. 
Thus neither the freedom of debate nor the inviolability of the 
representative exists in France—but only the inviolability of the 
creditor. 
§§ 39-42. The sittings of the assembly shall be public. Nevertheless, 
the assembly can resolve itself into a private committee, at the 
request of the requisite number of representatives. To make a law 
valid, it must be voted by one more than the half of the repre­
sentatives. Except in pressing cases no bill can be passed that has not 
been read three times, with an interval of five days between each 
reading. 
This form, borrowed from the English "constitution", is not 
observed in France on any important occasions—indeed, on those 
on which it might be supposed most requisite. For instance, the 
electoral law of May 31a was passed after one reading. 
CAP.  V.—ON THE EXECUTIVE POWER 
§§ 43-44. The executive power is entrusted to a president. The 
president must be a born Frenchman, at least 30 years of age, and 
must never have lost his qualification as a French citizen. 
The first president of the French republic, L. N. Bonaparte, had 
not only lost his qualification as a French citizen, had not only been 
an English special constable,411 but was a naturalised Swiss. 
§§ 45-70. The president of the republic is elected for four years, 
and not re-eligible till after four years from the expiration of his 
term of office. The same restriction applies to his relatives to the 6th 
degree inclusive. The election is to take place on the second Sunday 
in May. Should the president have been elected at any other time, his 
powers cease on the second Sunday in May, in the fourth year after 
his election. He is elected by secret vote, and by an absolute majo­
rity. If no candidate has more than half the number of recorded 
votes,  but at least two million, the national assembly may elect the 
president out of those five candidates who have polled the largest 
number. 
The president must swear fealty to the constitution, may submit 
propositions to the assembly, through his ministers, can dispose of 
the army, without commanding it in person, is not allowed to cede 
a May 31, 1850 (see p. 136-44 of this volume).— Ed. 

=====第596页=====
NOTES TO THE PEOPLE. 125 
THE CONSTITUTIONS OF EUROPE, 
COMPILED  FROM  ORIGINAL  SOURCES  ; WITH  THE  ASSISTANCE  OF  LEADINC  CONTINENTAL 
DEMOCRATS. 
No. I. THE  CONSTITUTION  OF THE  FRENCH  REPUBLIC  ADOPTED  NOVEMBER,  4, 1848. 
A rhetorical preamble introduces the Constitu­
tion, in which  the  following passages deserve 
notice  : 
1, France declares itself a republic.  2. The 
French republic is democratic, one and indivi­
sible.  3. Its  principles  are  Liberty, Equality, 
Fraternity,  and its  foundations  are  Family, 
Labour, Property,  and  Public Order.  5. It 
respects  the  independence  of other nations, 
and will make  its own respected also.  It  will 
undertake no aggressive  war,  and will never 
employ  its  force against  the  liberty  of any 
people. [Romef] 
Before the Insurrection  of June, the National 
Assembly  had  drawn up  a constitution, which 
contained among many other recognitions  of 
the rights  and  duties  of man,  the  following 
articles. 
Art. 6. The  right  to education  is the right 
possessed  by all  citizens  to the means for the 
full development  of their physical, moral,  and 
intellectual faculties,  by a  gratuitous education 
at the hands  of the state. 
Art. 7. The  right  of labour  is the right  of 
every member  of society  to live  by  labour. 
Therefore  it is the  duty  of society  to supply 
with work  all  able bodied persons who cannot 
otherwise obtain  it. 
Art. 9. The  Bight to support  is the right  of 
the orphan,  the  infirm and the aged  to be 
maintained  by the state. 
After  the  victories  of June 1848 had given 
courage  to the middle-class, they erased these 
three articles from 
THE  CONSTITUTION, 
which now stands  as follows :— 
" CAP.  I. Sovereign power rests in the en­
tirety  of French citizens.  It is  inalienable 
and eternal. No individual, no fraction  of the 
people has  the  right  to its exercise." 
" CAP.  II.  RIGHTS  GUARANTEED  BY THE 
CONSTITUTION  :—No one can be arrested or im­
prisoned, except  as prescribed  by the laws. 
" § 3. The  residence  of  every  one on 
French territory  is inviolable—and  it is  not 
allowed  to enter  it otherwise than in the forms 
prescribed by law." 
Observe here and throughout that the French 
constitution guarantees liberty,  but  always 
with the  proviso  of exceptions made by law,  or 
which may  STILL  BE  MADE  ! and all the cx-the restoration,  and by  Louis Philippe, have 
not only been retained, but, after the June-Re­
volution, immeasurably multiplied. Thus,  for 
instance,  the law of the 9th  August  1849, 
relative  to the  State  of Siege, which the As­
sembly,  and  during  its  prorogation,  the 
President  can  enact,  and  which gives  to the 
military authorities  the  right  of bringing all 
political offenders before  a court-martial. It fur­
ther grants them the power  to enter and search 
any house  by day or  night,  to seize  all arms, 
and to remove  all persons not having  a domi­
cile in the place declared under  a state of siege. 
As to strangers, the only  " right  " they enjoy 
on French soil,  is to  be arrested and driven  ont 
of it, as  often  as the  police authorities think 
proper. 
As to Frenchmen, any French citizen can  be 
arrested,  if a  single functionary issues his man­
date to that effect  ! 
" § 4. No one can  be judged  by others than 
his natural judges. Exceptional tribunals  can 
be formed under no denomination  or pretext." 
We have already seen that, under " the state 
of siege,"  a military tribunal supersedes  all 
others. Besides this, the Assembly established 
an " exceptional tribunal," called  the "  High 
Court,"  in 1848  for a  portion  of the political 
offenders; and, after the insurrection  in June, 
transported 15,000 insurgents without any trial 
at all ! 
" § 5.  Capital punishment for political offen­
ces is annulled." 
But they transport  to fever-stricken settle­
ments, where they are executed, only  a little 
more slowly, and far more painfully. 
" § 8. Citizens have  a right  to associate,  to 
meet peacefully and unarmed,  to petition,  and 
express their opinions through  the  press and 
elsewhere. The enjoyment  of these rights  has 
no other limit, than the equal rights of others, 
and the publie safety." 
That  the  limitation made  by the "  public 
safety," takes away the enjoyment of the right 
altogether,  is clearly shewn  by the  following 
facts :— 
1. The liberty  of the Press.—By the laws  of 
August 11,1848, and of July 27,1849, not only 
securities for newspapers were redemanded,  but 
all the restrictions made  by the Emperor Napo­
leon,  and since, were renewed  and  made more 
stringent. 
The law of July 23,1850, raises the security- ceptions made  by the  Emperor Napoleon, by 
The first page  of Karl Marx's article  "The  Constitution  of the  French Republic' 
which appeared  in Notes  to the  People 

=====第597页=====

=====第598页=====
Constitution of the French Republic 575 
any portion of the French territory, nor to dissolve or prorogue the 
assembly, neither may he suspend the authority of the constitution. 
He negotiates and ratifies all treaties, which, however, do not become 
definitively binding till sanctioned by the assembly. He is not allowed 
to undertake any war without the consent of the assembly—may 
exercise the prerogative of pardoning, but is not allowed to grant an 
amnesty. Those condemned by the Haute Cour can be pardoned only 
by the national assembly. The president may postpone the promul­
gation of a law, and demand that the assembly deliberate thereon 
again. But such deliberation then becomes definitive. He appoints 
ambassadors and ministers, and may suspend, during three months, 
the mayors, departmental councils, national guards, etc., elected by 
the citizens. All his decrees must be countersigned by the ministers, 
with exception of the dismissal of the ministers themselves. The 
president, ministers, and public officers are severally answerable in 
their own departments for every act of the government. Every act 
whereby the president may influence, delay, or prevent the due 
exercise of the functions of the assembly, is an act of high treason. By 
such an act the president is at once deprived of his authority—it 
becomes the duty of every citizen to refuse obedience to his 
mandates, and the power of his office devolves forthwith on the 
assembly, the judges of the Haute Cour  de Justice are to meet without 
loss of time, and to summon the juries to a given place, to judge the 
president and his accomplices. 
The president has the use of an official residence, and an annual 
salary of 600,000 francs, or £24,000. [He now receives 2,160,000 
francs, or £86,400.] The ministers have a seat ex officio in the 
national assembly, and may speak as often as they choose. The 
national assembly elects a vice-president of the republic, out of three 
candidates which the president may name within one month after 
his own election. The vice-president takes the same oath as the 
president, must not be a relation of the president, takes the pres­
ident's place where the latter is prevented from acting, and officiates 
as president of the Council of State. If the presidential chair becomes 
vacated through death, or any other cause, a new election is to take 
place within one month. 
CAP.  VI.—THE COUNCIL OF STATE 
§§ 71-75. The Council of State is merely a deliberative body, for 
considering the propositions to be submitted by the cabinet—and 
those that may be forwarded from the assembly. 

=====第599页=====
576 Karl Marx 
CAP.  VIL— THE INTERNAL ADMINISTRATION 
This chapter deals with the clergy,a the principal magistrates, the 
common and provincial councils. The only article of consequence, 
and one that is made use of to the fullest possible extent, is the 
following: 
§ 80. The general councils, the cantonal councils, and the common councils, may 
be dissolved by the President with sanction of the Council of State. 
CAP.  VIIL—ON THE JUDICIAL POWER 
Generally speaking, this chapter merely reproduces the enact­
ments of the Emperor Napoleon. The following additions are, 
however, deserving notice: 
"§ 81. Justice is exercised gratuitously, in the name of the French people." 
This is so little the case, that one is not even beheaded for nothing! 
§§ 91-100, treat of the Haute Cour de Justice, which is alone 
empowered to judge the President, before which the ministers can 
be arraigned, and all political offenders the National Assembly may 
think proper to send before that tribunal. 
This "High Court" consists of five judges that the court of 
Cassation (the highest tribunal of France) elects out of its own 
members, and of thirty-six jury-men taken from the general councils 
of the departments, by an entirely aristocratic body. The only 
individuals hitherto tried by this tribunal, are the accused of May 15, 
1848—(here the names of Barbes, Blanqui, and others rise up in 
judgment! 412) and the deputies compromised on June 13, 1849. 
By the law of August 7, 1848, all those who cannot read and write 
are erased from the jury list, thus disqualifying two-thirds of the 
adult population! 
CAP.  IX—OF THE ARMED POWER 
The entire of the old military law is left in existence. The crimes of 
the soldier are not cognisable before the civil tribunals. The 
following paragraph illustrates the spirit of this constitution. 
"§ 102. Every Frenchman is liable to military service, and to serve in the national 
guard, with exception of those cases provided by the law." 
Every man having money, can absolve himself from the obligation 
of service. 
The working classes are entirely excluded from the ranks of the 
national guard, by the law now under consideration, the second 
Presumably a slip of the pen: "officials" rather than "clergy" would seem to be 
the right word here.— Ed. 

=====第600页=====
Constitution of the French Republic 577 
reading of which has been already carried! Moreover the President 
has the right to suspend for one year the national guards of every 
parish—and, actually, throughout half France, the national guard 
has been dissolved! 
CAP.  X.—SPECIAL ENACTMENTS 
"§ 110. The National Assembly confides the Constitution to the vigilance and 
patriotism of the entire people" 
—and confides the "vigilant" and "patriotic" to the tender mercies 
of the Haute Courl — June 13! 
CAP.  XL—ON THE REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION. 
"§ 111. Should the Assembly, at the close of its session, express a desire for a total 
or partial change in the Constitution, the revision shall be proceeded with in the 
following manner:—The wish expressed by the Assembly cannot become law till after 
three successive debates, which must take place after the interval of one month 
between each, and can be carried only by three-fourths of the votes, those voting being 
not less than 500 in number. The assembly called for the purpose of the revision is 
elected for only three months, and must not, except in very pressing cases, entertain 
any other question." 
Such is the "Constitution of the French Republic", and such is the 
manner in which it has been used. The reader will at once see that 
from beginning to end it is a mass of fine words, hiding a most 
treacherous design. From its very wording, it is rendered impossible 
to violate it, for every one of its provisions contains its own an­
tithesis—utterly nullifies  itself.  For instance: — "the vote is direct 
and universal",— "excepting those cases which the law shall deter­
mine". 
Therefore it cannot be said that the law of May 31, 1850 
(disfranchising two-thirds of the people) at all violates the Constitu­
tion. 
The Constitution constantly repeats the formula, that the regula­
tion and limitation of the rights and liberties of the people (e. g., the 
right of association, of the Franchise, the Freedom of the Press, of 
Tuition, etc.) shall be determined by a subsequent organic law,— and 
these "organic laws" "determine" the promised freedom by 
destroying it. This trick of granting full liberty, of laying down the 
finest principles, and leaving their application, the details, to be 
decided by subsequent laws, the Austrian and Prussian middle-
classes, have borrowed from their French prototypes, the same thing 
had been done in the French Constitution of 1830—and in those 
previously enacted. 

=====第601页=====
578 Karl Marx 
People! Make up your minds as to details,413 as well as to 
principles, before you come to power. Therefore the struggle was 
fought in the English convention on this very point! 
The only clauses in the whole constitution that are positive and 
definite, are those on the election of the President (§ 45) and the 
Revision of the Constitution (§ 111). These are the only provisions 
that can be violated, for they are the only ones that do not carry their 
own contradiction with them. 
They were aimed by the Constituent Assembly of 1848, directly 
against Bonaparte—whose intrigues for the presidential office 
alarmed the deputies. 
The eternal contradictions of this Constitution of Humbug, show 
plainly enough, that the middle-class can be democratic in words,  but 
will not be so in deeds—they will recognise the truth of a principle, 
but never carry it into practice—and the real "Constitution" of 
France is to be found, not in the Charter we have recorded, but 
in the organic laws enacted on its basis, an outline of which we have 
given to the reader. The principles were there—the details were 
left to the future, and in those details a shameless tyranny was 
re-enacted! 
The excess of despotism reached in France will be apparent by the 
following regulations as to working men. 
Every working man is supplied with a book by the police—the first 
page of which contains his name, age, birthplace, trade or calling, 
and a description of his person. He is therein obliged to enter the 
name of the master for whom he works, and the reasons why he 
leaves him. But this is not all: the book is placed in the master's 
hands,  and deposited by him in the bureau of the police with the 
character of the man by the master. When a workman leaves his 
employment, he must go and fetch this book from the police office; 
and is not allowed to obtain another situation without producing it. 
Thus the workman's bread is utterly dependent on the police. But 
this again, is not all: this book serves the purpose of a passport. If he 
is obnoxious, the police write "bon pour retourner chez lui" 3 in it, 
and the workman is obliged to return to his parish! No comment is 
needed on this terrific revelation! Let the reader picture to himself 
its full working, and trace it to its actual consequences. No serfdom 
of the feudal ages—no pariahdom of India has its parallel. What 
wonder if the French people pant for the hour of insurrection. What 
wonder if their indignation take the aspect of a storm. They were 
merciful in 1830, they were merciful in 1848; but since then their 
"To be sent home".— Ed. 

=====第602页=====
Constitution of the French Republic 579 
liberty has been trafficked away, their blood has been shed in 
torrents, every prison in France is crowded with life-long cap­
tives,—15,000 were transported in one mass and the dreadful 
despotism we have described rests on them now. What wonder that 
the middle-class should fear the people, and that they should strain 
their last nerve to keep the hour of retribution in abeyance. But they 
are divided among themselves. They have too many conflicting 
ambitions, and foremost on the cards stands 
THE GAME OF NAPOLEON. 
The question now is, shall the presidential powers be prolonged, 
and shall the constitution be revised. Napoleon cannot be re-elected, 
without an open breach of the constitution for lstly, he cannot be 
re-elected until after a period of four years from the expiration of his 
term of office; and, 2ndly, the constitution cannot be revised 
except by a majority of two-thirds. Such a majority in favour of 
that question does not exist, therefore, a constitutional re-election 
is not possible. 
The only alternative for Bonaparte is, therefore, to defy the 
constitution, take up arms, and fight it out, or a legitimate surrender 
of his functions at the time prescribed. In the latter case Cavaignac 
will become President, and the republic of the middle-class will be 
perfected. In the former the issues are more complicated. 
The game of Napoleon, therefore, now is, to work on the 
discontent of the people. The middle-class are the enemies of 
Napoleon,—the people know it, and there is one bond of sympathy 
between them. He, however, shares the odium of oppression jointly 
with the middle-class; if he can cast it off his shoulders entirely on 
theirs,  one great obstacle will have been removed. 
This he is endeavouring to do—as proved by his recent speech at 
Dijon, where he says: 
"Every bad law has been enacted by the assembly, every good law that I proposed 
has been rejected or mutilated by that body. They have thwarted me in every attempt 
to better your condition, and raised obstacles against improvement where none 
existed." 
Thus he is endeavouring to guide the lightning, from his own 
head on to that of the assembly. Meanwhile, the army are more with 
him than with the latter body,—and such is the misery of the people 
that almost any change would be for the better in the estimation of 
the many, while the enlightened are but the minority. 

=====第603页=====
580 Karl Marx 
Therefore, supposing the middle-class to risk the struggle under 
Cavaignac, on finding Bonaparte determined, the people would 
certainly fight against them—and Bonaparte would be fighting with 
the people. Combined, they would prove too strong for the assembly. 
But then would come the critical time; the assembly finding that the 
people were about to conquer, would prefer the lesser of two evils. 
They would prefer an Empire or a Dictatorship of Napoleon, to a 
Democratic and Social Republic, and would, therefore, come to 
terms with the President. The latter dreading, as much as they, the 
democratic power, would accept their aid. The army, or a portion of 
it at least, would have become still more attached to Napoleon by the 
excitement, peril, and "glory" of strife; and the struggle would then 
assume a new aspect, that of the army and the  bourgeoisie  against the 
People. The issue depends on the courage, sense, and union of the 
latter. The game of Napoleon, is, first to play off the People against 
the middle-class. Then to play off the middle-class against the people 
and to use the army against them both. 
The future is pregnant with great events, and the present of 
France is one of the most interesting studies history affords. 
Written between May 24 and June 8, 1851 Reprinted from the journal 
First published in the Notes to the People 
No. 7, June 14, 1851 

=====第604页=====
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 

=====第605页=====

=====第606页=====
583 
Karl Marx 
[ON GERMANY] 
NOTE FOR THE "REVIEW" (MAY-OCTOBER  ïmof 10 
1) Supremacy of Russia emerging openly. Hegemony divided 
between Prussia and Austria. The minor states formally secured 
once more thanks to their rivalry, true. But the princes of the minor 
states (e. g. Hesse,416 Baden) disgraced in the eyes of most Ger­
mans,  and thus the differences between the various houses and 
small townships, which were still being so keenly asserted as re­
cently as 1848, smashed. Equally, in consequence of the results of 
the 1848 movement, the authority of all existing official powers 
diminished. 
2) Prussia. Although excluded from the government, humiliated, 
sham Constitution, the bourgeoisie achieved everything and more 
than it dared demand in 1847. 
3) Austria—hitherto the peasantry given preference, reaped the 
results of the revolution. 
Protectionism.417 
4) Trade policy differences  between  Austria and  Prussia.  Free trade; in 
Prussia nobility, as in England industrial bourgeoisie. 
Written in September and October 1850 
First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, 
Works, Vol. 44, second Russ. ed., 1977 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第607页=====
584 
Karl Marx 
REFLECTIONS 418 
There is a division of trade into trade between dealers and dealers 
on the one hand, and between dealers and consumers on the other. 
Transfer of capital takes place in the former case, exchange of 
income for capital in the latter; the former has its own money, the 
latter its own coin. This distinction, which was made by Adam Smith, 
is very important and has been emphasised by Tooke, and even 
earlier by the Report of the Bullion Committee.3419 What is missing 
however is an examination of the relationship between these two 
kinds of trade and of money. 
(1) All crises show in fact that the trade between dealers and 
dealers constantly exceeds the bounds set by the trade between 
dealers and consumers. All propositions advanced by economists to 
prove the impossibility of over-production, or at any rate universal 
over-production, deal only with trade between dealers and dealers, 
as already Sismondi rightly pointed out in his polemic against 
McCulloch.b  This becomes even more evident when one considers 
that at least three-quarters of the exchange between dealers and 
consumers consists of exchange between workers on the one hand 
and retail traders and artisans on the other; this exchange however 
depends in turn on the exchange between workers and industrial 
capitalists, which in its turn is determined by the exchange between 
dealer and dealer— cercle vicieux. 
(2) It is true that, as Adam Smith says, the exchange between 
dealers and dealers is bound to be circumscribed by the exchange 
Report, together with Minutes of Evidence, and Accounts, from the Select Committee 
Appointed to Inquire into the Cause of  the High Price of  Gold  Bullion. Ordered  by the House  of 
Commons to be printed 8 June 1810.—Ed. 
Simonde de Sismondi, Nouveaux principes d'économie politique ou de la  richesse  dans 
ses rapports avec la population, T. IV, Paris, 1827.— Ed. 

=====第608页=====
From the Preparatory Materials 585 
between dealers and consumers, since the prices at which the com­
modities are sold to the latter are the final prices, which must 
retrospectively balance the costs of production expended in the 
preceding transactions as well as the profits. However on the basis of 
Adam Smith's proposition, the whole economy has been inanely 
over-simplified by Proudhon3 and others. The matter is not so 
simple. First, the trade between dealers and dealers in England, for 
example, is by no means circumscribed by the trade between dealers 
and consumers in England, but more or less by that between dealers 
and consumers on the world market as a whole. For instance, the 
India Company420 or East India merchants send indigo to the 
London market. There it is auctioned. This is a transaction between 
dealers and dealers. The purchaser of the indigo sells part of it in 
France, Germany, etc., where it is bought by various dealers and 
manufacturers. Whether they will in the end recover the price of the 
indigo, will depend on how the final product is sold to the consumer, 
who lives perhaps on the Ionian Islands or in Afghanistan or in 
Adelaide. It would therefore be wrong to say that the trade between 
dealers and dealers in one country is limited by the trade between 
dealers and consumers in that country. If this trade is universal, it is 
limited by the trade between dealers and consumers on the world 
market, and this is all the more the case when the trade between 
dealers and dealers is conducted on a large scale and the country 
occupies a prominent position on the world market. 
Secondly. Because the working class forms the largest section of 
consumers, one could say the fact that the income of the working 
class decreases—not in one country, as Proudhon thinks, but on the 
world market—leads to an imbalance between production and 
consumption, and hence over-production. This is largely correct. 
But it is modified by the growing extravagance of the propertied 
classes. It would be wrong to put forward this proposition uncon­
ditionally— as though the trade of the planter were determined 
by the consumption of his Negroes. 
Thirdly. The trade between dealers and dealers largely creates the 
trade between dealers and consumers. For example, when manufac­
turers receive very large orders from speculators, workers are ful­
ly employed, their wages rise and so does their consumption. 
Speculative railway construction enterprises actually create large-
scale consumption, which in the end proves to be entirely "un­
productive". We also find that in fact the trade between dealers 
a Probably a reference to Proudhon's book  Système des  contradictions  économiques,  ou 
Philosophie de la misère, T. 1-2, Paris, 1846. For a critical examination of this book see 
Marx's The Poverty of  Philosophy  in Vol. 6 (pp. 105-212) of the present edition.—Ed. 

=====第609页=====
586 From the Preparatory Materials 
and consumers is in most cases ultimately thwarted by that between 
dealers and dealers. The crisis always begins in the former, often of 
course after the demand of the limited forces of consumption has 
been met, but often simply because supply exceeds ostensible 
estimates (e. g. in the case of speculations in corn). 
Fourthly. Over-production must not be attributed solely to 
disproportionate production, but to the relationship between the 
class of capitalists and that of workers. 
(3) As to the currency which is found in the two distinct forms of 
trade — the currency used in trade properly speaking and the 
currency used in the exchange of income for commodities, i. e. for 
particles of capital—it is insufficient to state that a division exists 
between the two currencies, it is also a question of their connection 
and interaction. The money of private individuals, of the consumers, 
that is in the first place of all political and ideological strata, second­
ly of those who live on the rent of land, thirdly of so-called 
(non-industrial) capitalists, of the public creditors, etc., even of the 
workers (in the savings-banks), in short the surplus of the receipts 
of the non-trading classes of the population over their everyday 
expenditure and over that part of their money which they 
themselves think they must always have at their disposal, that is 
which they keep (hoard) at home as a reserve—this surplus is the 
chief source of deposits, which in their turn form the main basis of 
commercial money. Transfers, credit operations, in short the entire 
monetary movement within this commercial world, depend on the 
deposits of that part of the population that consists mainly not of 
tradespeople. In [...]a  of credit failure the deposits are withdrawn 
from commerce. Capital becomes unproductive, because the means 
enabling the classes that direct production to use this capital are 
destroyed in their hands. On the other hand, since these classés need 
money for their transactions with one another and the banker no 
longer lends money to the grocer and the manufacturer, the income 
of the consumers diminishes and consequently also the amount of 
money in their hands, thus the complaints about lack of money move 
from the commercial world into the world of the consumers. 
(4) It would be wrong to say that lack of credit is of paramount 
importance in times of crisis, and currency is of no importance. It is 
evident from the reasons mentioned earlier that the amount of 
currency is then at its lowest ebb precisely because on the one hand 
its velocity has decreased and secondly because cash is required in 
numerous transactions where it was not required previously. But it is 
Illegible in the manuscript, presumably "times".—Ed. 

=====第610页=====
From the Preparatory Materials 587 
precisely this which accentuates the great difference between the 
amount of money and the value of the operations transacted with a 
relatively small quantity of currency. There is therefore in fact a lack 
of currency and not a lack of capital. Capital loses its value and 
cannot be turned to account. But what does cannot be turned to 
account mean in this context? It cannot be transformed into 
currency, and it is precisely its convertibility which constitutes its 
value. But in spite of all that, capital exists. 
The thing shows itself primarily in the refusal to discount bills of 
exchange, even those based on  bona  fide transactions. And the bill of 
exchange is commercial money, its value represents commercial 
capital. The convertibility of bank-notes into gold is a minor matter, 
the failure of bank-notes merely aggravates the commercial crises. 
The real difficulty is the inconvertibility of commodities, i.e. of the 
actual capital, into gold and bank-notes. It is for this reason that when 
these phenomena appeared in 1793, 1825 and 1847,421 it was 
possible to remedy them where capital actually existed, by issuing 
exchequer bills and bank-notes. Moreover, it cannot be asserted that 
these bills and bank-notes were capital. They were merely currency. 
The crisis did not end, but the currency crisis did. The convertibility 
of bank-notes, therefore, is based on the convertibility of securities, 
and not only in banking but also in commerce. But even securities 
which by their very nature are considered to be convertible, such as 
government securities and short bills, cease to be convertible. It 
seems that this is by no means a question of commodities, but of 
the convertibility of the tokens of value which represent them. 
Commodities cease to be money, they are not convertible into 
money. The blame for this is of course put on the monetary system, 
on a particular form of this system. It is due to the existence of the 
monetary system, just as the latter is based on the present mode of 
production. But the convertibility of bank-notes into gold is in the 
end necessary, because the convertibility of commodities into money 
is necessary, in other words because commodities have exchange 
value, and this requires a special equivalent distinct from the 
commodities, i. e. because in fact the system of private exchange 
prevails. 
Actually the depreciation of money is even in inverse proportion 
to the depreciation of commodities. But bank-notes can depreciate in 
terms of gold only because commodities can depreciate in terms of 
bank-notes. In any case, what does depreciation of bank-notes mean? 
That at any particular moment, commodities, i. e. their value, cannot 
be transformed into gold or silver, and that each intermediate link 
between the commodities and gold, or each substitute remains only a 

=====第611页=====
588 From the Preparatory Materials 
substitute and hence without value. The principal question therefore 
always remains the inconvertibility of  commodities,  of capital  itself.  It is 
rubbish if some say, there is no lack of currency but lack of capital. 
Currency is of no consequence. For what matters here is precisely the 
difference between capital, i. e. commodities, and currency. What 
matters is the fact that the former does not necessarily entail the 
latter as its representative, that is as its price in the commercial world; 
that capital ceases to be currency, that it can no longer circulate and 
has no longer value. When capital appears to be a  secondary  matter, it 
is ridiculous to present currency as a secondary matter. However 
there is even more nonsense on the other side. They acknowledge 
the inconvertibility of capital and make fun of the convertibility of 
bank-notes. But they want to offset this by some artifice or other and 
by modifying the monetary  system.  As if the inconvertibility of capital 
were not already contained in the existence of any monetary system, 
indeed as if it were not contained even in the existence of products in 
the form of capital. Trying to alter this on the existing basis means 
depriving money of its monetary qualities, without conferring on 
capital the quality of always being exchangeable, and moreover at its 
fair price. 
The existence of a monetary  system  entails not only the possibilm but 
even the reality of this separation, and the fact that this system exists 
proves that the inconvertibility of capital, because it is appropriate to 
money, is already entailed by the existence of capital, and therefore 
by the entire organisation of production. It would be just as wrong 
however to say that the pressure on the money market was simply 
caused by fraudulent credit operations. Money as such implies the 
credit system. Or both are produced by the same cause. The 
Birmingham men,422 who want to do away with the inconveniences of 
money by putting large quantities of money into circulation, or by 
lowering the standard of money, are of course fools. Proudhon, Gray 
and others who want to retain money but in such a way that it should 
no longer have the properties of money, are also fools. Since it is in 
the money market that the entire crisis erupts and all the features of 
bourgeois production recur as symptoms, which, it is true, become 
incidental causes, nothing is simpler to understand than the fact that 
it is money that narrow-minded reformers who stick to the bourgeois 
standpoint want to reform. Because they want to retain value and 
private exchange, they retain the division between the product and 
its exchangeability. But they want to modify the token of this division in 
such a way that it  expresses  identity? 
Marx marked the last two sentences with a vertical line in the margin.—Ed. 

=====第612页=====
From the Preparatory Materials 589 
(5) The complete simpletons, i. e. the staunch ignorant democrats, 
are familiar only with money as used in the trade between dealers and 
consumers. They therefore do not know the sphere in which the 
collisions take place, the tempests of monetary crises and big 
financial transactions. Thus the problem, just as everything else, ap­
pears to these simpletons to be as simple and silly as they themselves 
are. They regard the trade between dealers and consumers as a 
straightforward exchange of values, in which the freedom of each 
individual receives its supreme practical confirmation. Class antago­
nism is in no way involved in this exchange. One trader confronts 
another, one moneyed individual confronts another. The precondi­
tion that every individual must be moneyed to be able to participate 
in the consumer goods trade, i.e. to be able to live, this precondi­
tion is of course automatically given by the fact that every individu­
al must work and let his talent3 act, as Stirner says.b 
First of all it is a historical fact, which no one can deny, that in all 
hitherto existing social formations which were based on separation 
and contradiction between castes, tribes, social estates, classes, etc., 
money was an essential component of this organisation, and the 
monetary system was always symptomatic of the heyday or decline of 
this organisation. It is therefore not our task to prove that the 
monetary system is based on class contradictions, it is up to the 
simpletons to prove that, in spite of all previous historical ex­
perience, the monetary system can make sense even where there 
are no class contradictions, and that this particular element present 
in all social formations up to now will be able to survive in a situation 
that negates all hitherto existing social formations. To confront 
complete simpletons with such a task would be too simple. They deal 
with everything in monosyllables and this constitutes their specific 
talent. The monetary system and the entire present system are in 
their opinion as straightforward and as stupid as they themselves are. 
But let us again visualise their beloved trade between consumers 
and dealers. They do not look beyond it, neither sideways nor 
forward and backward. 
What does the free individual use to pay for his purchases at the 
grocer? He uses an equivalent—or token of value—of his income. 
The worker exchanges his wages, the manufacturer his profit, the 
a To be understood both in the old sense of "money", "wealth", and in the 
modern sense of "ability, aptitude", etc., for the German word Vermögen used here 
means "ability", "capability" as well as "wealth", "fortune", "riches", "prop­
erty".— Ed. 
b Max Stirner, Der Einzige und sein Eigenthum, Leipzig, 1845, p. 353. A critical 
analysis of Stirner's views is given in The German Ideology by Marx and Engels 
published in Vol. 5 of the present edition.— Ed. 

=====第613页=====
590 From the Preparatory Materials 
capitalist his interest, the landowner his rent—transformed into gold 
and silver and bank-notes—at the grocer, the cobbler, the butcher, 
the baker, etc. And what does the cobbler, the grocer, and so on, 
exchange for the money which represents wages, rent, profit and 
interest? He exchanges his capital for it. He replaces his capital, 
reproduces it and expands it in this transaction. 
Thus to begin with in this seemingly so simple transaction all class 
relations manifest themselves and are presupposed,  [i. e.] the classes 
of workers, of landowners, and of industrial and non-industrial 
capitalists. On the other hand, it first and foremost presupposes the 
existence of these specific social relations, which give wealth the form 
of capital, and separate capital from revenue. The simplicity 
disappears with thé transformation into money. 
The fact that the worker receives his wages in money—and 
likewise the landowner his rent and the manufacturer his  prof­
it—and not as provisions in kind, payment in kind or by means of 
barter, merely shows that the monetary system presupposes a high 
level of development and greater differentiation and separation of 
classes than does the absence of a monetary system in the 
pre-monetary stages of society. There is no wage labour without 
money, and therefore also no profit and interest in the latter form, 
and accordingly no rent of land either as this is simply a part of 
profit. 
It is true that income in the form of money, i. e. in the form of 
gold, silver or bank-notes, no longer shows that it appertains to an 
individual exclusively as a member of a definite class, as a class 
individual, unless someone has obtained it by begging or stealing, 
that is to say by misappropriating an income of this type, and thus 
represents a class individual as a result of rather drastic measures. 
The transformation into gold or silver blurs the class character and 
veils it. Hence the apparent equality—apart from money—in 
bourgeois society. Hence in a society with a completely developed 
monetary system, there is, on the other hand, actually real civil 
equality of individuals insofar as they have money, irrespective of 
their source of income. In such a society, as distinct from ancient 
society where only the privileged strata could exchange certain 
things, everything is available to any person, any kind of material 
exchange can be carried out by everybody, in accordance with the 
amount of money into which his income can be converted. Whores, 
science, patronage, decorations, rent of land, lickspittles, all these are 
objects of exchange, just as coffee, sugar and herrings are. In the 
case of the estate system, the consumption of the individual, his 
material exchange, depends on the particular division of labour to 

=====第614页=====
From the Preparatory Materials 591 
which he is subordinated. In the class system it depends only on the 
universal medium of exchange which he is able to acquire. In the 
first case, he as a socially circumscribed person takes part in 
exchange operations which are circumscribed by his social position. 
In the second case he as an owner of the universal medium of 
exchange is able to obtain everything that society can offer in 
exchange for this token of everything. In the exchange of money for 
commodities, in this trade between dealers and consumers, the 
manufacturer,when he buys at the grocer, is just as much a consumer 
as his worker, and the servant obtains the same commodities for 
the same amount of money as his master. Thus the specific nature of 
the income which has been transformed into money disappears in 
this exchange and the class characteristics of all individuals are 
blurred and merge in the category of buyer, who in this transaction 
faces the seller. Hence the illusion of seeing not an individual 
member of a class in this act of buying and selling, but the 
purchasing individual as such without class characteristics. 
Now let us disregard for the moment the specific nature of the 
income, which is not evident in gold and silver any more than is the 
smell of urine in the tax on brothels, of which the Roman Emperor 
Hadrian said: non oletf*  This nature emerges however in the amount 
of money which is at the person's disposal. The range of the 
purchases is in the main determined by the nature of the income. 
The quantity and the kind of articles bought by the largest class of 
consumers, the workers, is indicated by the nature of their income. 
It is however true that the worker can squander his wages on liquor 
for himself instead of buying meat and bread for his children, a 
thing he cannot do when he is paid in kind. His personal freedom 
has thereby been extended, i. e. more latitude has been allowed to 
the rule of liquor. On the other hand, the money the workers are 
able to spare after paying for the most essential means of subsistence, 
can be used by them to buy books, lecturers and meetings, instead of 
meat and bread. They are in a better position to acquire the universal 
powers of society, such as the intellectual ones. Where the nature of 
the income is still determined by the type of occupation, not only as 
at present by the quantity of the universal medium of exchange, but 
also by the nature of his occupation, the ways in which the individual 
can enter into relations with society and appropriate it are extremely 
limited, and the social organisation for the interchange of the 
material and intellectual products of society is from the outset 
a It doesn't smell! (These words are usually attributed to Emperor Vespasianus, 
who introduced a tax on public lavatories.) — Ed. 

=====第615页=====
592 From the Preparatory Materials 
restricted to a definite method and a particular content. Money, 
which is the supreme expression of class contradiction, therefore also 
obscures religious, social, intellectual and individual differences. 
When confronting the bourgeoisie, the feudal barons for example 
made futile attempts, by means of luxury laws, politically to check or 
break this universal levelling power of money. Thus in the 
commercial transactions between consumers and dealers, the 
qualitative class differences are transformed into the quantitative 
difference of a larger or smaller amount of money at the disposal of 
the buyer; and within a single class it is the quantitative difference 
which constitutes the qualitative difference. Hence big bourgeoisie, 
middle bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie. 
Written in March 1851 
First published in the journal Kommunist 
No. 1, January 1977 (in Russian) 
First published in German in: Marx/ 
Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 10, 
Berlin, 1977 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第616页=====
APPENDICES 

=====第617页=====

=====第618页=====
595 
PERMIT TO LEAVE SWITZERLAND 
ISSUED TO FREDERICK ENGELS 423 
No. 1279 
Surname 
Christian names 
Place of birth 
Age 
Height Engels, Writer 
Friedrich 
Barmen (Prussia) 
28 years 
5 foot 93A inches, or 1 metre 79 
centimetres 
Light brown 
Broad 
Light brown 
Brown 
Small 
Medium 
Light brown 
Round 
Oval 
Ruddy Hair 
Forehead 
Eyebrows 
Eyes 
Nose 
Mouth 
Beard 
Chin 
Face 
Complexion 
Distinguishing marks 
Issued for the period of one year on September 11, 1849 
to England via Piedmont and Spain, to reside there. 
(Authorised by Department of Justice and Supervision 
September 11, 1849.) Going 
on 
First published in Russian 
(Voprosy istorii No. 11, 1970) Signature of bearer 
Fred.  Engels* 
Printed according to the original 
Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first time 
a Signature in Engels' hand.— Ed. 

=====第619页=====
596 
APPEAL FOR SUPPORT FOR GERMAN POLITICAL 
REFUGEES 424 
Ever since, accompanied by the savage din of war, "peace and 
order" have been re-established in Germany; ever since, atop the 
ruins of smouldering cities and amidst the murderous thunder of 
cannon, the "security of property and person" has been restored; 
ever since the court-martial has scarcely sufficed to consign one 
"rebel" after the other with smashed head to the grave; ever since 
the prisons have no longer proved large enough to accommodate all 
the "traitors"; ever since the only remaining form of justice has been 
martial law—since that time thousands upon thousands of people 
have been wandering without shelter in foreign lands. 
From day to day their number grows and with it the misfortune of 
those without a homeland; turned away from one place to the next, 
they do not know in the morning where they will lay their heads that 
evening, nor in the evening where tomorrow's food is coming from. 
There is an emigration of countless numbers filling Switzerland, 
France and England. Those wretched people have come from all the 
provinces of Germany. 
Anyone who mounted the barricades in Vienna against the black 
and yellow3 "league" and grappled with Jellachich's Serezhans425; 
anyone who fled from the soldiery of Wrangel and Brandenburg in 
Prussia; anyone who in Dresden took up the musket to defend the 
Imperial Constitution, and anyone who in Baden saw action as a 
republican soldier against the united crusading army of- the 
princes—whether liberal, democrat, republican or socialist: support­
ers of the most varied political doctrines and interests, they are 
all united in the same exile and the same misery. 
Dressed in rags, half a nation is begging at the doors of foreigners. 
Our fugitive compatriots are also wandering on the cold pavement 
of the resplendent metropolis, London. Every ship that crosses the 
a Black and yellow were the official colours of the Austrian Empire.— Ed. 

=====第620页=====
Appendices 597 
Channel brings from across the sea a new multitude of people 
without a homeland; in every street of the city one can hear the grief 
of an exile lamenting in our tongue. 
This distress has deeply stirred many German friends of liberty in 
London. Therefore on September 18 of this year a general meeting 
was held of the German Workers' Educational Society and the 
refugees from our nation who had arrived here, in order to set up a 
Committee of Support for Democrats in Need. Those elected were: 
Karl Marx, former editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung; 
Karl Blind, former envoy in Paris of the Baden-Palatinate 
Government; 
Anton Füster, former member of the Austrian Imperial Diet in 
Vienna; 
Heinrich Bauer, master shoemaker in London; and 
Karl Pfänder, a painter here. 
This Committee will render a public account every month, both at 
the general meeting and in the form of extracts in German 
newspapers. In order to avoid any misinterpretation it has been 
decided that no member of the Committee may draw any assistance 
whatsoever  from  the fund.  Should a member of the Committee ever be 
in need of assistance in the future, then he will cease to be a member 
of the Committee. 
We ask you now, friends and brothers, to do whatever lies in your 
power. If you are concerned that liberty, crushed and enchained, 
should rise again,*and if you have a feeling in your hearts for the 
sufferings of your best champions, then there will be no great need 
of exhortations from us. 
All donations should be addressed to: "Heinrich Bauer, master 
shoemaker, 64 Dean Street, Soho Square, London." Whatever is 
enclosed should be marked "for the Refugee Committee". 
London, September 20, 1849 
The Committee of Support for German Political Refugees: 
Anton Füster, Karl Marx, Karl  Blind, 
Heinrich Bauer, Karl Pfänder 
Published in the Westdeutsche Zeitung Printed according to the Neue 
No. 106, September 25, 1849; Deutsche Zeitung 
the Neue Deutsche Zeitung No. 228, 
September 26, 1849; the Deutsche Londoner Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 238, September 28, 1849; time 
the Demokratische Zeitung No. 220, 
September 30, 1849, and in other news­
papers 
21-1124 

=====第621页=====
598 
RECEIPT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPORT 
FOR GERMAN POLITICAL REFUGEES IN LONDON 
November 13, 1849 
We acknowledge receipt through Herr G. Tichen in Stettin 3 of 
£11.14s. for which we express our gratitude on behalf of the needy 
German political refugees. 
London, November 13, 1849 
The Committee of Support for German Political Refugees 
Signed: Dr. Karl Marx, Henry Bauer, Karl Pfänder 
First published in the Norddeutsche Freie Printed according to the newspaper 
Presse No. 208, November 23, 1849 Published in English for the first 
time 
a The Polish name is Szczecin.— Ed 

=====第622页=====
599 
ACCOUNTS OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPORT 
FOR GERMAN REFUGEES IN LONDON 
On November 18 of this year the German Workers' Society in 
London held a general meeting, attended by the majority of the 
political refugees there, to adopt the accounts of the Committee of 
Support [for refugees] formed at an earlier meeting.3 
Total receipts since September 22 of this year were: 
£ s d 
1. From the Workers'Society in London 2 8 4 /2 
2. From the German Readers' Society in Lon­
don 2 15 — 
3. From the editorial board of The Northern 
Star in London — 5 — 
4. From Citizen Eddäus in London — 1 — 
5. Collected by Citizen Siefert in London — 9 6 
6. From Citizen Görringer in London 1 5 9 
7. Collected by Citizen H. Bauer in London 7 19 
8. From German workers in Paris, through 
Citizen Heidecker  — 12 1 
9. From Huddersfield through Citizen Krepp  3 — — 
10. From Stettin in Prussia 18 14 — 
Total.... 36 12 5l/2 
See this volume, p.  597.—  Ed. 

=====第623页=====
600 Appendices 
Expenditures on refugees from September 22 to 
November 18 of this year were: 
£ s d 
1. Kleiner 3 17 2 
2. Zschinski 3 17 4 
3. Fröhlich  2 2 1 
4. Henser 3 7 6 
5. Egener 1 19 — 
6. W. Töpffer  1 11 7 
7. J. Töpffer  1 4 4 
8. To the refugees Blei, Bergmann, Osoba, 
Wessely, Braulichy and Klein, together 2 8 10 
9. To the refugee merchant Schopp 
and family, against an I. O. U 4 — — 
10. Costs of printing and subscription 
lists 1 15 2'/2 
Total 26 3 '/2 
Total receipts 36 12 5l/2 
Total expenditure 26 3 /2 
Cash in hand 10 9 5 
Clothing has also been received which has been distributed to the 
refugees. 
The above accounts were adopted unanimously by the meeting. 
Receipts are to hand for all expenditures and the donors from 
Huddersfield and Stettin who were not represented have been 
requested to nominate representatives in London to inspect the 
receipts. 
As the Committee had been depleted by the departure of two 
members, A. Füster and K. Blind, and as, moreover, an attempt is 
being made here to set up a counter-committee, independent of the 
Workers' Society and of the refugees of the social-democratic trend, 
the Committee returned its mandate to the Society. 
The Society thereupon resolved: 
1. That the German Workers' Society, acknowledging the work of 
the hitherto existing Committee, appoints a new committee of five of 
its members under the title "Social-Democratic Committee of 
Support for German Refugees".426 This Committee takes over the 
balance of the former Committee. 
2. The Committee will give priority to members of the 
social-democratic party but, as far as its funds allow, will not exclude 
refugees of other trends from its support. 

=====第624页=====
Appendices 601 
3. The Committee will present monthly accounts to the Workers' 
Society and will thereupon be reappointed. The accounts will be 
published in the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung, in The Northern Star, in 
the Frankfurt Neue Deutsche Zeitung, in Cologne in the Westdeutsche 
Zeitung, in the Norddeutsche Freie Presse in Hamburg, in the Berlin 
Demokratische Zeitung, in the Schweizerische National-Zeitung, in the 
Schnellpost and in the Staatszeitung in New York. 3 
4. Contributors will be entitled to be personally present at the 
monthly presentation of accounts, or, if they are not in London, to 
send a representative to check the books, receipts, and cash in hand. 
5. The Workers' Society appoints as committee members Karl 
Marx, August Willich, Frederick Engels, Heinrich Bauer, Karl 
Pfänder. 
In publishing the above accounts and the decisions of the Workers' 
Society, the undersigned Committee requests that contributions be 
sent to Heinrich Bauer, 64 Dean Street, Soho, London. 
London, December 3, 1849 
The Committee: 
Karl Marx, August Willich, Frederick Engels, 
Heinrich Bauer, Karl Pfänder 
Published in the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung Printed according to the West-
No. 245, December 7, 1849; the West- deutsche Zeitung 
deutsche Zeitung No. 173, December 12, 
1849,  and the Demokratische Zeitung Published in English for the first 
No. 258, December 15, 1849 time 
d Deutsche Schnellpost and New-Yorker Staatszeitung. —Ed. 

=====第625页=====
602 
FROM THE INDICTMENT OF THE PARTICIPANTS 
IN THE UPRISING 
IN ELBERFELD IN MAY 1849427 
Besides the above-named accused, the tailor Peter Nothjung is also 
accused of the main crime of the attempt,3 although he was 
neither on the Army Reserve Committee nor on the Public Safety 
Committee. He was von Mirbach's adjutant, and as such was close to 
the whole movement and, according to his own statement, knew its 
purpose. At the time of the uprising he went from Cologne, his place 
of residence, to Elberfeld, where he was asked by the newspaperb 
editor Engelsand Hühnerbein, with whom he was already acquainted, 
to help the Military Committee 428 with the reception of the men and 
the writing out of billeting orders. On the same day von Mirbach 
appointed him his adjutant and provided him with a black, red and 
goldc  sash as a mark of distinction. According to his own statement 
the aim of the whole movement was declared by the members of 
the Public Safety and Military Committees to be the recognition of 
the German Constitution, and for that reason the citizens should be 
armed. He fulfilled the functions of adjutant until von Mirbach's 
departure; he was arrested in the neighbourhood of  Ronsdorf.... 
Frederick Engels, a newspaper editor, is also said to have taken part 
in putting up barricades. Witness Heinrich Meininghaus states in 
particular that a young man with spectacles and a small moustache 
who was pointed out to him by an armed volunteer as the editor 
Engels, and who conducted himself as one of the leaders, gave the 
order to strengthen the barricade at the Wunderbau. The 
a The charge brought by the judicial authorities was worded: "attempt to 
overthrow the government".— Ed 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung. —Ed. 
c Colours symbolising the unity of Germany.— Ed 

=====第626页=====
Appendices 603 
above-mentioned witnesses Simon and Sauer also speak of a young 
man with a small moustache and a check coat who took part in 
erecting the barricade in front of von der Heydt's house.... 
The royal arsenal at Gräfrath was repeatedly attacked and looted 
by armed bands during the disorders in Elberfeld. The first marches 
of this kind took place on May 10 and 11 but were carried out not by 
the Elberfeld bands, but by inhabitants of Solingen and the 
neighbourhood for the purpose of arming those localities and then 
partly supporting the uprising in Elberfeld and partly spreading it 
further in the province. These marches on Gräfrath are the objects 
of a special charge in another investigation into the disorders which 
took place at the same time in Solingen and the neighbourhood, 429 
whereas here it is mainly a matter of the looting of .the arsenal which 
was carried out on May 15 and from Elberfeld. According to 
statements by several persons who took part in this march, on that 
day the accused Karl Jansen ordered part of his detachment, some 
30-40 men, to make a sortie, as he said, against Wald to get weapons 
there. This detachment was headed by Jansen as a captain and 
Wohlmeiner as a lieutenant, and the editor Engels joined the two of 
them. Engels and Jansen procured themselves two cart-horses on the 
way at the copper works and rode on them at the head of the 
detachment as far as the estate of the merchant Jung at Hammer-
stein, where Engels exchanged his horse for Jung's saddle-horse, and 
both he and Jansen had riding saddles given to them. After 
Hammerstein, according to the statement of another of the accused, 
Wilhelm Rausch, Jansen gave the order to proceed to Gräfrath to see 
whether weapons and uniforms which they could use were to be 
found in the arsenal there. According to the testimony of 
sergeant Starke to the local army reserve administration, and of 
non-commissioned officer Steiniger, 6-8 riflemen in the vanguard of 
the detachment arrived first at the arsenal and then the armed band 
of 30-40 men headed by Engels and Jansen, both on horseback and 
armed with sabres and pistols. The detachment immediately formed 
up in front of the arsenal and placed sentries at the doors. Then 
Engels went up to sergeant Starke with his pistol drawn, asked him 
whether any weapons were still available and, on receiving the 
answer that the weapons had already been taken by force by the 
Solingen and Wald detachments, ordered him to go into the arsenal 
with him. Personal resistance by the two army men to the armed 
band of 30-40 would have been useless, the more so as the doors of 
the arsenal could not be locked as a result of the earlier attacks by the 
Solingen detachment. The two army men therefore had to yield to 
force and allow the arsenal to be entered. There Engels chose several 

=====第627页=====
604 Appendices 
items of armament and uniform and had them brought out into the 
yard. For these two receipts, not quite identical in wording, were 
written out over the signature of Captain Karl Jansen.... 
According to these, the items taken out of the arsenal consisted of 
haversacks, helmets, trousers, cartridge-pouches, pistols, sabres, 
drums, footwear, and one rifle. On Janseris order each man of the 
band took from these the items of clothing which fitted him and the 
necessary weapons. Jansen himself does not deny that he led part of 
his armed detachment, 36-37 a strong, to Gräfrath for the above-
mentioned purpose; he only asserts that he did so on the basis of a 
written order which he received from von Mirbach on the morning of 
May 15 for the requisition of equipment on the way to Wald via 
Gräfrath. He also confirms that Engels placed himself with him at the 
head of the detachment and, on arriving at Gräfrath, posted sentries 
at the arsenal doors and entered with the sergeant. He maintains that 
while Engels was busy in the arsenal, he  himself,  leaving Lieutenant 
Wohlmeiner with the detachment, made a reconnaissance of the 
terrain in the neighbourhood of the arsenal and on his return saw 
some of the various items of equipment already lying in the square. 
... accordingly accused, namely: 
... 7. Frederick Engels, Johann Gottfried Wohlmeiner and Karl 
Jansen 
a) of having in May 1849 in Elberfeld placed themselves at the 
head of an armed band, or having made the relevant arrangements, 
plundering the state-owned arsenal in Gräfrath; or 
b) of having in May 1849 with a band and with open use of force 
plundered various articles of equipment from the royal arsenal in 
Gräfrath.... 
First published in the  Westdeutsche  Zeitung Printed according to the newspaper 
Nos.  93 and 95 (supplements), April 19 „,,-,, • ^ ,. , ? 
and 21 1850 Published m English lor the hrst 
a The Westdeutsche Zeitung says "39-40".—  Ed. 

=====第628页=====
605 
PRELIMINARIES TO ISSUE OF SHARES 
IN THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG. 
POLITISCH-ÖKONOMISCHE REVUE, 
EDITED BY KARL MARX 
As is generally known, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung appeared from 
June 1,1848, to May 19,1849, under the editorship of Karl Marx as a 
daily newspaper in Cologne on the Rhine. It represented the most 
resolute democratic trend in Germany with such success that in spite 
of all suspensions and states of siege, in spite of all press trials and 
persecutions, hostility and obstacles of all kinds it numbered  5,600 
subscribers after appearing for only eleven months. After the 
editorial board was twice acquitted by a jury, the Prussian 
Government had no other means of suppressing this dreaded paper 
than the use of force: When the partial uprisings in Rhenish Prussia 
were suppressed in May last year, the temporary rule of the sabre 
was used to remove the editorial board from Prussia by force and 
thus to make the continued appearance of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung impossible. 
After taking part in the revolutionary movements of last summer, 
either in South Germany or in Paris, the majority of the editors of 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung assembled again in London and decided 
to continue the paper from there. 3 At first the paper can only appear 
as a review in monthly issues of approximately five sheets. But it will 
only fully serve its purpose of exercising an uninterrupted and 
lasting influence on public opinion, and create new opportunities 
also from the financial point of view, when the editorial board is in a 
position to produce issues in more rapid succession. It is therefore 
intended that, as soon as funds allow, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
should appear as a fortnightly of five sheets or, if possible, as a big 
weekly journal like the American and English weeklies and, as soon 
See this volume, pp. 5-6.— Ed. 

=====第629页=====
606 Appendices 
as conditions permit its return to Germany, at once to transform it 
again from a weekly journal into a daily newspaper. 
A provisional estimate shows that with only fortnightly issues and a 
sale of 3,000 copies the Revue will yield an annual net profit of 1,900 
talers. 
To put the enterprise on a secure basis and to enable the Revue to 
appear fortnightly or weekly, a capital of £500 is needed, and an 
issue of shares for this amount is hereby opened on the following 
conditions: 
1. Every share is worth 50 francs and will be paid up at once 
against a provisional receipt later exchangeable for the original 
share. 
2. Every shareholder is liable only for the amount of his share. 
3. Shareholders have the right to nominate representatives in 
London to inspect the conduct of the business. 
4. A quarterly general meeting will be called to receive a report on 
the progress of the enterprise and the accounts and to take decisions 
on the future control of the conduct of the business. A lithographed 
business report will be sent to individual shareholders. 
5. Profits accruing from the business will be added to the capital 
until the Neue Rheinische Zeitung can appear weekly. When the 
enterprise has prospered thus far, the profit will be divided into 
three equal parts, one remaining in a reserve fund, one distributed 
to shareholders as dividend, and the last going to the editorial board. 
London, January 1, 1850 
K. Schramm, 
Manager of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Written with the participation of Marx and Printed according to the manu-
Engels script 
First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, Published in English for the first 
Works, first Russ. ed., Vol. VIII, Moscow- time 
Leningrad, 1930 

=====第630页=====
607 
ABOUT ENGELS' SPEECH 
AT A BANQUET HELD ON FEBRUARY 25, 1850, 
IN HONOUR OF THE SECOND ANNIVERSARY 
OF THE FEBRUARY REVOLUTION 
IN FRANCE 
(From a Newspaper Report)430 
Citizen Engels, editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, made a 
speech in French which he ended, amidst thunderous applause, with 
a toast to the June insurgents. 
First published in the Westdeutsche Zeitung Printed according to the newspaper 
No. 51, March 1, 1850 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第631页=====
608 
ACCOUNTS OF THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC REFUGEE 
COMMITTEE IN LONDON 
1. Expendit ure 
£ s d 
November 1849 16 grants @ 7s 5 12 — 
December 29 
3 » 7s 
4s 10 3 
12 — 
1 
1 » 6s 
3s — 6 
3 — 
2 " 5s — 10 — 
1 
1 .. 5s 6d 
8s — 5 
8 6 
1 
4 » 12s 
10s 2 12 — 
January 1850 20 " 7s 7 — — 
1 " 2s 6d — 2 6 
3 " 4s — 12 — 
February 1 to 23 18 " 7s 6 6 — 
2 
1 » 5s 
2s — 10 
2 — 
5 " 10s 2 10 — 
1 
1 » 3s 
13s — 3 
13 — 
2 " Is 3d — 2 6 
1 " Is — 1 — 
114 gra nts totalling 38 13 6 
Postage, stamp duty, bank charges 
and writing materials 
Total 39 

=====第632页=====
Appendices 609 
The expenses include £26 advances to various refugees, who in 
the meantime have found work, for the purchase of tools, chothing, 
etc., which they have promised to repay later. 
November 19 
December 1 
10 
15 
17 
February 11 
20 2. Receipts 
£ 
Balance 10 
From the Workers' Society — 
Through the Westdeutsche Zei­
tung in Cologne 30 talers 
minuscosts 4 
From German workers in 
Paris 2 
Through Professor Turk in 
Rostock 16 
From the Cincinnati Aid Com­
mittee 20 
From workers in Schwerin 3 
Total 57 
Minus the above expendi­
tures 39 9 5 
3 6 
1 
5 10 
12 6 
18 — 
— — 
10 3 
18 7 
Cash in hand 17 11 
The above accounts were presented to the meeting of the local 
German Workers' Society of March 4 and were found correct. 
The receipts and the books of the Committee are ready at the 
Treasurer's for inspection by the donors or their representatives. 
Since these accounts were balanced two more items have been 
received from Cologne and New York, which will be entered in the 
next account. On the other hand, the number of refugees here 
needing support has been greatly increased by the constant 
expulsions from Switzerland and France. New refugees are arriving 
here almost daily, most of them in a state in which they need not only 
the usual scanty aid but also urgent outlays for clothes. In these 
circumstances the funds of the undersigned Committee are used all 
the more the less successful the attempts to procure means to 
support the refugees here from other sources appear to have been, 
and the more often, therefore, all the refugees arriving here are at 
once directed to the Committee. The efforts of the German workers 
here and of the refugees themselves have succeeded in finding work 
for many of these. But a large number of jobs which are available to 
refugees elsewhere are for various reasons closed to them here, in 
particular because of the fierce competition in overcrowded London. 

=====第633页=====
610 Appendices 
Moreover, the rush of new arrivals is so great that in spite of these 
efforts the list of persons needing support is swelling every week. 
Although the greatest economy has been observed in spending the 
money contributed to the Committee, and regular aid can only cover 
the most urgent needs, because of the high prices of the necessaries 
of life prevailing here, the funds of the Committee were bound to 
shrink very rapidly in these circumstances. We must even fear that 
we may soon be unable to protect the local unemployed refugees 
from homelessness and the most extreme misery. 
We are therefore appealing once more to the party in Germany 
itself for funds. We cry out to it that as the number and hence the 
need of the refugees in Switzerland and France declines, it increases 
in the same degree in London, and we hope that it will not come to 
such a pass that people who fought arms in hand for the freedom 
and honour of the German nation will have to beg for their bread on 
the street corners of London. 
All contributions are requested at the address of 
Mr. Henry Bauer 
64 Dean Street, Soho 
London 
London, beginning of March 1850 
The Social-Democratic Refugee Committee: 
Karl Marx, Fr. Engels, H. Bauer, 
A. Willich, Karl Pfänder 
Published in Die Hornisse No. 67, March Printed according to the West-
20, 1850 (abridged) and in the Westdeutsche deutsche Zeitung 
Zeitung No. 68, March 21, 1850 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 

=====第634页=====
611 
ABOUT ENGELS' 
SPEECH AT A MEETING OF FRATERNAL DEMOCRATS 
ON APRIL 5, 1850, 
COMMEMORATING ROBESPIERRE'S BIRTHDAY 
ANNIVERSARY 
(From a Newspaper Report)431 
Frederick Engels did justice to the revolutionary spirit of the 
English. He pointed out that a party of Levellers 432 had already 
existed at the time of the English Revolution, and ended with the 
health of the English workers. 
First published in Die Hornisse No. 89, Printed according to the newspaper 
April 17, 1850 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第635页=====
612 
MEETING OF REFUGEE COMMITTEE 
ON APRIL 8, 1850 433 
Citizen Kleiner declares that Citizen R. Schramm has assured him 
that he does not belong to a refugee committee, but has merely 
received a number of lottery tickets from Galeer in Geneva with 
instructions to send the money to Geneva. The other committee 
meets at Hillmann's, is merely posing as a committee and, he 
believes, has no money. 
Read, approved and signed 
W. Kleiner 
Beyerle 
Citizen Gnam: Citizen Struve declares that he has no money for 
refugees. He has received a hundred lottery tickets from Galeer but 
has not yet disposed of them. Should he receive the money for them, 
he will either pay the money in to some committee that might be set 
up, or use his own judgment in giving the money to the refugees in 
return for a receipt. He regrets the splits that exist amongst the 
German émigrés; if these splits did not exist thousands of guilders 
would find their way here. For this reason he would advise the 
refugees to form a committee among themselves. 
Read, approved and signed 
Gnam 
Josef Leoni 
Jakob Klein 
Citizen Struve then donated £  1, which Gnam suggested should be 
given to the committee—at which Citizen Struve said: No, not to a 

=====第636页=====
Appendices 613 
committee, I am giving that to those who are here just now, and they 
are to divide it amongst themselves. 
Gnam 
Josef Leoni 
Lucas 
The minutes were written by Engels on 
April 8, 1850 
First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, 
Works, Vol. 44, second Russ. ed., 1977 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第637页=====
614 
UNIVERSAL SOCIETY OF REVOLUTIONARY 
COMMUNISTS 434 
ARTICLE 1 
The aim of the association is the downfall of all privileged classes, 
the submission of those classes to the dictatorship of the prole­
tarians by keeping the revolution in continual progress until the 
achievement of communism, which shall be the final form of the 
constitution of the human family. 
ARTICLE 2 
To contribute to the realisation of this aim, the association will 
form ties of solidarity between all sections of the revolutionary 
communist party, causing national divisions to disappear according 
to the principle of republican fraternity. 
ARTICLE 3 
The founding committee of the association is constituted its 
Central Committee, and, wherever necessary for the accomplish­
ment of the work, it will establish committees which will be in cor­
respondence with the Central Committee. 
ARTICLE 4 
The number of association members is not limited, but no member 
may be admitted unless he has been voted in unanimously. In no case 
can the election be held by secret ballot. 
ARTICLE 5 
All the association members pledge themselves by solemn oath to 
preserve absolutely in these terms Article 1 of the present rules. Any 
modification which might lead to the weakening of the intentions 

=====第638页=====
Appendices 615 
expressed in Article 1 releases members of the association from their 
obligation. 
ARTICLE 6 
All the society's decisions are taken by a majority of two-thirds of 
the voters. 
(Signed:) /. Vidil, Auguste Willich, 
G.Julian Harney, Adam, 
Ch. Marx, F.Engels 
Drawn up in mid-April 1850 Printed according to the manu­
script First published in Russian (Papers of the 
Marx-Engels Institute No. 1, Moscow- Translated from the French 
Leningrad, 1926) Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第639页=====
616 
ACCOUNTS OF THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC 
REFUGEE COMMITTEE IN LONDON 
Receipts 
February 25 
March 13 
March 18 
April 16 
April 20 
March £ s d 
Balance in hand i... 17 11 8 
From the Social Reform Association 
in London 30 18 5 
From the Cologne Refugee Commit­
tee 36 — — 
From A. F., member of the Workers' 
Society — 5 — 
Through Herr Wichmann in Ham­
burg 6 — — 
Through " Rempel in Bielefeld ... 3 — — 
" Engels of E.B. a 1 — — 
From several English workers — 7 — 
Expenditure 
53 grants @ 7s 
7 ' 10s 
1 - 9s 6d 
1 ' 2s 8V2d 
6 - 5s 
2 • Is 
2 - 4s 
1 
ige and 2s 
'ost ige and petty expenses 95 
18 
3 11 
10 
9 
2 
10 
2 
8 
2 
3 
27 1072 
Presumably Elberfeld-Barmeri.—Ed. 

=====第640页=====
Appendices 617 
£ s d 
pril 56 grants @ 6s 16 16 — 
18 ' ' 5s 4 10 — 
2 ' ' 2s 6d — 5 — 
14 '• ' ls6d 1 1 — 
52 ' ' 7s 18 4 — 
1 ' ' 8s — 8 — 
54 ' ' 3s 8 2 — 
49 ' ' 3s 6d 8 11 6 
1 " ' 6s 4d — 6 4 
Petty expenses .... — 6 5 
Balance in hand 58 10 
85 17 I1/* 
H72 
The Committee, set up on September 18, 1849, has since its 
foundation supported about a hundred refugees for shorter or 
longer periods, and the total sum of moneys passed through its 
hands amounts to £161 3s 8V2d. In addition, the Workers' Society 
here has catered for the exceptional needs of individual refugees by 
collections, found work for others and put its premises with news­
papers at the disposal of all refugees. 
The books and receipts concerning the above accounts, which 
were submitted to and adopted by the German Workers' Society, are 
available with the Treasurer of the Committee for inspection by the 
donors or their representatives. 
Messrs. Struve, Bobzin, Bauer (Stolpe) and others have lately 
seen fit to use their names to attract from Germany adequate 
funds for the refugees. Accordingly they have grouped around 
themselves a number of refugees and formed their own commit­
tee at a meeting yesterday. It goes without saying that this re­
newed project to form a parallel committee can no more divert us 
from our work for the refugees than the earlier projects which 
failed. 
As the accounts show, the Committee's funds are so depleted that 
they barely suffice for the needs of one more week. But more 
refugees apply for support every day. We therefore call on the 
German social-democratic party once again not to let down their 

=====第641页=====
618 Appendices 
refugees and as soon as possible to send their contributions to the 
Treasurer, K. Pfänder, 435 21 King Street, Soho, London. 
London, April 23, 1850 
The Social-Democratic Refugee Committee: 
K. Marx, President, 
August Willich, K. Pfänder, 
Frederick Engels, Heinrich Bauer 
Published in the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung Printed according to the  Nord-
No. 265, April 26, 1850 (abridged); deutsche Freie Presse and checked 
the Westdeutsche Zeitung No. 104 (supple- with the Westdeutsche Zeitung 
ment),  May 2, 1850; the Neue Deutsche 
Zeitung No. 106, May 3, 1850, and the Published in English for the first 
Norddeutsche Freie  Presse  No. 349, May 10, time 
1850 

=====第642页=====
619 
THE GERMAN REFUGEES IN LONDON 
For some time funds have been coming in so scantily for the 
German refugees here that these latter have suffered the greatest 
misery. A number of them, who so far have been unable to find any 
work in their trade here, have been sleeping in the streets and parks 
for almost a week and are suffering hunger. In various quarters the 
differences between the committees and allegations of biassed dis­
tribution of funds have been made a pretext for not sending any 
money for the refugees. Messrs. Struve, Bobzin and others have 
contributed to this situation by declaring that the undersigned 
Committee supports only "Communists". \ 
We declare once again that we have, supported  everybody  without 
distinction who proved his status as a German refugee in need of 
support. Our books and receipts are there to prove it, and are 
available at any time for inspection by donors or their representa­
tives.  At a full meeting of the committee of  Messrs.  Struve, Bobzin 
and others, co-signatory Willich asked the refugees who had received 
support which of them had been asked whether he was a "Com­
munist". Not one raised his  hand! 
We declare the above claims of Messrs. Struve, Bobzin and others 
to be lies and slander. 
This declaration removes the pretext under which the London 
refugees have hitherto been deprived oï support from various 
quarters. 
London, June 14, 1850 
The Social-Democratic Refugee Committee: 
K. Marx, F. Engels, K. Pfänder, 
A. Willich, H. Bauer 

=====第643页=====
620 Appendices 
Letters and contributions are 
K.Pfänder, 21 King Street, Soho, 
Published in the Westdeutsche Zeitung 
No. 149, June 25, 1850; Die Hornisse 
No. 146, June 25, 1850; the Neue 
Deutsche Zeitung No. 152, June 27, 1850 requested at the address of 
London. 
Printed according to the West­
deutsche Zeitung 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第644页=====
ACCOUNTS 
OF THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC REFUGEE COMMITTEE 
IN LONDON FOR MAY, JUNE AND JULY 1850 
Receipts 
£ 
April 24 Cash in hand according to previous 
account 9 
May From Hanau through Citizen Schärtt-
ner, £ 13 less 7s 9d income tax 12 
From an Englishman — 
Frankfurt am Main £5 and £20 25 
46 
June From Trier 2 
" Paris (German workers) 1 
Through Citizen Betzler — 
4 
July From Frankfurt am Main 30 
" Cologne — 
" Wiesbaden (Workers' Associa­
tion) 4 
Hamburg (Norddeutsche Freie 
Presse)  11 
" London Workers'Society 7 
Frankfurt am Main 20 
" Neustadt a.d. Haardt 4 
" Hamburg (Despatch Dept. of the 
Freischütz)436  20 
" La Chaux-de-Fonds 5 
" Hamburg (Workers' Association 
of St. Georg)  
104 s d 
4 111/, 
12 3 
2 — 
— — 
19 2'/, 
2 6 
18 6 
6 — 
11 4 
10 — 
11 10 
9 6 
10 
— 17 10 
11 — 

=====第645页=====
622 Appendices 
Expenditure 
April 24 
to May 30 
June 
July 128 grants @ 3s 6d 
27 " " 3s 
26 " " 2s 
31 " " Is 
25 " " 5s 
Occasional grants 
Shoemakers' work for refugees. 
Petty expenses 
58 grants @ 2s 
59 " " Is 
25 " " ls6d 
Occasional gran ts 
Petty expenses 
28 grants @ 2s 
24 " " Is 
93 " " 6d 
Occasional grants 
For the refugees' board and lodging 
9s 6d £ s d 
22 8 — 
4 1 — 
2 12 — 
1 11 — 
6 5 — 
1 5 — 
— 14 — 
— 6 11 
39 2 11 
5 16 
2 19 — 
1 17 6 
— 10 — 
— 11 6 
11 14 — 
2 16 
1 4 — 
2 6 6 
1 6 — 
£7 
£5 
£5 
£5 
£6 
£6 10s — 
10s — 
For working equipment 
Advances to refugees 
Advances to a refugee with family 
Petty expenses 35 
Cash in hand 46 12 
19 6 
3'/2 
58 13 9A 
Total expenditure 109 10 8  7* 
Total receipts 155 16 2 A 
Less expenditure 109 10 8/2 
The above accounts were submitted to the meeting of the Workers' 
Society on July 30 of this year and were approved. Books and 

=====第646页=====
Appendices 623 
receipts are ready and available for inspection by the donors or their 
representatives. 
Since in the month of June contributions received were very scanty 
and the need of the refugees was often unbearable, it was decided to 
set up a communal lodging and eating-house for them. The local 
Workers' Society and a section of the refugees who had already 
found work made it possible by their contributions to begin the 
execution of this plan. From funds received later the house could be 
provided with the necessary utensils and furniture. Up to now 18 
refugees have found lodgings there and about 40 have received 
meals.  At first the unemployed shoemakers among the refugees 
were used to provide their comrades with the necessary footwear. 
Later the Committee allocated funds and took the steps necessary to 
equip a common workshop for the refugees on the same premises 
and so to enable them to earn part of their living expenses 
themselves. 
If the first attempt proves a success, the thing will be done on a 
larger scale and the public will be further informed about it at the 
appropriate time. The Committee expects that this double enterprise 
of providing aid and employment for the refugees will be supported 
by a great many contributions from Germany until the refugees are 
able to support themselves. 
London, July 30, 1850 
The Social-Democratic Refugee Committee: 
Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, August Willich, 
Karl Pfänder, Heinrich Bauer 
Published in the Norddeutsche Freie 
Presse  No. 425, August 7, 1850; 
the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung No. 280, 
August 9, 1850; Der Freischütz No. 98, 
August 15, 1850 Printed according to the  Nord­
deutsche Freie Presse 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第647页=====
624 
ABOUT ENGELS' SPEECH 
AT A MEETING ORGANISED BY FRATERNAL 
DEMOCRATS ON SEPTEMBER 10, 1850 
(From a Newspaper Report)437 
Mr. Engels, formerly editor of a German newspaper, and who was 
introduced by the Chairman (John Pettie) as one who had fought 
and bled for freedom, addressed the meeting. He said that about 
thirty months ago there had been a fine lot of gentlemen sent over to 
England, Louis Philippe, Prince Metternich, Prince William of 
Prussia, and others—and foreign patriots had thought it a disgrace 
to England that she should so readily shelter them. But, he said, 
wait—the people of England, at their own time would act justly, and 
had done so now. (Hear, hear!) The treatment of Haynau would 
produce a greater effect upon the Continent than anything which 
had been done in England for the last ten years. 
His treatment was worse than if they had torn his epaulettes from 
his shoulder, or broken his sword and thenceforth he would be 
driven from the society of his equals with contempt (Hear, hear). 
There would shortly be another revolution on the Continent, and 
the enemies of the people who would otherwise have fled to this 
country, would now be afraid to do so, and would go somewhere 
else,  probably to their friend Nicholas of Russia who would perhaps 
give them a small kingdom in Siberia. (Loud laughter!) 
In the name of his country he thanked the people of London for 
their treatment of Haynau which he hoped, would be imitated in any 
future place the monster might visit. (Applause.) 
Published in The Times No.  20591,  Sep- Printed according to the Reynold's 
tember 11, 1850; The Morning Chronicle Weekly Newspaper 
No. 26139, September 12, 1850; the 
Deutsche Londoner Zeitung No. 285, Sep­
tember 13, 1850; The Northern Star 
No. 673, September 14, 1850; the Reynold's 
Weekly Newspaper No. 5, September 15, 
1850,  and Die Hornisse No. 218, Sep­
tember 18, 1850 

=====第648页=====
625 
MEETING OF THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY 
SEPTEMBER 15, 1850 438 
Present: Marx, Engels, Schramm, Pfänder, Bauer, Eccarius, 
Schapper, Willich, Lehmann. 
Fränkel is excused. 
As this is an extraordinary meeting the minutes of the last meeting 
are not here and are therefore not read. 
Marx: The Friday meeting could not take place because of a clash 
with a meeting of the commission of the Society.3  As Willich has 
called b a meeting of the district, a meeting whose legality I will not go 
into,  this meeting must be held today. I wish to make the following 
proposal which is in three parts: 
1. The Central Authority shall be transferred from London to 
Cologne and its powers will be transferred to the district authority 
there as soon as this meeting is over. This decision shall be reported 
to League members in Paris, Belgium and Switzerland. The new 
Central Authority will itself notify members in Germany. 
Explanation: I was opposed to Schapper's motion to set up a 
district authority in Cologne for the whole of Germany because this 
might disrupt the unity of the Central Authority. Our motion does 
away with this objection. There are a number of new reasons which 
support the motion. The minority in the Central Authority is in open 
rebellion against the majority both in the motion of censure during 
the last meeting, in the general meeting now called by the district as 
well as in the Society and among the refugees. Therefore the Central 
Authority cannot possibly remain here. Its unity cannot be main­
tained any longer, there would be a split and there would then be 
two leagues. As the interests of the party must come first I pro­
pose this way out. 
a German Workers' Educational Society in London, called below the Great 
Windmill Street Society.— Ed. 
The second copy of the minutes has: "called for Monday".— Ed. 

=====第649页=====
626 Appendices 
2. The existing League Rules shall be declared null and void. The 
new Central Authority shall be responsible for drawing up new rules. 
Explanation: The Rules of the 1847 Congress were amended by 
the London Central Authority in 1848. Circumstances have now 
changed yet again. The latest London Rules weakened the principal 
articles of the original Rules. Both Rules are in force in different 
places, in some places there are no Rules at all or there are 
unauthorised ones, so that there is complete anarchy in the League. 
Moreover the latest Rules have become public and so can no longer 
be used. My proposal, therefore, essentially is that effective rules be 
introduced in place of the present lack of rules.439 
3. Two districts shall be formed in London to be entirely 
independent of each other and the only bond between them will be 
that they belong to the League and correspond with the same 
Central Authority. 
Explanation: It is necessary to form two districts here for the very 
reason that the unity of the League must be preserved. Quite apart 
from personal disagreements we have witnessed also differences of 
principle even in the Society. In the last debate on "the position of 
the German proletariat in the next revolution" views were expressed 
by members of the minority on the Central Authority which directly 
clash with those in the last circular but onea and even the Manifes­
to.10 A German national standpoint was substituted for the universal 
outlook of the Manifesto, and the national feelings of the German 
artisans were pandered to. The materialist standpoint of the Man­
ifesto has given way to idealism. The revolution is seen not as the 
product of realities of the situation but as the result of an effort of 
will. Whereas we say to the workers: You have 15, 20, 50 years of civil 
war to go through in order to alter the situation and to train 
yourselves for the exercise of power, it is said: We must take power at 
once, or else we may as well take to our beds. Just as the democrats 
abused the word "people" so now the word "proletariat" has been 
used as a mere phrase. To make this phrase0 effective it would be 
necessary to describe all the petty bourgeois as proletarians and 
consequently in practice represent the petty bourgeois and not the 
proletarians. The actual revolutionary process would have to be 
replaced by revolutionary catchwords. This debate has finally laid 
a_The second copy has: "of the Central Authority".— Ed. 
This refers to the Address of the Central Authority to the League, March 1850, and 
Manifesto of  the Communist Party (see this volume, pp. 277-87, and present edition, Vol. 
6).—  Ed. 
The second copy reads: "this view".— Ed. 

=====第650页=====
Appendices 627 
bare the differences in principle which lay behind the clash of 
personalities, and the time for action has now arrived. It is precisely 
these differences that have furnished both parties with their 
battlecries and some members of the League have called the 
defenders of the Manifesto reactionaries, seeking thereby to make 
them unpopular, which however does not worry them in the least, 
as they do not seek popularity. The majority would therefore be 
justified in dissolving the London district and expelling the members 
of the minority3 as being in conflict with the principles of the League. 
I do not put a motion to that effect as it would cause a pointless 
scandal and because these people are still Communists in their 
convictions even though the opinions they are now expressing are 
anti-communist and could at best be described as social-democratic. 
It is obvious, however, that it would be a mere waste of time, and a 
harmful one at that, for us to remain together. Schapper has often 
spoken of separation—very well then, I am seriously in favour of it. I 
think that I have found the way for us to separate without splitting 
the party. 
I wish to state that, for my own part, I should like to have at most 
twelve people440 in our district, as few as possible, and gladly leave 
the minority in possession of the great throng. If this proposal is 
accepted we shall obviously be unable to remain in the Society13; I 
shall resign from the Great Windmill Street Society0 together with 
the majority. After all it is not a matter of the hostile relationship 
between the two groups, but, on the contrary, of eliminating the 
tension and so all relationships. We remain together in the League 
and in the party but we are not going to maintain a relationship that 
is plainly harmful. 
Schapper: Just as in France the proletariat parts company with the 
Montagne 441 and La Presse  so it is here also: the people who represent 
the party in principle part company with those who organise the 
proletariat. I am in favour of moving the Central Authority 0 and also 
of making alterations in the Rules. The Cologne members are 
familiar with the situation in Germany. I also think that the new 
revolution will produce people who will lead themselves6 better than 
all those who made a name for themselves in 1848. As far as 
disagreements of principle are concerned, it was Eccarius who raised 
the question that provided the occasion for this debate. I have voiced 
a The second copy reads: "the minority of the Central Authority".— Ed. 
The second copy reads: "in the same Society".— Ed. 
c See this volume, p.  483.—  Ed. 
The second copy has: "to Cologne".— Ed. 
e The second copy has: "take the lead".— Ed. 

=====第651页=====
628 Appendices 
the opinion attacked here because I am in general an enthusiast in 
this matter. The question at issue is whether we ourselves chop off a 
few heads right at the start or whether it is our own heads that will 
fall. In France the workers will come to power and thereby we in 
Germany too. Were this not the case I would indeed take to my bed; 
in that event I would be able to enjoy a different material position. If 
we come to power we can take such measures as are necessary to 
ensure the rule of the proletariat. I am a fanatical supporter of this 
view but the Central Authority favours the very opposite. You want 
to have nothing more to do with us—very well, let us part company 
now. I shall certainly be guillotined in the next revolution, nev­
ertheless I shall go to Germany. You want two districts—very well, 
but that will be the end of the League. We shall meet again in 
Germany and then perhaps be able join forces again. Marx is a 
personal friend of mine but you are in favour of separation—very 
well, we shall each go our separate ways. But in that case there should 
be two leagues, one for those who work with the pen and one fori 
those who work in other ways. I do not share the view that the 
bourgeoisie in Germany will come to power and on this point I am a 
fanatical enthusiast—if I weren't I wouldn't give a brass farthing for 
the whole affair. But if there are two districts here in London, two 
societies and two refugee committees then we should prefer also to 
have two leagues and complete separation. 
Marx: Schapper has misunderstood my motion. If the motion is 
adopted we shall separate, the two districts shall separate and the 
people concerned will have no relations with each other. However, 
they will belong to the same League and be under the same 
Authority.3 You can even retain the greater part of the League 
membership. As for personal sacrifice, I have given up as much as 
anyone; but for the class and not for individuals. And as for 
enthusiasm, not much enthusiasm is needed to belong to a party 
when you believe that it is on the point of seizing power. I have 
always defied the momentary opinions of the proletariat. We are 
devoted to a party which, most fortunately for it, cannot yet come to 
power. If the proletariat were to come to power the measures it 
would introduce would be petty-bourgeois and not directly pro­
letarian. Our party can come to power only when the conditions 
allow it to put its own views into practice. Louis Blanc is the best 
instance of what happens when you come to power prematurely.442 
In France, moreover, it isn't the proletariat alone that gains power 
but the peasants and the petty bourgeois as well, and it will have to 
a The second copy reads: "Central Authority".— Ed. 

=====第652页=====
Appendices 629 
carry out not its, but their measures. The Paris Commune443  shows 
that one need not be in the government to accomplish something. 
And incidentally why do we hear nothing from the other members of 
the minority, especially Citizen Willich, who approved the circular 
unanimously at the time? We cannot and will not split the League: we 
wish merely to divide the London district into two districts. 
Eccarius: It was I who raised the question and it certainly was my 
intention to have the whole matter discussed. I have explained it in 
the Society why I think that Schapper's view is based on an illusion 
and why I do not think that our party can come to power 
immediately in the next revolution. Our party will then be more 
important in the clubs than in the government. 
Citizen Lehmann walks out without comment. Citizen Willich 
likewise. 
First part of the motion: all in favour, Schapper abstains. 
Second part: all in favour, Schapper abstains. 
Third part: all in favour, Schapper abstains. 
Schapper makes a protest against us all: We are now completely 
separated. I have my own acquaintances and friends in Cologne who 
follow me rather than you. 
Marx: We have acted in accordance with the Rules. The 
resolutions of the Central Authority are valid. 
After the minutes are read out both Marx and Schapper declare 
that they have not written to Cologne on this matter.3 
Schapper is asked whether he has any objection to the minutes. He 
says he has no objection as he thinks all objections are superfluous. 
Eccarius proposes that everyone should sign the minutes. Ac­
cepted. Schapper declares that he will not sign. 
Dated, London, September 15, 1850 
Read, approved and signed.b 
Signed: K. Marx, Chairman of the Central Authority 
F. Engels, Secretary 
Henry Bauer, K. Schramm, J. G. Eccarius, 
K. Pfänder 
First published in the International Review Printed according to the manu-
of Social History, Vol. 1, Part 2, 1956 scripts 
a This sentence is missing in the second copy.— Ed. 
These words are missing in the second copy.— Ed. 
22-1124 

=====第653页=====
630 
THE RESOLUTION OF THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY 
OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE 
September 15, 1850^ 
1. The Central Authority will be transferred from London to 
Cologne and a new Central Authority will be formed by the Cologne 
district. 
2. The existing League Rules are declared null and void and the 
new Central Authority is instructed to draft new ones. 
3. Two districts will be formed from the existing London district. 
They will be independent of each other and will deal only with the 
common Central Authority. 
Drawn up on September 15, 1850, with 
the participation of Marx and Engels Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time First published in the Dresdner Journal 
und Anzeiger No. 180, June 22, 1851 

=====第654页=====
631 
ACCOUNTS OF THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC REFUGEE 
COMMITTEE IN LONDON 
FROM AUGUST 1 TO SEPTEMBER 10 ] 1850]445 
Receipts 
£ 
August Balance 46 
Collected by Miss Berg 12 
From the Workers' Association in 
St. Georg, Hamburg 2 
From the same 1 
From Neustadt an der Haardt  8 
From Mr. C. Flory through the edi­
torial board of the Deutsche Londo­
ner Zeitung — 
September From the German Workers' Associa­
tion in Paris 2 
Collected by Herr John Berg 17 
Total 90 10 
10 
10 — 
Expenditure 
August For the refugees' board and lodg­
ing 28 
To the brushmakers' workshop 7 
For leather, etc — 
56grants ®6d 1 
23 » "Is 1 
6 " "2s6d — 
Various grants — 
4 grants ©10s 2 
Advances to refugees 8 
To four refugees for the voyage to 
America 5 9 3 
10 — 
13 6 
8 — 
3 — 
15 — 
5 6 

=====第655页=====
632 Appendices 
Travelling expenses to Schleswig- £ s d 
Holstein  7 3 — 
Petty expenses, postage, bank charges, 
etc _H3 
September For board and lodging 14 4 8 
39 grants of 6d — 19 6 
2 " of Is _ 2 — 
1 " of 10sandlof5s _ 15 _ 
Distributed according to the donor's 
(Herr Berg's) instructions 8 15 — 
Advances to refugees l 18 — 
Petty expenses — 6 10 
Total 90 3 6 
Since the four undersigned members of the hitherto existing 
Social-Democratic Committee, oh submitting these accounts, de­
clared their resignation from the Committee, the Society in Great 
Windmill Street3 appointed a commission to check the books and 
receipts, which reported on the 15th that it had found everything in 
order. 
The undersigned saw fit to leave all books and receipts concerning 
their administration with the hitherto treasurer, K. Pfänder, 21 
King Street, Soho Square, since they had resigned not only from the 
Committee but from the Society and the documents cannot be 
dispensed with in case enquiries are made by members of the public. 
Donors* are therefore requested to appoint representatives in 
London to inspect the books and receipts at the above-mentioned 
hitherto treasurer's. 
London, September 18, 1850 
Karl Marx, H. Bauer, K. Pfänder, 
Fr. Engels 
Published in the Deutsche-Londoner Zeitung Printed according to the newspaper 
No. 287, September 27, 1850 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a The German Workers' Educational Society in London.— Ed. 

=====第656页=====
633 
PROPOSAL FROM THE LONDON DISTRICT 
OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE 
TO THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY IN COLOGNE446 
To expel all members of the Sonderbund and in particular 
Schapper, Willich, Schärttner, Lehmann, Dietz (Oswald), Geben, 
Fränkel (the last seven by name) and to inform all League districts 
and communities of this decision as well as the Sonderbund in 
London and its leaders.[...] 
1. They have communicated reports, and false reports at that, 
concerning the split in London to leaders of secret societies outside 
the League and to refugees of various nationalities. 
2. They are in a state of open rebellion against the legally 
constituted Central Authority in Cologne; they act in defiance of the 
latter's decisions and have an emissary3  travelling around Germany 
to found a Sonderbund. 
3. They have violated, and still violate, in their relations with the 
members of the London district, all obligations binding on the 
members of secret societies. 
4. They have, since the separation, broken all the laws of secret 
societies and to permit them to remain in the League any longer 
would only serve them to hasten its disintegration. 
Drawn up on November 11, 1850, with Printed according to the newspaper 
the participation of Marx and Engels 
First published in the Dresdner Journal und 
Anzeiger No. 180, June 22, 1851 
a Gaude.— Ed. 

=====第657页=====
634 
RULES OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE 
1. The aim of the Communist League is to bring about the 
destruction of the old society—and the overthrow of the 
bourgeoisie—the spiritual, political and economic emancipation of 
the proletariat, the communist revolution, using all the resources of 
propaganda and political struggle towards this goal. In the various 
stages of development through which the struggle of the proletariat 
has to pass, the League shall represent at all times the interest of the 
movement as a whole, just as it shall seek at all times to unite and 
organise all the revolutionary forces of the proletariat within  itself;  as 
long as the proletarian revolution has not attained its ultimate goal 
the League shall remain secret and indissoluble. 
2. Membership shall be open only to those who comply with the 
following conditions: 
a. be emancipated from all religion, sever connections with any 
church organisation and not participate in any ceremony not 
required by civil law; 
b. understand the conditions, the course of development and the 
ultimate goal of the proletarian movement; 
c. stand aloof from all organisations and particular strivings that 
oppose or obstruct the progress of the League towards its goal; 
d. show ability and zeal in propaganda, unswerving devotion to 
convictions and revolutionary energy; 
e. maintain the strictest secrecy in all matters concerning the League. 
3. Admission shall be granted by the unanimous vote of the 
community. A new member shall normally be admitted by the 
chairman in the presence of the whole community. Members will 
swear to abide unconditionally by the decisions of the League. 
4. Whoever violates the conditions of membership shall be 
expelled. A majority vote of the community is required for the 

=====第658页=====
Appendices 635 
expulsion of individuals. The Central Authority can expel whole 
communities where expulsion has been proposed by a district 
community. The whole League shall be notified of expulsions and 
shall keep those expelled under surveillance just like any suspect 
individual. 
5. The League is organised in communities, districts, a Central 
Authority and a congress. 
6. A community consists of at least three members of the same 
locality. It shall elect a chairman, who will conduct the meetings, and 
a deputy, who will act as treasurer. 
7. Above the communities of a country or a province there shall 
be a chief community, the district, to be nominated by the Cen­
tral Authority. The communities shall deal directly only with 
their districts, the districts in turn deal with the Central Author­
ity. 
8. The communities shall meet regularly, not less than once a 
fortnight, they shall correspond at least once a month with their 
districts; the latter shall communicate with the Central Authority 
at least once every two months; every three months the Central Au­
thority shall report on the state of the League. 
9. The chairman and deputy of the communities and districts 
shall be elected for one year and can be deposed at any time by 
their electorate; the members of the Central Authority can only be 
deposed by the congress. 
10. Every League member shall pay a monthly contribution whose 
minimum shall be determined by the congress. Half of the sums so 
raised will go to the districts and half to the Central Authority; they 
will be used to cover administration costs, the distribution of 
propaganda material and the dispatching of emissaries. The districts 
shall bear the cost of the correspondence with their communities. 
Contributions shall be sent every three months to the districts, which 
will forward half of the total income to the Central Authority and, at 
the same time, give an account of their income and expenditure 
to their communities. The Central Authority shall account to the 
congress for monies it has received. Extraordinary expenses shall be 
met by extraordinary contributions. 
11. The Central Authority is the executive organ of the whole 
League. It shall consist of at least three members and shall be elected 
and augmented by the district which the congress has assigned as its 
seat. It shall be responsible only to the congress. 
12. The congress is the legislative organ of the whole League. It 
shall consist of the delegates of the district assemblies, which will elect 
one deputy for every five communities. 

=====第659页=====
636 Appendices 
13. The district  assembly  is the representative body of thé district. It 
shall be convened in the district centre regularly every quarter by 
the committee of the chief community to debate the affairs of the 
district. To this assembly each community shall send one delegate. 
The district assembly shall invariably be convened in the middle of 
July each year for the election of the League delegates. 
Article 5 Community 
Article 6 District 
Article 7 Central Authority 
Article 8 The Congress 
Article 9 Admission to the League 
Article 10 Expulsion from the League (money....)2 
14. A fortnight after the close of the district election assemblies 
the congress shall meet as a rule at the seat of the Central Authority 
unless the latter decides upon another venue. 
15. The congress shall receive from the Central Authority, which 
has a seat in it but no vote, a report on all its activities and on the state 
of the League; it shall lay down the principles governing the policy to 
be followed by the League, decide upon amendments to the Rules 
and determine the seat of the Central Authority for the coming year. 
16. In cases of emergency the Central Authority can summon an 
extraordinary congress which will consist in that event of the 
delegates last elected by the districts. 
17. Disputes between individual members of the same community 
shall be settled conclusively by that community; disputes between 
members of the same district by the district community; those 
between members of different districts by the Central Authority; 
personal complaints about members of the Central Authority shall 
be brought before the congress. Disputes among communities 
belonging to the same district shall be resolved by the district 
community, those between communities and their district or between 
different districts, by the Central Authority; but in the first case an 
appeal may be made to the district assemblies and in the second, to 
the congress. The congress shall also resolve all conflicts between the 
Central Authority and the lower committees of the League. 
First published in Russian in the journal Printed according to a copy of the 
Voprosy Istorii No. 11, 1948 manuscript with remarks by Marx 
a Articles 5-10 were written by Marx at the bottom of the third page of the 
manuscript.— Ed. 

=====第660页=====
637 
ABOUT ENGELS' SPEECH 
AT A NEW YEAR'S PARTY 
OF THE FRATERNAL DEMOCRATS SOCIETY 
DECEMBER 30, 1850 
(From a Newspaper Report)448 
M. Engels (who, with Carl Schapper, attended as a deputation 
from the German Society) also responded to this sentiment, thanked 
them in the name of his brethren for their sympathy, and expressed 
his best wishes for the prosperity of the English people. He then 
entered into a long and elaborate statement of the causes of the 
failures abroad, and the consequent reaction, showing that it equally 
arose from the ignorance of the people and the treachery of their 
leaders. 
First published in The Northern Star Reprinted from the newspaper 
No. 689, January 4, 1851 

=====第661页=====

=====第662页=====
NOTES 
AND 
INDEXES 

=====第663页=====

=====第664页=====
641 
NOTES 
1 This statement was written by Engels soon after his arrival in London from 
Switzerland on approximately November 10, 1849. In July 1849, Engels crossed 
into Switzerland, together with the retreating Baden-Palatinate insurgent army, 
and then left for London via Genoa by sea around the Iberian Peninsula. Marx, 
who had emigrated to London in August 1849, carried on extensive work there to 
restore the Communist League and to assist revolutionary refugees coming to 
England. Engels, too, immediately joined in and was brought into the League's 
Central Authority which Marx had restored. 
Engels' statement to the Chartist newspaper The Northern Starv/as prompted by 
articles of the petty-bourgeois journalist Karl Heinzen, with whom Marx and 
Engels had had a controversy as far back as 1847 (see present edition, Vol. 6, 
pp. 291-306), and the fact that Heinzen's articles were used by English 
Conservative circles for the persecution and expulsion of political refugees from 
Britain. Thus, Heinzen's pamphlet Lehren der Revolution (Lessons of the 
Revolution) reprinted in the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung Nos. 241 and 242 of 
November 9 and 16, 1849, contained gross demagogic statements compromising 
the German revolutionary refugees. Referring to those statements, the author of a 
letter published in The Times of November 23, 1849, and signed Anti-Socialist 
suggested to the Home Secretary that "the writer of such hellish doctrines" should 
be ordered "to quit the English dominions within 24 hours". 
Marx wrote to Joseph Weydemeyer on December 19, 1849: "You will have 
seen what-you-may-call-him Heinzen's inane bragging in the newspapers. This 
fellow, who was done for by the revolution in Germany—before that his things 
enjoyed a certain vogue because the petty bourgeois and the commercial traveller 
liked to see printed in black and white the idiocies and rodomontades they 
themselves might utter in tones of mystery between biscuits and cheese at the 
wine-shop—is endeavouring to rehabilitate himself by compromising the other 
refugees in Switzerland and England—those who have really worked  — in the eyes 
of those countries' governments, by kicking up a row, and by threatening shortly 
to gobble up a hundred thousand of millions of men at déjeuner à la fourchette, thus 
earning himself a lucrative martyrdom." p. 3 
2 After the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, which had been published by Marx and Engels 
in Cologne from June 1, 1848, till May 19, 1849, was banned Marx did not give up 

=====第665页=====
642 Notes 
the idea of resuming, in one way or another, the publication of a paper that would 
continue the revolutionary traditions of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. He wrote 
about this to Engels in Switzerland on August 1, 1849, inviting him to London to 
help start one up. Marx succeeded in raising funds and finding a publisher, and in 
mid-December 1849 a contract to publish the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch­
ökonomische Revue was signed between the responsible publisher Konrad Schramm 
and Schuberth and Co., a Hamburg bookselling firm. The periodical's aims were 
to assess the results of the 1848-49 revolution, to reveal the nature of the new 
historical situation, and to develop further the proletarian party's tactics. Most of 
the articles and literary and international reviews were written by Marx and 
Engels, who also drew contributions to the Revue from their followers Wilhelm 
Wolff,  Joseph Weydemeyer, and Johann Georg Eccarius. Issue No. 1 also carried 
an item by Karl Blind, "Oesterreichische und preussische Parteien in Baden", and 
issue No. 4—verses by the French democrat Louis Ménard. 
The cover named the places of publication as London, where Marx and Engels 
lived at the time, Hamburg, where the journal was printed, and New York since a 
great number of those who had participated in the 1848-49 revolution in Germany 
emigrated to America, and Marx and Engels hoped to find suitable ground there 
for distributing the journal. Presuming the possibility of a new revolutionary 
upsurge, they intended shortly to make their publication a weekly, and later a 
daily newspaper (see this volume, pp. 605-06). This plan was not, however, carried 
out. Altogether six issues were published; the last issue, a double one (5-6),came 
out at the end of November 1850. All further attempts to continue publication 
were blocked by police persecution in Germany and lack of funds. 
Marx sent the text of the Announcement to Joseph Weydemeyer in Frankfurt 
am Main on December 19, 1849, with a request to publish it in the Neue Deutsche 
Zeitung. It was printed in Nos. 14, 23 and 31 of January 16 and 26, and February 
5, 1850. 
It was also printed in the Berner Zeitung No. 361 of December 27, 1849; in the 
Westdeutsche Zeitung (published by Hermann Becker in Cologne) on January 8, 9, 
11 (supplement), 12 and 13 (supplement), 1850; in the Schweizerische National-
Zeitung, Basle, No. 8, January 10, 1850; in the Düsseldorfer Zeitung No. 9, January 
10, 1850; in the Norddeutsche Freie  Presse,  Hamburg-Altona, No. 254, January 18, 
1850;  in Der Volksfreund, Lemgo, No. 3, January 18, 1850. p. 5 
3 In May 1849, when the counter-revolution was on the upsurge, the Prussian 
Government issued an order expelling Marx and the other editors of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung from Prussia. This measure, prepared well in advance, was 
applied when the main uprisings in the Rhine Province had been virtually 
suppressed. On his return to Cologne in April 1848, Marx applied for Prussian 
citizenship which he had been forced to renounce in 1845 when he was living in 
Belgium as an emigrant. Despite the Cologne Magistrate's favourable reply to his 
application, however, the Cologne royal district authorities and the Minister of the 
Interior refused to grant it, and Marx remained a "foreigner", who could at any 
moment be accused of abusing hospitality and expelled. The royal district 
authorities' note to this effect followed on May 11, 1849, and on May 16 Marx was 
given 24 hours to leave Prussia. Weerth and Dronke, who did not enjoy Prussian 
citizenship either, received similar orders. Legal proceedings were instituted 
against Engels for his part in the Elberfeld uprising. The last issue, No. 301, of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung appeared on May 19, 1849. p. 5 
4 Letters from Germany by Engels, as well as his series of articles Letters from France, 
were written for the Chartist journal The Democratic Review of British and Foreign 

=====第666页=====
Notes 643 
Politics, History and Literature published by George Julian Harney in 1849 and 
1850.  Harney had invited Engels to make regular contributions to the new journal 
as early as March 1849 (see The Harney Papers, Assen, 1969, pp. 249-50). But 
Engels was only able to start contributing in November 1849, when he came to 
London. In London Marx and Engels established close contacts with the 
revolutionary wing of the Chartist party and used The Democratic Review to 
disseminate the ideas of scientific communism and explain the character of events 
on the Continent to the English working people. 
The content of the Letters from Germany and the Letters from France, the way 
events are analysed, and the fact that appraisal of these events coincides, 
sometimes even textually, with that given in later works by Marx and Engels (e.g., 
the first and second letters from Germany and the first international review; 
Letters  from France and The Class Struggles in France) show that their author was not 
only well informed of Marx's work at the time, but also took part in it. Marx did 
not yet know English well enough to write articles for The Democratic Review, so the 
author could only be Engels. 
Engels wrote the Letters from Germany from personal observations while 
actively participating in the 1848-49 revolution in Germany. He used material in 
the German and English press and information provided by Communist League 
members, some of whom emigrated to London at that time. In conformity with 
current journalistic practice, the letters were marked Cologne. 
The letters from Germany and France met with a broad response in the 
Chartist press. The Northern Star in its reviews of the new issues of The Democratic 
Review always stressed the particular significance of these letters. Thus, in its 
review of the issue which opened the series, The Northern Star  (No.  637 of January 
5, 1850) wrote that letters from France and Germany "will do much towards 
promoting the good work of international fraternity". As regards the next of The 
Democratic Review issue The Northern Star (No. 641, February 2, 1850) stated: 
"Letters from France and Germany are decidedly the most important of the contents 
of this number of the Democratic Review. The disclosures concerning the designs of 
the European despots, and the proofs given to the progress of the revolutionary 
spirit in France and Germany, stamp these letters as inexpressibly valuable. The 
letter from France has but one fault—its comparative brevity." Noting that 
the Letters expose the policy of the counter-revolutionary powers and their 
instrument—President Bonaparte, the Chartist newspaper concluded its review 
of the March issue as follows: "The Letters in the present number show that great 
events are at hand" (The Northern Star, March 2, 1850). Further comments on the 
Letters appeared in The Northern Starot April 6 and May 4, 1850. Another paper, 
People,  commented on the current issue of The Democratic Review, that original and 
very important letters from France and Germany had appeared (People, II, 1850, 
p. 304). 
The Democratic Review published four letters from Germany. The first three, 
containing cross references, were published in the January, February and March 
issues. In this volume they are published under the general title Letters from 
Germany. The fourth letter, written later and containing no direct references to 
the first three, appeared in the August issue of the journal. In this volume it is 
published in chronological order (see pp. 392-95). 
Footnotes give references to passages in later works by Marx and Engels with 
similar assessments of events and facts. The numbers of the letters have been 
supplied by the editors of this edition. p. 7 
5 The term Ordermongers is formed on the pattern of the words "profitmongers" 
and "moneymongers" often met in the Chartist press. Engels uses it here for the 

=====第667页=====
644 Notes 
first time. In the Letters from France (see this volume, pp. 24, 25, 26, 28 et seq.) 
Engels used this term to denote the members of the party of Order (see Note 32). 
p. 7 
6 The Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation (962-1806) included, at different 
times,  German, Italian, Austrian, Hungarian and Bohemian lands, Switzerland 
and the Netherlands, forming a motley conglomeration of feudal kingdoms and 
principalities, church lands and free towns with different political structures, legal 
standards and customs. p. 7 
The Federal Diet—a representative body of the German Confederation, an 
ephemeral union of German states, founded in 1815 by decision of the Congress 
of Vienna. Though it had no real power, it was nevertheless a vehicle for feudal 
and monarchical reaction. During the 1848-49 revolution in Germany, reactionary 
circles made vain attempts to revive the Federal Diet, intending to use it to prevent 
the democratic unification of Germany. After the defeat of the revolution, the 
Federal Diet received its former rights in 1850 and survived till 1866. p. 7 
8 The German National Assembly, which opened on May 18, 1848, in St. Paul's 
Church in the free city of Frankfurt am Main, was to unify the country and to 
draw up a Constitution. The liberal deputies, who were in the majority, turned the 
Assembly into a mere debating club. At the decisive moments of the revolution, 
the liberal majority condoned the counter-revolutionary forces. In spring 1849, 
the liberals left the Assembly after the Prussian and other governments rejected 
the Imperial Constitution it had drawn up. What remained of the Assembly 
moved to Stuttgart and was dispersed by the Württemberg forces on June 18. 
The Imperial Vicar or Regent (Archduke John of Austria) and the Imperial 
Ministry constituted a provisional Central Authority set up by the Frankfurt 
National Assembly on June 28-29, 1848. The provisional Central Authority had 
neither a budget nor an army of its own, possessed no real power, and was an 
instrument of the counter-revolutionary German princes. p. 7 
The Interim (a temporary agreement) was concluded in September 1849 between 
Prussia and Austria on joint administration in Germany until the question of the 
German Constitution was settled. Under this agreement, the Austro-Prussian 
commission was established, which actually meant the revival of a kind of Federal 
Diet. While reflecting the counter-revolutionary aspirations of both governments, 
the agreement conflicted with Prussia's claims for supremacy in Germany, p. 7 
10 The following editorial note is supplied to this passage: "Since the above letter 
came to hand, intelligence has reached this country of the abdication of the 'Vicar', 
and the resignation of his authority (?) into the hands of Austrian and Prussian 
commissioners. Thus has ended the Frankfort farce.— Ed. D.R." This note was 
presumably written by Engels. p. 7 
11 The Left wing of the Frankfurt National Assembly consisted of two factions: the 
Left (Robert Blum, Karl Vogt and others) and the extreme Left, known as the 
radical-democratic party (Arnold Rüge, Friedrich Wilhelm Schlöffel, Franz Zitz, 
Samuel Trüzschler and others), which, in the main, represented the petty 
bourgeoisie, but was nevertheless supported by a section of the German workers. 
The extreme Left vacillated and took a halfway position on the basic problems of 
the German revolution—abolition of the remnants of feudalism and unification 
of the country. In April and May 1849, after the conservative and most of the 
liberal deputies had left the Assembly, the Left and the extreme Left gained the 
majority. But they, too, continued the policy of curbing the revolutionary actions 
of the masses. 

=====第668页=====
Notes 645 
The Regency of  the Empire was formed in Stuttgart on June 7 by what remained 
of the Frankfurt National Assembly, instead of the Central Authority headed by 
the Imperial Regent, Archduke John, who was openly counter-revolutionary. The 
Regency consisted of five deputies representing the Left faction (moderate 
democrats): Franz Raveaux, Karl Vogt, Ludwig Simon, Friedrich Schuler, August 
Becher. They failed in their attempts to carry by parliamentary means the 
Imperial Constitution that had been worked out by the Frankfurt Assembly and 
rejected by the German princes: The Regency virtually ceased its activities after 
the Frankfurt Assembly was finally dispersed on June 18, 1849. Some of its former 
deputies emigrated to Switzerland. p. 7 
12 The Three-Kings'-League—an agreement concluded in Berlin on May 26, 1849, 
between Prussia, Saxony and Hanover. Based on the Prussian project of 
reorganising the German Confederation, it was an attempt by Prussia to gain 
hegemony in Germany. By trying to make other German princes join this League 
(known as the Prussian Union), Prussia's ruling circles hoped to unify the German 
states,  without Austria, under Prussian rule. However, under pressure from 
Austria, supported by Russia, the Prussian Government was forced to give up its 
plans in 1850. p. 8 
13 On May 28, 1849, the Prussian Government appealed to the German governments 
to join the Three-Kings'-League. The appeal, together with a new draft of the 
Imperial Constitution, revised in a counter-revolutionary spirit, was published in 
the German press at the end of May and the beginning of June 1849. p  g 
14 Engels is referring to the acquittal for high treason by jury in Berlin and 
Königsberg in December 1849 of Benedikt Waldeck and Johann Jacoby, the 
leaders of the Left wing of the Prussian National Assembly, which was dissolved by 
the government on December 5, 1848. p. 9 
15 The Orangemen—members of the Orange Society (Order), a Protestant terrorist 
organisation founded in Ireland in 1795 and employed by the authorities, 
Protestant landlords and the clergy against the Irish national liberation 
movement. The name was derived from William III, Prince of Orange, who 
suppressed the Irish uprising of 1689-91 for restoration of the Stuart monarchy. 
The Order had an especially strong influence in Ulster, Northern Ireland, with a 
mainly Protestant population. p. 9 
16 On December 5, 1848, the Prussian National Assembly was dissolved and the 
Constitution imposed by the King made public. The dispersal of the Assembly was 
the culmination of the counter-revolutionary coup d'état that began in November 
with the order to transfer the Assembly from Berlin to the remote town of 
Brandenburg. The Constitution introduced a two-chamber system; the age and 
property qualifications made the First Chamber a privileged Chamber of Gentry 
("House of Lords"); by the electoral law of December 6, 1848, the right to vote in 
the two-stage elections to the Second Chamber was granted only to the so-called 
independent Prussians. The royal authority was vested with very wide pow­
ers—  the King was authorised to convene and dissolve the Chambers, appoint 
ministers, declare war and conclude peace. He was vested with full executive 
power, while sharing legislative power with the Chambers. 
Later, anti-democratic revisions of the Constitution were made repeatedly on 
the initiative of Prussian ruling circles. Thus, after dispersing on April 27, 1849, 
the Second Chamber of the Prussian Diet, which included a large number of 
opposition deputies—liberals and moderate democrats, on May 30 Frederick 
William IV promulgated a new electoral law introducing elections based on high 

=====第669页=====
646 Notes 
property qualifications and unequal representation of different sections of the 
population. The electorate was divided into three classes according to property 
status.  Thus the King succeeded in having an obedient majority elected to the 
Second Chamber. p. 12 
17 The reference is to a message by Frederick William IV of January 7, 1850, with 
new amendments to the imposed Constitution revised by the government and 
adopted by the Chambers (Friedrich Wilhelm IV. Allerhöchste Botschaft in the 
Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger No. 10 of January 10, 1850, and the Neue  Preussische 
Zeitung No. 9 of January 11, 1850). p. 12 
18 Engels draws an analogy with English absolutist legal institutions. The Star 
Chamber (the name of a meeting-place of the king's councillors in the royal palace 
of Westminster derived from stars fashioned on the ceiling of the hall) was 
established by Henry VII in 1487 as a special court to try rebellious feudal lords. 
Under Elizabeth I, it became a political court; it was abolished during the English 
revolution of the seventeenth century. p. 12 
19 This refers to Frederick William IV's New-Year message "To My Army" ("An 
mein Heer") signed in Potsdam on January 1, 1849, and published in the 
Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger of January 3, 1849. The Neue Rheinische Zeitung used 
this document to expose the counter-revolutionary actions of the Prussian military 
(see Marx's article "A New-Year Greeting", present edition, Vol. 8). p. 13 
20 This refers to the second revised version of the imposed Constitution adopted by 
the Chambers on January 31, 1850, including the King's amendments to the 
previous version. In the new version, the reactionary monarchist traits of the 
Constitution became more prominent and new concessions were made to the 
aristocracy and the junker landowners. On February 6, 1850, Frederick William 
IV took the oath to the Constitution. p. 14 
21 On March 19, 1848, during the revolutionary events in Berlin, the armed people 
compelled King Frederick William IV to come out onto the balcony of his palace 
and bare his head before the bodies of the insurgents who had fallen at the 
barricades. 
Further, Engels refers to Frederick William IV's speech on February 6, 1850, 
concerning the oath to the Prussian Constitution. p. 14 
22 This expression is from the speech from the throne made by Frederick William IV 
at the opening of the First United Diet in Berlin on April 11, 1847 (Allgemeine 
Preussische Zeitung No. 101, April 12, 1847). p. 14 
The Holy Alliance—an association of European monarchs founded in 1815 to 
suppress revolutionary movements and preserve feudal monarchies in European 
countries. During the 1848-49 revolution, and in subsequent years, counter­
revolutionary circles in Austria, Prussia and Tsarist Russia attempted to revive the 
Holy Alliance's activities in a modified form. p. 15 
24 From 1707 to 1806 the principality of Neuchâtel and Valangin (in German: 
Neuenburg and Vallendis) was a dwarf state under Prussian rule. In 1806, during 
the Napoleonic wars, Neuchâtel was ceded to France. In 1815, by decision of the 
Vienna Congress, it was incorporated into the Swiss Confederation as its 21st 
canton, at the same time retaining its vassalage to Prussia. On February 29, 1848, 
a bourgeois revolution in Neuchâtel put an end to Prussian rule and a republic was 
proclaimed. Up to 1857, however, Prussia laid constant claims to Neuchâtel and 
only pressure from France forced her to renounce it officially. p. 16 

=====第670页=====
Notes 647 
25 The Sonderbund —a separatist union of the seven economically backward Catholic 
cantons of Switzerland formed in 1843 to resist progressive bourgeois reforms and 
to defend the privileges of the church and the Jesuits. The decree of the Swiss Diet 
of July 1847 dissolving the Sonderbund served as a pretext for the latter to start 
hostilities against the other cantons early in November. On November 23, 1847, 
the Sonderbund army was defeated by the federal forces. Attempts by Austria and 
Prussia to interfere in Swiss affairs in support of the Sonderbund failed. 
The Federal Constitution of the Swiss Confederation was adopted on September 
12, 1848. The new Constitution ensured a certain centralisation of the country, 
which had been turned from a confederation of cantons (the confederation treaty 
of 1814 sanctioned by the Congress of Vienna restricted the power of central 
government to the utmost) into a federative state. p. 16 
26 When publishing the series of articles Letters from France the editor of The 
Democratic Review, Harney, tried to present them as reports received directly from 
Paris.  At the same time, the articles were based not only on French material, but on 
British press reports and other information (private letters to Engels from Paris, 
and reports by a member of the Communist League, Ferdinand  Wolff,  who 
had been expelled from Paris and came to London in December 1849). 
The fourth letter of the series was written by Engels while Marx was working 
on the third chapter of The  Class  Struggles in France (March 1850), which appeared 
in instalments in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue. The facts 
and appraisal of the events given in Letters from France often coincide with what 
Marx wrote about France in The Class Struggles (the footnotes give references to 
relevant places), in the third international review (see this volume, pp. 507-09 and 
516-25) and later in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (present edition, 
Vol. 11). Coincidence of thought and of approach testifies to the fact that Letters 
from France reflected Marx's and Engels' common point of view. The numbers of 
the letters have been supplied by the editors of this edition. p. 17 
27 The reference is to the French Provisional Government formed on February 24, 
1848,  as a result of the overthrow of the July monarchy. Most ministerial posts 
were held by moderate republicans (Lamartine, Dupont de l'Eure, Crémieux, 
Arago, Marie, and two members of the oppositional Republican Party, which was 
associated with Le National—Marrast and Garnier-Pagès). There were, besides, 
three leaders of the petty-bourgeois party of democrats and socialists grouped 
round La Réforme —Ledru-Rollin, Flocon and Louis Blanc—and also a mechanic, 
Albert (real name Martin). The Provisional Government existed till May 10, 1848, 
when it was replaced by the Executive Commission set up by the Constituent 
National Assembly. p. 17 
28 Droit d'octroi —a right, originating from feudal times, of cities to levy tolls on 
imported consumer goods. It was repealed in 1791 during the French Revolution, 
but later reintroduced on some foodstuffs (salt, wine, fish, etc.). p. 18 
29 The reference is to the repeal in June 1846 of the Corn Laws by the Peel 
Government in the interests of the industrial bourgeoisie. 
The Corn Laws (first introduced in the fifteenth century) imposed in the 
interests of landowners high import duties on agricultural produce in order to 
maintain high prices for these products on the home market. The struggle 
between the industrial bourgeoisie and the landed aristocracy over the Corn Laws 
ended in their repeal. p. 19 
30 The revolution of February 1848 in France was sparked off by the authorities' 
prohibition of a banquet organised by the opposition and fixed for February 22 
and of a peaceful demonstration in support of the freedom of assembly, p. 20 

=====第671页=====
648 Notes 
31 The party of the National included moderate republicans, under Armand 
Marrast, who were supported by the industrial bourgeoisie and a section of liberal 
intellectuals associated with it; in the 1840s the adherents of this party grouped 
around the newspaper Le National. 
The most prominent representatives of this trend in the Provisional Gov­
ernment were Marrast, editor of Le National, and Garnier-Pagès, Minister of 
Finance. p. 20 
32 At the elections to the French Legislative Assembly held on May 13, 1849, the 
monarchist groups—the Legitimists, Orleanists, and Bonapartists who had 
formed the party of Order, gained the majority. p. 20 
33 Tuileries —the royal palace in Paris; prior to the February revolution, the 
residence of Louis Philippe. 
The Elysée-National —the residence (from December 1848) of Louis Napoleon 
Bonaparte, President of the French Republic. p. 20 
34 Freeholders—a category of English small landowners originating from feudal 
times.  Engels often used this term, familiar to English workers, when writing of 
conditions in France. p. 21 
35 A tax of 45 additional centimes upon every franc of direct taxes was adopted by 
the French Provisional Government on March 16, 1848. p. 21 
36 In December 1849, the Minister of Education Parier proposed a Bill making 
schoolmasters in primary schools subordinate to the prefects, who could dismiss or 
appoint them at will. The law was adopted on January 11, 1850. p. 22 
37 Following the death of the Right-wing monarchist deputy de Beaune, by-elections 
were held in the department of the Gard on December 20, 1849. Favand, the 
candidate of the petty-bourgeois socialist democratic party (Montagne), was 
elected by a majority vote of 20 thousand out of 36 thousand. p. 22 
38 The Legitimists—supporters of the Bourbon dynasty overthrown in 1830, who 
upheld the interests of the big hereditary landowners and the claim to the French 
throne of Count Chambord, King Charles X's grandson, who took the name of 
Henry V. p. 22 
39 The reference is to the draft law on education, submitted on June 18, 1849, by the 
Minister of Education, Falloux (hence its name). This law confirming the 
dominant position of the Catholic Church and religious organisations in public 
education was adopted by the Legislative Assembly on March 15, 1850. p. 22 
40 The June insurrection of the Paris proletariat against the bourgeois régime of the 
Second Republic (June 23-26, 1848) was the culmination of the 1848 revolution in 
France and exerted a strong influence on revolutionary events in other European 
countries. p. 23 
41 The trees of  liberty  were planted in the streets of Paris following the victory of the 
February revolution of 1848. The planting of trees of liberty—mainly oaks and 
poplars—has been a tradition in France ever since the French Revolution. 
In January 1850, the trees of liberty on the boulevards were felled by the order 
of Paris Prefect Carlier because they allegedly hindered street traffic. The 
authorities thus tried to provoke mass disturbances and to stage a new massacre of 
revolutionary elements. p. 24 
42 By-elections to the Legislative Assembly were to be held on March 10, 1850, in 
connection with the annulment of the powers and the conviction by the Supreme 

=====第672页=====
Notes 649 
Court of the Left deputies who participated in the anti-government demonstra­
tion on June 13, 1849. To influence the voters, the government divided 
the territory of France into five big military areas; as a result, Paris and its 
neighbouring departments were surrounded by the other four areas, which were 
under the command of counter-revolutionary generals. Comparing the powers of 
these generals with those of Turkish pashas, the republican press called these 
areas pashalics. 
This measure was illegitimate because, under Article 76 of the Constitution, 
changes in the administration of the departments of France could be effected only 
by special legislation of the National Assembly. p. 25 
43 The Orleanists—supporters of the House of Orleans, overthrown by the February 
revolution of 1848; they represented the interests of the financial aristocracy and 
the big industrial bourgeoisie. p. 25 
44 The issue of The Democratic Review containing Engels' fourth letter also carried the 
beginning of his Two Years of  a Revolution. This was a synopsis of the first chapter 
of Marx's The Class Struggles in France (see this volume, pp. 48-70). 
Part of the first paragraph of the letter beginning with the words: "really, this 
composition is significant", up to the words: "the total and entire emancipation 
of the working men", was printed under the title "Election of Carnot, Vidal and 
de Flotte" in The Northern Star No. 650, April 6, 1850, in the review of The 
Democratic Review's April issue. p. 27 
45 On May 15, 1848, Paris workers led by Blanqui, Barbes and others took 
revolutionary action against the anti-labour and anti-democratic policy pursued by 
the bourgeois Constituent Assembly which opened on May 4. The participants in 
the mass demonstration forced their way into the Assembly premises, demanded 
the formation of a Ministry of Labour and presented a number of other demands. 
An attempt was made to form a revolutionary government. National Guards from 
the bourgeois quarters and regular troops succeeded, however, in restoring the 
power of the Constituent Assembly. The leaders of the movement were arrested 
and put on trial. p. 27 
46 Bourgeois Lacedemonian is an ironical nickname for the Paris businessman and 
member of the National Guard Alexandre Leclerc who was awarded the Legion of 
Honour for his part, together with his sons, in suppressing the June 1848 
insurrection of Paris workers. p. 32 
Letter Six was apparently not completed in time or left unfinished by Engels. An 
excerpt from it was published by the editor of The Democratic Review in the June 
number in his own article "Tactics and Programme of the Counter Revolutionists" 
with the comment (to make the readers think the Letters came directly from Paris): 
"We had begun to fear the arrest of our Paris correspondent, his Letter not having 
reached us until several days after the usual time. It was received only as we were 
going to press. It is impossible for us to give more than the following brief 
extracts." Then came the three paragraphs by Engels reproduced in this volume 
under the heading VI. p. 33 
48 Engels has in mind the results of the preliminary debates held from May 21 to 23, 
1850,  on the law abolishing universal suffrage (462 votes for and 227 against). For 
details see this volume, pp. 136-37. The law was finally adopted on May 31; it 
introduced a property qualification camouflaged by stipulating three years' 
permanent residence in a given locality and the payment of personal tax. »« 

=====第673页=====
650 Notes 
49 See Note 29. p. 34 
50 The Mountain (Montagne) —representatives in the Constituent and subsequently 
Legislative Assembly of a bloc of democrats and petty-bourgeois socialists grouped 
round the newspaper La Réforme. They called themselves Montagne by analogy 
with the Montagne in the Convention of 1792-94. p. 34 
51 Dronke wrote to Engels from Paris (February 21 and the beginning of May, 1850) 
that the prestige enjoyed among the French workers by prominent representatives 
of petty-bourgeois socialism and revolutionary democratism (Louis Blanc, 
Proudhon, Albert and Barbes) was declining. He held a different view of Blanqui, 
however, saying that he had the same great influence over the French workers as 
previously. p. 35 
52 This refers to the prospectus for the pamphlet by a certain Daniel Borme, a 
French chemist of royalist convictions: Borme fils. Le Rideau est levé!!! Grande 
lanterne magique des pâtissiers politiques des 24 février, 15 mai et 24 juin 1848, dédiée 
aux paysans, aux ouvriers laborieux et aux honnêtes gens par M. Borme fils, ex-accusé 
du 15 mai [Paris], impr. de M me Lacombe [1850] im 4°, 2 p. The prospectus told 
of Borme's part in organising royalist actions in March-May 1848 and also about 
the Bourges trial. p. 37 
53 From March 7 to April 3, 1849, the leaders of the Paris workers' uprising of May 
15, 1848, were tried at Bourges, accused of conspiracy against the government. 
Barbes and Albert were sentenced to exile, Blanqui to ten years solitary 
confinement and the rest of the accused to various terms of imprisonment or exile. 
p. 37 
54 Instead of increasing the civil list by 3 million per annum, the Assembly granted 
Louis Bonaparte a lump sum of 2,160,000 francs (see this volume, p. 140). 
p. 38 
55 The reference is to the article "A Gradual Decline of the National Assembly" 
printed in the newspaper Le Pouvoir No. 195, July 15, 1850, for which Felix de 
Lamartinière, the publisher, was fined (see Le Moniteur universel  Nos.  197 and 200 
of July 16 and 19, 1850). The further reference is to the leading article in Le 
Pouvoir No. 199, July 19, 1850. p. 40 
56 As stipulated by Article 32 of the Constitution of the French Republic, during the 
recess a permanent commission had to be set up of 25 elected deputies and 
members of the Bureau of the Legislative Assembly. In 1850 this commission 
consisted of 39 members: eleven Bureau members, three questors and 25 elected 
deputies. p. 40 
57 It is not by chance that Engels gives May 1852 as the deadline for any possible 
attempt to upset the Republic. According to the French Constitution (Article 45) 
Louis Napoleon's term of presidency expired on the second Sunday in May 1852 
and he was not re-eligible for another four years (see this volume, p. 572). 
The Bonapartist coup d'état took place on December 2, 1851. p. 40 
58 The Announcement, written by Marx and Engels concerning the delay in printing 
the first issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue (see Note 
2), the material for which was sent from London to Hamburg early in February 
1850,  was forwarded to Hamburg not later than February 20. It was published at 
the beginning of the first number with the following note: "The Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung  is a monthly of no less than five signatures. Subscription for three months 
is 25 silver groschen. Separate numbers ten silver groschen. Responsible publisher 
K.Schramm."  p. 41 

=====第674页=====
Notes 651 
59 The second chapter "June 13, 1849" of Marx's work The Class Struggles in France, 
1848 to 1850, mentioned here (initially published as "1848-1849"), came out 
in the second issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue; 
the third chapter mentioned in the Announcement—"Repercussions of June 13 
on the Continent"—was published in No. 3 of the Revue, entitled "Consequences 
of June 13, 1849". Marx realised his plans for the fourth and partly for the third 
chapter by writing some other material for the Revue, in particular in the 
international reviews written jointly with Engels. p. 41 
60 Chapter IV of Engels' The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution, "To Die 
for the Republic", was published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch­
ökonomische Revue No. 3, which came out about April 17, 1850. p. 41 
61 Marx did not prepare his lectures on political economy for publication as he had 
intended. 
The German Workers' Educational Society in London was founded in February 
1840 by Karl Schapper, Joseph Moll and other members of the League of the Just 
(an organisation of German craftsmen and workers, and also of emigrant workers 
of other nationalities). After the reorganisation of the League of the Just in the 
summer of 1847 and the founding of the Communist League, the latter's local 
communities played the leading role in the Society. During various periods of its 
activity, the Society had branches in working-class districts in London. In 1847 and 
1849-50, Marx and Engels took an active part in the Society's work, but on 
September 17, 1850, Marx, Engels and a number of their followers withdrew 
because the Willich-Schapper sectarian and adventurist faction had temporarily 
increased its influence in the Society causing a split in the Communist League. In 
the late 1850s, Marx and Engels resumed their work in the Educational Society, 
which existed up to 1918, when it was closed down by the British Government. 
p. 41 
62 The article by Wilhelm Wolff was published in No. 4 of the Revue under the title 
"Nachträgliches aus dem Reich" (Additional News from the Empire). 
The article on the financial state of Prussia was to be written by G. A. Bergen­
roth, a German democrat who took part in the 1848-49 revolution. This article was 
however never received by the journal. p. 41 
63 Marx's The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 consists of a series of articles 
written between January and October 1850 specially for the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue and published in it under the general title 
"1848-1849". This is a most important work summing up the results of 
the 1848-49 revolution. In preparation for this work, Marx used French 
newspaper reports, reports published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, and accounts 
given by witnesses—French and German revolutionary refugees, among them 
Ferdinand  Wolff,  the Neue Rheinische Zeitung Paris correspondent, and another 
Communist League member, Sebastian Seiler, who was a stenographer to the 
French National Assembly in 1848 and 1849 and wrote a pamphlet on the events 
of June 13, 1849, which he presented to Marx. Marx was also probably familiar 
with Ledru-Rollin's pamphlet on the same subject. 
According to the original plan (see this volume, p. 41) the work was to consist 
of four articles: "The Defeat of June 1848", "June 13, 1849", "Repercussions of 
June 13 on the Continent" and "Current Situation; England". However, in Nos. 
1, 2 and 3 of the journal only three articles were published: "The Defeat of June 
1848",  "June 13, 1849" and "Consequences of June 13, 1849". The influence of 
the June 1849 events on the Continent and the situation in England were treated 

=====第675页=====
652 Notes 
in other items of the journal, particularly in the international reviews written 
jointly by Marx and Engels. 
The work was not reprinted in full during Marx's lifetime. In 1895 it came out 
in book form in Berlin, with an Introduction by Engels. The title The Class 
Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 was given by Engels and the work has since 
appeared under this title in various languages. In the 1895 edition, Engels added 
the fourth chapter, which included the sections of the third international review 
dealing with events in France (see this volume, pp. 507-09 and 516-25). Engels 
entitled this chapter "The Abolition of Universal Suffrage in 1850". Engels wrote 
to Richard Fischer on February 13, 1895, that the fourth chapter "will serve as a 
factual conclusion to the work as a whole, without which it would have remained a 
fragment". At the same time, the headings of the first three chapters were 
changed: I. "From February to June 1848", II. "From June 1848 to June 13, 
1849",  III. "From June 13, 1849, to March 10, 1850". In the present edition, the 
headings of the first three chapters are given according to the journal, while the 
heading of the fourth chapter is given as in the 1895 edition. 
The publication of the series of Marx's articles drew the attention of the press. 
A short announcement of No. 1 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch­
ökonomische Revue and quotations from Marx's work were published in the 
Freischütz, Hamburg, No. 40, April 2, 1850; a review in the Wochenblatt der 
Hornisse, Cassel, No. 3, April 15, 1850. The preface and the first article were 
reprinted in the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung  Nos.  262, 263 and 264, April 5, 12 and 
19, 1850. On January 1, 1852, the Turn-Zeitung, published by German socialist 
emigrants in the USA, carried an article by Joseph Weydemeyer "On the 
Dictatorship of the Proletariat", written under the direct influence of Marx's 
work, the first work by Marx and Engels in which the term "the dictatorship of the 
proletariat" was used. On the other hand, the idea of the dictatorship of the 
proletariat brought criticism of the author from the petty-bourgeois democrats. 
The Neue Deutsche Zeitung, whose editor was a former "true socialist", Otto 
Liming, published a review (Nos.  148-51,  June  22-23,  25 and 26, 1850) of the four 
numbers of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue with unfa­
vourable comments on this proposition and an incorrect interpretation of it. 
Marx was obliged to write Liming a special letter rebuffing attempts to distort 
and dispute the idea of the dictatorship of the proletariat (see this volume, 
pp. 387-88). 
Marx and Engels attached great importance to the popularisation of the ideas 
contained in The Class Struggles in France among the English workers. Engels 
used this work in his Letters from France published in The Democratic Review 
(see this volume, pp. 17-40) and, on the basis of the first article in the series, wrote 
Two Years of a Revolution, which was published in the same journal (see this 
volume, pp. 353-69). Excerpts from Marx's work were cited by his contemporaries 
(Hermann Becker, Proudhon). 
Excerpts from The Class Struggles in France were first published in English in 
the journal The Marxian, New York, 1921, Vol. 1, No. 2, and it appeared in full as 
a separate edition by Labour News Company, New York, 1924. 
In this volume, the work is published after the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische  Revue text, checked with that of the 1895 edition prepared by 
Engels. The Revue published it from the manuscript and since Marx's handwriting 
was difficult to decipher, mistakes cropped up. In the present edition, all changes 
in style, spelling, punctuation and other corrections made by Engels have been 
taken into account, as well as errata printed in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue (to the first number in the second, and to the second 
and third in the fourth). 

=====第676页=====
Notes 653 
Account has also been taken of the analysis, carried out by the editorial 
commission working on the Marx/Engels,  Gesamtausgabe  (MEGA), erste Abteilung, 
10. Bd. and kindly made available to us, of the marks and corrections made by 
Marx and Engels in their copies of the journal. Engels' corrections apparently date 
from 1895 when he republished The Class Struggles (in the 1895 edition, however, 
they were only partly taken into account). It is also probable that Engels intended 
to republish the Revue in full. Some corrections by Marx and Engels coinciding 
with the errata printed in the Revue have been silently inserted in the text of the 
present edition. Changes in meaning are indicated in footnotes. 
Besides this, obviously inaccurate dates and factual data, including those in the 
1850 and 1895 editions, have also been silently corrected. Comments are not 
usually made on Marx's free translation of quotations, except when the words 
Marx puts in quotation marks are not true quotations but convey the general 
meaning of the cited passages. p. 45 
64 The Paris uprising of June 5 and 6, 1832, was prepared by the Left republicans and 
by secret revolutionary societies including the Society of the Friends of the People. 
The uprising flared up during the funeral of General Lamarque, an opponent of 
Louis Philippe's Government. The insurgent workers threw up barricades and 
defended them with great courage; the red flag was hoisted over them for the first 
time. 
The uprising of Lyons workers in April 1834, directed by the secret republican 
Society of the Rights of Man and the Citizen, was one of the first mass actions by 
the French proletariat. The uprising, supported by republicans in several other 
towns including Paris, was brutally suppressed. 
The Paris uprising of May 12, 1839, in which the revolutionary workers played a 
leading part, was prepared by the secret republican socialist Society of the Seasons 
led by Auguste Blanqui and Armand Barbes; it was suppressed by troops and the 
National Guard. p. 48 
65 Robert Macaire—a character portraying a clever swindler, created by the famous 
French actor Frederick Lemaître and immortalised in the caricatures of Honoré 
Daumier. The figure of Robert Macaire was a biting satire on the domination of 
the financial aristocracy under the July monarchy. p. 50 
66 The reference is to the repercussions of the suppression of the uprising in the free 
city of Cracow (the Cracow Republic) which, by decision of the Congress of 
Vienna, came under the joint control of Austria, Prussia and Russia, who had 
partitioned Poland at the end of the eighteenth century. The insurgents 
succeeded in seizing power in Cracow on February 22, 1846, established a 
National Government of the Polish Republic and issued a manifesto abolishing 
feudal services. The Cracow uprising was suppressed at the beginning of March; 
in November 1846, Austria, Prussia and Russia signed a treaty incorporating 
Cracow into the Austrian Empire. 
On the Swiss Sonderbund see Note 25. 
On the Holy Alliance see Note 23. p. 51 
67 In the spring of 1847 at Buzancais (department of the Indre) the starving workers 
and the inhabitants of neighbouring villages looted storehouses belonging to 
profiteers, which led to a clash between the population and troops. Four of those 
who took part were executed and many others sentenced to hard labour. p 52 
68 The dynastic opposition—an opposition group in the French Chamber of Deputies 
during the July monarchy (1830-48). The group, headed by Odilon Barrot, 
expressed the sentiments of the liberal industrial and commercial bourgeoisie and 

=====第677页=====
654 Notes 
favoured a moderate electoral reform, which they regarded as a means to prevent 
revolution and preserve the Orleans dynasty. 
On the National party see Note 31. p. 53 
69 See Note 38. p. 54 
70 During the first days of the revolution, the workers of Paris demanded that the 
French Republic's flag should be red, the colour of that hoisted in the workers' 
suburbs of Paris during the June uprising of 1832. Bourgeois representatives 
insisted on the tricolour (blue-white-and-red) which had been the national 
standard during the French Revolution and under Napoleon I. It had been the 
emblem of the bourgeois republicans grouped around the newspaper National 
even before 1848. In the end, the tricolour was accepted as the national standard 
with a red rosette fixed to the  flagstaff;  later, the rosette was removed. 
p. 57 
71 In 1848 Le Moniteur universel printed reports on the sittings of the Luxembourg 
Commission alongside official documents. p. 57 
72 The reference is to the sum assigned by the King in 1825 as compensation for 
aristocrats whose property had been confiscated during the French Revolution, 
p. 61 
73 The Mobile Guards, set up by a decree of the Provisional Government on February 
25, 1848, with the secret aim of fighting the revolutionary masses, were used to 
crush the June uprising of the Paris workers. Later they were disbanded on the 
insistence of Bonapartist circles, who feared that if a conflict arose between Louis 
Bonaparte and the republicans, the Mobile Guards would side with the latter. 
p. 62 
74 Lazzaroni—a contemptuous nickname for declassed proletarians, primarily in the 
Kingdom of Naples, who were repeatedly used in the struggle against the liberal 
and democratic movement. p. 62 
75 The Poor Law adopted in England in 1834 provided for only one form of relief 
for the able-bodied poor: workhouses with a prison-Jike regime in which the 
workers were engaged in unproductive, monotonous and exhausting labour.The 
people called these workhouses "Bastilles for the poor". Here and later Marx uses 
the English word "workhouses". p. 63 
76 The reference is to the elections to the National Guard and the Constituent 
Assembly which were tobe held on March 18 and April 9, 1848, respectively. Paris 
workers, grouped around Blanqui, Dézamy and others, insisted on a postpone­
ment of the elections arguing that they should be prepared by thorough 
explanatory work among the population. As a result of the popular demonstration 
on March 17 in Paris, regular troops were withdrawn from the capital (after the 
events of April 16 they were brought back), and elections to the National Guard 
were postponed till April 5 and to the Constituent Assembly till April 23. p §4 
77 See Note 43. p. 65 
78 Commission du pouvoir exécutif (the Executive Commission)—the Government of 
the French Republic set up by the Constituent Assembly on May 10, 1848, to 
replace the Provisional Government which had resigned. It existed until June 24, 
1848,  when Cavaignac's dictatorship was established during the June proletarian 
uprising. Moderate republicans predominated on the Commission; Ledru-Rollin 
was the sole representative of the Left. p. 66 

=====第678页=====
Notes 655 
79 See Note 45. p. 67 
80 Under the decree prohibiting congregations of people adopted by the Constituent 
Assembly on June 7, 1848, the organisation of gatherings and meetings in the 
open was punishable by imprisonment of up to ten years. p. 67 
81 On June 22, 1848, Le Moniteur universel No. 174 in the section "Partie non 
officielle" reported an order of the Executive Commission of June 21 on the 
expulsion of workers between the ages of 17 and 25 from the national workshops 
and their compulsory enrolment in the army. On July 3, 1848, after the 
suppression of the June insurrection of the Paris workers, the government passed 
a decree dissolving the national workshops. p. 67 
82 See Note 50. p. 71 
In the German original, the term Haupt- und Staatsaktion ("principal and 
spectacular action", "main and state action") is used, which has a double meaning. 
First, in the seventeenth and the first half of the eighteenth century, it denoted 
plays performed by German touring companies. The plays were rather formless 
historical tragedies, bombastic and at the same time coarse and farcical. 
Second, this.term can denote major political events. It was used in this sense by 
a trend in German historical science known as "objective historiography". 
Leopold Ranke was one of its chief representatives. He regarded Haupt- und 
Staatsaktion as the main subject-matter. p. 73 
84 The reference is to the by-elections to the Constituent Assembly in Paris on 
September 17, 1848 (to replace former deputies, including those who were 
deprived of their powers after the June insurrection was suppressed). Among the 
newly elected was the revolutionary socialist François Raspail, imprisoned after the 
events of May 15, 1848. p. 75 
85 This refers to a system of general treaties set up by the Congress of Vienna 
(September 1814-June 1815), embracing the whole of Europe, apart from 
Turkey. The Congress decisions helped to restore feudal order, perpetuated the 
political fragmentation of Germany and Italy, sanctioned the incorporation of 
Belgium into Holland and the partition of Poland, and outlined measures to 
combat the revolutionary movement. p. 76 
86 The Projet de constitution présenté à l'Assemblée nationale drafted by the commission 
was submitted to the National Assembly by Marrast on June 19, 1848. The draft 
was published in Le Moniteur universel No. 172, June 20, 1848. A German 
translation of the draft was published in the supplement to No. 24 of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung on June 24, 1848. After the June insurrection, this draft was 
thoroughly revised by its authors in a conservative spirit. The Constitution of the 
French Republic was finally adopted on November 4, 1848. p. 77 
87 
The lily—a heraldic emblem of the Bourbon dynasty; the violet—a Bonapartist 
emblem. p. 81 
88 By a decree of the Senate (Senatus consult) of May 18, 1804, Napoleon I, the 
founder of the Bonaparte dynasty, was proclaimed Emperor of the French. 
During the February uprising of 1848, King Louis Philippe and the monarchist 
circles were compelled to make Guizot and other unpopular ministers tender their 
resignations, and tried to form a government of moderate liberals to save the 
monarchy. On the morning of February 24 Odilon Barrot was authorised to head 

=====第679页=====
656 Notes 
the Cabinet, but Louis Philippe was compelled to abdicate and flee by the victory 
of the popular revolution. The Barrot Ministry survived till that afternoon. 
p. 82 
89 On January 26, 1849, the Minister of Public Works Léon Faucher submitted and 
demanded urgent discussion of a Bill on the right of association, prohibiting clubs. 
The Constituent Assembly, however, refused to discuss the Bill as an urgent 
matter. In spite of opposition from the Left deputies, who demanded the 
Ministry's resignation, accusing it of a breach of the Constitution, the first clause of 
the Bill (better known as the Bill on Clubs) was adopted by the National Assembly 
by a monarchist and moderate republican vote on March 21, 1849 (see this 
volume, p. 569). This decision dealt a serious blow at the freedom of assembly and 
association, primarily at the workers' associations. p. 88 
90 An allusion to the similarity between the schemes for restoring the monarchy in 
December 1848, when Changarnier assumed command of the National Guard 
and the Paris garrison, and the part General Monk played in restoring the Stuarts 
in 1660. p. 89 
91 In April 1849, President Louis Bonaparte and the French Government sent an 
expeditionary corps to Italy under General Oudinot to intervene against the 
Roman Republic proclaimed on February 9, 1849, and to restore the secular 
power of the Pope. On April 30, 1849, the French troops were driven back from 
Rome. The main blow was dealt by Garibaldi's volunteer corps. Oudinot violated 
the terms of the armistice signed by the French, however, and on June 3 started a 
new offensive against the Roman Republic, which had just completed a military 
campaign against Neapolitan troops in the south and was engaged in rebuffing the 
Austrians in the north. After a month of heroic defence, Rome was captured by 
the interventionists and the Roman Republic ceased to exist. p. 92 
92 The reference is to the defeat of the Piedmontese army during the second stage of 
the Austro-Italian war which broke out on March 25, 1848, as a result of the 
national liberation uprising in Lombardy and Venice against Austrian rule. 
However, the Piedmontese were compelled by military setbacks, particularly the 
defeat at Custozza on July 25 and 26, 1848, and the capture of Milan by the 
Austrians, to conclude an onerous armistice with Austria on August 9, 1848. On 
March 12, 1849, under public pressure, Charles Albert, King of Sardinia, 
cancelled the armistice and on March 20 hostilities were resumed. Despite national 
enthusiasm in Austrian-occupied Lombardy and throughout Italy, the Piedmon­
tese army was defeated at Novara on March 23. Charles Albert abdicated. Victor 
Emmanuel II, the new King, concluded an armistice with the Austrians on March 
26, and on August 6 a peace treaty was signed restoring Austrian rule in 
Northern Italy and the Austrian protectorate over a number of states of Central 
Italy (Parma, Tuscany, etc.). 
Engels gives a detailed account of the Austro-Italian war of 1848-49 in his 
articles in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (see present edition, Vols. 7-9). p. 93 
93 Le Comité de salut public (the Committee of Public Safety) established by the 
Convention on April 6, 1793; during the Jacobin dictatorship (June 2, 1793-July 
27, 1794) it was the leading body of the revolutionary government in France. It 
lasted until October 26, 1795. p. 93 
94 See Note 53. p. 97 
95 General Bréa, who commanded some of the troops that suppressed the June 
insurrection of the Paris proletariat, was killed by the insurgents at the gates 

=====第680页=====
Notes 657 
of Fontainebleau on June 25, 1848, for which two of the insurgents were 
executed. p. 97 
96 The reference is to the revolutionary events in Hungary and Germany in the 
spring and summer of 1849. A counter-offensive by the Hungarian revolutionary 
army, which routed the Austrian troops and almost cleared the Austrian invaders 
from the whole country, began in April. Hungary declared its independence on 
April 14, the Habsburg dynasty was officially dethroned and Kossuth elected head 
of state. However, a change unfavourable to the revolutionary movement shortly 
took place in the Hungarian campaign. In mid-June 1849 the Tsarist army 
entered Hungary to assist the Austrian counter-revolution. The Tsarist interven­
tion was in effect approved by the ruling circles of France and England. The 
combined forces of the Habsburgs and the Tsar suppressed the Hungarian 
revolution. 
Almost simultaneously with the counter-offensive by the Hungarians, popular 
uprisings broke out in Saxony, Rhenish Prussia, the Palatinate and Baden in 
defence of the Imperial Constitution drafted by the Frankfurt National Assembly 
but rejected by the King of Prussia and other German princes. On the 
development of these uprisings see Engels' essays The Campaign for the German 
Imperial Constitution (this volume, pp. 147-239). p. 97 
97 The reference is to the bombardment of Rome by Oudinot's expeditionary corps 
on June 3, 1849. Rome was repeatedly subjected to fierce bombardments during 
the French siege, which lasted until July 3, 1849. p. 101 
98 Article V belongs to the introductory part of the Constitution. The articles of the 
principal part of the Constitution are numbered in Arabic figures. p. 101 
99 The meeting of the Montagne leaders was held on the premises of the Fourierists' 
daily La Démocratie pacifique on the evening of June 12, 1849. (Using the ex­
pression friedfertige [pacific] Demokratie, Marx plays on the title of the newspaper 
and its trend.) The participants refused to resort to arms and decided to confine 
themselves to a peaceful demonstration. p. 104 
100 In the manifesto published in Le PeupleNo. 206, June 13, 1849, the Democratic 
Association of the Friends of the Constitution—an organisation of moderate 
bourgeois republicans formed by the National party members during the 
Legislative Assembly election campaign—called upon the citizens of Paris to 
participate in a peaceful demonstration to protest against the "presumptuous 
pretensions" of the executive authorities. p. 105 
101 The Declaration of the Montagne was published in La Réforme and in La Démocratie 
pacifique and also in Proudhon's newspaper Le Peuple No. 206, June 13, 1849. 
p. 105 
102 The events in Paris sparked off an armed uprising of Lyons workers and 
craftsmen on June 15, 1849. The insurgents occupied the Croix-Rousse quarter 
and erected barricades, but were suppressed by troops after several hours of 
staunch struggle. p. 106 
103 On August 10, 1849, the Legislative Assembly adopted a law under which "in­
stigators and supporters of the conspiracy and the attempt of June 13" were 
liable to trial by the Supreme Court. Thirty-four deputies of the Mountain 
(Ledru-Rollin, Félix Pyat and Victor Considérant among them) were deprived of 
their mandates and put on trial (some of them, those who emigrated, were tried by 
default). On June 13, the editorial offices of democratic and socialist news-

=====第681页=====
658 Notes 
papers were raided and the main of these papers were banned. Repressions were 
extended to emigrants residing in France, including Marx, who was ordered to 
leave Paris for the department of Morbihan, a remote swampy area in Brittany (on 
this see present edition, Vol. 9, p. 527). At the end of August 1849 Marx left 
France for England, not wishing to submit to the arbitrary police decision. 
p. 107 
104 The reference is to the Municipal Guard of Paris formed after the July 1830 
revolution and subordinated to the Prefect of Police. It was used to suppress 
popular uprisings and was disbanded after the February 1848 revolution. 
p. 108 
105 In the battle of  Waterloo  (June 18, 1815) Napoleon's army was defeated by British 
and Prussian troops commanded by Wellington and Blücher. p. 109 
The reference is to the commission of three cardinals (who traditionally wore 
scarlet mantles) which, after the suppression of the Roman Republic by the French 
army and relying on support from the interventionists, restored the reactionary 
clerical regime in the papal states. p. 109 
107 See Note 56. p. 109 
108 Alongside Wiesbaden, Ems was a permanent residence of Count Chambord, the 
Legitimist pretender to the French throne (who called himself Henry V). 
p. 110 
109 Louis Philippe, who had fled from France after the February revolution of 1848, 
lived in Claremont. p. 111 
110 "Motu proprio" (of his own motion)—initial words of a special kind of papal 
encyclical adopted without the preliminary approval of the cardinals and usually 
concerning the internal political and administrative affairs of the papal states. 
Here this refers to the statement of Pope Pius IX "To My Beloved Subjects" 
of September 12, 1849 (the French text was published in Le Moniteur universel 
No. 271, September 28, 1849). p. 112 
111 The proposition that the proletarian revolution could only be victorious in several 
advanced capitalist countries simultaneously and not in a single country alone was 
most clearly formulated by Engels in his work Principles of Communism (1847) (see 
present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 351-52). By developing further the Marxist theory and 
drawing on the law of uneven economic and political development of capitalism in 
the era of imperialism, in 1915 Lenin came to the conclusion that under the new 
historical conditions, the victory of the socialist revolution would be possible 
initially in a few or even in a single country. p. 117 
112 The figures do not tally: the text reads 538,000,000 instead of 578,178,000, 
apparently a misprint. This does not, however, affect the general conclusion, for 
the net per capita income is less than 25 francs in both cases. p. 122 
Lagarde, a supporter of the Mountain party, was elected to the Legislative 
Assembly in the by-elections held in the department of the Gironde on October 
14, 1849, to replace the deceased Right-wing deputy Ravez. 
On the elections in the department of the Gard see Note 37. p. 123 
114 See Note 42. p. 123 
115 See Note 39. p. 123 

=====第682页=====
Notes 659 
116 In his message of November 10, 1849, Carlier, the newly appointed Paris Police 
Prefect, called for a "social anti-socialist league" to be set up for the protection of 
"religion, labour, family, property and loyalty". The message was published in Le 
Moniteur universel No. 315, November 11, 1849. p. 124 
117 See Note 41. p. 127 
118 The July column erected in Paris on Bastille Square in 1840 in memory of those 
who fell in the July revolution of 1830 has been decorated with wreaths of 
immortelles ever since the February revolution of 1848. p. 128 
May 4, 1848—the Constituent Assembly was convened; December 20, 1848— 
Louis Bonaparte became President; May 13, 1849—elections were held to the 
Legislative Assembly; July 8, 1849—by-elections took place in Paris as a result of 
which the party of Qrder strengthened its position in the Legislative Assembly. 
p. 130 
120 Coblenz—a city in Western Germany; it was the centre of counter-revolutionary 
emigration during the French Revolution. p. 131 
121 The reference is to the discovery of gold in California in 1848. Along with the 
discovery of rich deposits of gold in Australia in 1851, the Californian discovery 
added to the industrial and stock-exchange agitation in capitalist countries. 
p. 132 
122 Proudhon expressed this point of view in his polemics against the bourgeois 
economist Frederic Bastiat, published in La Voix du  peuple  from November 1849 to 
February 1850 and reproduced in a separate edition which appeared in Paris in 
1850 under the title Gratuité du  crédit.  Discussion entre M. Fr. Bastiat  et M. Proudhon. 
p. 134 
123 In 1797 the British Government issued a special Bank Restriction Act making 
bank-notes legal tender and suspending the payment of gold for them. 
Convertibility was reintroduced only in 1821 in conformity with a law passed in 
1819.  p. 134 
124 See Note 46. p. 135 
125 The reference is to the commission of 17 Orleanists and Legitimists—deputies to 
the Legislative Assembly—appointed by the Minister of the Interior on May 1, 
1850,  to draft a new electoral law. Its members were nicknamed burgraves, a 
name borrowed from the tide of Victor Hugo's historical drama as an allusion to 
their unwarranted claims to power and their reactionary aspirations. The drama is 
set in medieval Germany where the Burggraf was governor of a Burg (city) or a 
district, appointed by the Emperor. p. 136 
126 See Note 48. p. 137 
127 Baiser-Lamourette (Lamourette's kiss)—an allusion to an incident during the 
French Revolution. On July 7, 1792, Lamourette, deputy to the Legislative 
Assembly, proposed to end all party dissension with a fraternal kiss, and the 
representatives of the hostile parties, in accordance with this proposal, embraced 
one another. The following day, however, the struggle among the parties flared 
up with fresh vigour. p. 139 
128 See Note 56. p. 140 
129 The reference is to a new ministry to be appointed if the Bourbon dynasty was 
restored in the person of the Legitimist pretender to the throne, Count 

=====第683页=====
660 Notes 
Chambord. It was to consist of de Levis, de Saint-Priest, Berryer, de Pastoret and 
d'Escars. p. 141 
130 The reference is to the so-called Wiesbaden Manifesto—a circular drawn up in 
Wiesbaden on August 30, 1850, by de Barthélémy, secretary of the Legitimist 
faction in the Legislative Assembly, on the instruction of Count Chambord (de 
Barthélémy, La conspiration légitimiste avouée, in Le Peuple de 1850 No. 24, 
September 22, 1850). The circular was the Legitimists' policy statement in case 
they came to power. Count Chambord declared that he "officially and 
categorically rejects any appeal to the people, because it will signify a negation of 
the great national principle of hereditary monarchy". This statement evoked 
protests among the Legitimists themselves, notably from a group headed by La 
Rochejaquelein, and polemics in the press. p. 141 
131 An allusion to the expiration of Louis Bonaparte's presidential powers. In the text 
the date is not exact. According to the Constitution of the French Republic, 
presidential elections were to be held every four years on the second Sunday in 
May, on which day the powers of the incumbent President expired (see this 
volume, p. 572). p. 142 
The Society of  December  10 (Dix Décembre) —a Bonapartist organisation founded in 
1849 and consisting mainly of declassed elements, political adventurists, the 
reactionary military. Many of its members helped to elect Louis Bonaparte as 
President of the Republic on December 10, 1848, hence its name. This 
organisation played an active part in the Bonapartist coup d'état on December 2, 
1851.  Marx describes the society in his The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte 
(see present edition, Vol. 11). p. 143 
133 The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution  is a series of essays on the history 
of an uprising in support of the Imperial Constitution which took place in Rhenish 
Prussia, the Bavarian Palatinate and Baden in the spring and summer of 1849. 
Engels started working on his essays in July 1849, soon after arriving in 
Switzerland together with the last units of the defeated Baden-Palatinate army. In 
June 1849, while in the Palatinate, Engels wrote an article, "The Revolutionary 
Uprising in the Palatinate and Baden", rebuffing criticism of the insurgents by the 
German conservative and liberal press (see present edition, Vol. 9). Later, in 
Switzerland, he wrote a rough version of the "Repudiation" (ibid.)in answer to 
attempts by some petty-bourgeois emigrants to cast suspicion on the officers and 
men of the volunteer corps commanded by Willich, which consisted mainly of 
workers and was the staunchest unit in the insurgent army. Engels was Willich's 
adjutant. Willich's corps covered the retreat of other units of the Baden-Palatinate 
army after its defeat at Rastatt and was the last to cross the Swiss border on July 12, 
1849. 
Soon after this Engels decided to write his essays. He intended to describe the 
revolutionary struggle during the final stage of the German bourgeois-democratic 
revolution and to criticise the movement's petty-bourgeois leaders, whose 
vacillations and helplessness were one of the main reasons for its failure. In a letter 
from Paris in early August (before his move to London) Marx suggested that he 
stress these aspects and produce the work in pamphlet form. 
His personal experience of the campaign and knowledge of relevant 
documents provided Engels with ample material for analysing the character of the 
movement, the position of various classes and parties in it, and the reasons for its 
failure. He used insurgents' accounts and literature on the Baden-Palatinate 
uprising that had appeared by the end of 1849, including works by the 
petty-bourgeois leaders of the uprising, whom he subjected to criticism. To 

=====第684页=====
Notes 661 
characterise their policy he made use of appeals, proclamations and articles 
published in the Karlsruher Zeitung, the organ of the Baden Provisional 
Government. 
Engels foresaw that his essays would be met with hostility by petty-bourgeois 
emigrants, as they contrasted sharply with the publications and reminiscences they 
were preparing for the press. "My work..." wrote Engels to Jakob Schabelitz in 
August 1849, "will present a different understanding of this history from that 
expressed in other publications that are due to appear." 
At first Engels intended to publish his work in pamphlet form and was helped 
by the Communist League members Jakob Schabelitz and Joseph Weydemeyer to 
find a publisher. But as Marx was making preparations to publish his own journal 
at the time, he changed his mind. In Switzerland Engels apparently devoted most 
of his efforts to collecting the material; in October his departure for England 
interrupted his work. In London he resumed work on the essays and the first two 
chapters—"Rhenish Prussia" and "Karlsruhe"—were published in the first 
number of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue. The work was 
completed in February. Chapters Three and Four under the title "The 
Baden-Palatinate Uprising" were published in abridged form in the Trier'sche 
Volksstimme Nos. 23-27, 30-37 of May 29 to June 7 and June 14 to 30, 1850. 
Marx's and Engels' supporters expressed a high opinion of the literary and 
polemical value of Engels' work. Weerth wrote jokingly to Marx on May 2, 1850: 
"...The articles on Baden could not have been better even if I myself had written 
them. This is, of course, the highest praise I can afford Engels" (G. Weerth, 
Sämtliche Werke, Bd. 5, S. 356). 
The petty-bourgeois leaders, on the contrary, received Engels' essays with 
indignation. Otto Lüning's review of four numbers of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue published in the Neue Deutsche Zeitung of June 22 to 26, 
1850,  criticised Engels' work in crude terms. Ludwig Simon came out with a review 
in the same vein (Deutsche Monatsschrift für Politik, Wissenschaft, Kunst und Leben, 
Bremen, 1851, 2. Bd., April-Juni, S. 170-74). 
The essays were not reprinted during Engels' lifetime. They were reprinted in 
full by Mehring in 1902 in the collection Aus dem literarischen Nachlass von Karl 
Marx, Friedrich Engels und Ferdinand Lassalle. On the basis of documents in his 
possession, Mehring pointed out several alterations made by the Hamburg 
publishers (Schuberth and Co.) for censorship reasons. In this volume these 
alterations are indicated in footnotes. 
Misprints in numbers 1-3 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische 
Revue corrected in the errata given in numbers 2 and 4 of the Revue have been 
taken into account in this volume. At the end of the last errata it was stated, in 
particular, "Besides, in numbers 2 and 3, in the articles 'The Palatinate' and 'To 
Die for the Republic', the general title 'The Campaign for the German Imperial 
Constitution' was missing, and the name of the author—  Frederick  Engels —was not 
given at the end of the article." In the first number, with the general introduction 
and Chapters One and Two—"Rhenish Prussia" and "Karlsruhe"—the general 
title and the author's name were given. The name was also given at the end of 
Chapter Three: "The Palatinate" (second number). Due account has also been 
taken of notes and marks made by Engels in his copy of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue (see Note 63), which are indicated in footnotes. 
p. 147 
134 The Imperial Constitution was adopted by the Frankfurt National Assembly on 
March 28, 1849. While proclaiming a number of civil liberties and introducing 
national central institutions, the Constitution nevertheless shaped the united 
23-1124 

=====第685页=====
662 Notes 
German state as a monarchy. On March 28 the Prussian King Frederick William 
IV was elected "Emperor of the Germans" by the Frankfurt National Assembly. 
Prussian-oriented liberal deputies of the Assembly in particular insisted on 
handing the imperial crown to the Hohenzollerns. However, Frederick William 
IV refused to accept the offer. Apart from the Prussian Government, those of 
almost all the larger German states (including Saxony, Bavaria and Hanover) 
refused to recognise the Constitution. Afraid of revolutionary action, liberals and 
democrats in the Frankfurt National Assembly proved incapable of upholding the 
Constitution. The people themselves were its sole defender, and in the spring 
and summer of 1849, they started an armed struggle led by petty-bourgeois 
democrats. Despite its limitations, the Constitution was seen by the people as the 
only remaining achievement of the revolution. On May 3, an armed uprising 
broke out in Dresden and later in a number of towns in Rhenish Prussia; however, 
these uprisings were rapidly suppressed by troops. The most powerful struggle in 
support of the Imperial Constitution developed in the Bavarian Palatinate and 
Baden, where workers, urban petty bourgeoisie and peasants rose in its defence. 
They were soon joined by military units, especially mounted units. In the middle 
of May provisional governments were set up, Leopold, the Grand Duke of Baden, 
fled, and the separation of the Palatinate from Bavaria was proclaimed. The 
leadership of the movement, however, fell mainly into the hands of moderate 
petty-bourgeois democrats, who were hesitant and refused to proclaim a 
republic. They chose passive defensive tactics confining the movement to local 
limits and preventing the uprising from spreading outside the Palatinate 
and Baden. Nevertheless, the combined Palatinate-Baden insurgent army, in 
which there were many workers' units, put up a strong resistance to the 
Prussian-Bavarian-Württemberg troops who greatly exceeded the insurgents 
in numbers and strength. The insurgents' last stronghold— Rastatt —fell 
on July 23. The uprisings in the Palatinate and Baden in the spring and sum­
mer of 1849 were the closing events of the German revolution. p. 149 
135 The March Association, thus named after the March 1848 revolution in Germany, 
was founded in Frankfurt am Main at the end of November 1848 by Left-wing 
deputies to the Frankfurt National Assembly and had branches in various towns in 
Germany. Fröbel, Simon, Wesendock, Eisenmann, Vogt and other petty-
bourgeois democratic leaders of the March associations confined themselves to 
revolutionary phrase-mongering and showed indecision and inconsistency in the 
struggle against counter-revolutionaries, for which Marx and Engels criticised 
them sharply (see present edition, Vol. 8, p. 185). p. 150 
136 The reference is to a legend of the Swiss Confederation the origin of which dates 
back to the agreement between the three mountain cantons of Uri, Schwyz and 
Unterwaiden in 1291. The legend runs that representatives of the three cantons 
met in the Grütli (or Rütli) meadow in 1307 and took an oath of loyalty in the joint 
struggle against Austrian rule. p. 150 
137 See Note 11. p. 150 
138 Presumably Engels himself intended to write this work to complement his essays 
on the campaign for the German Imperial Constitution, but no article on this was 
ever published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue. 
139 From May 3 to 9, 1849, Dresden, the capital of Saxony, was the scene of an armed 
uprising caused by the refusal of the Saxon King to recognise the Imperial 

=====第686页=====
Notes 663 
Constitution. The insurgents captured a considerable part of the city, with the 
workers playing the most active part in the barricade fighting, and formed a 
Provisional Government headed by the radical democrat Samuel Tzschirner. The 
moderate line pursued by the other members of the Provisional Government, the 
desertion of the bourgeois civic militia and the treacherous actions of the 
bourgeoisie in Leipzig where they suppressed the workers' solidarity movement, 
weakened the insurgents' resistance to the counter-revolutionary forces. The 
uprising was crushed by Saxon and Prussian troops. The Russian revolutionary 
Mikhail Bakunin, the German working-class leader Stephan Born and the 
composer Richard Wagner took an active part in the uprising. p. 154 
140 On May 6 and 7, 1849, workers and other democratic elements in Breslau 
(Wroclaw) erected barricades in protest to the dispatch of artillery to suppress 
the Dresden uprising, but they were defeated by vastly superior counter­
revolutionary forces. p. 154 
141 See Note 6. p. 155 
142 The Napoleonic Code (Code Napoléon) —Napoleon's 1804 civil code which he 
introduced into the conquered regions of Western and South-Western Germany. 
It remained in force in the Rhine Province after its incorporation into Prussia in 
1815.  p. 155 
Prussian Law (Allgemeines Landrecht für die Preussischen Staaten) was promulgated 
in 1794. It included criminal, state, civil, administrative and ecclesiastical law 
and bore the distinct imprint of obsolete feudal legal standards. 
After the annexation of the Rhine Province to Prussia in 1815, the Prussian 
Government tried to introduce Prussian Law into various legal spheres there to 
replace the French bourgeois codes in force in the province. This was done by 
introducing a series of laws, edicts and instructions aimed at restoring the feudal 
privileges of the nobility (primogeniture), Prussian criminal and marriage 
law, etc. These measures were resolutely opposed in the province and were 
repealed after the March revolution by special decrees issued on April 15, 
1848.  p. 156 
144 The army reserve (Landwehr) was formed in Prussia at the time of the struggle 
against Napoleonic rule. In the 1840s it was made up of persons up to 40 years of 
age who had served three years in the army and been on the reserve list for at least 
two years. As distinct from the regular troops, the army reserve was mobilised only 
in special emergencies (war or threat of war). p. 157 
On May 1, 1849, the Cologne Municipal Council, composed mainly of repre­
sentatives of the liberal bourgeoisie, issued an appeal for the convocation, on May 
5, 1849, of a meeting of all the municipal councils of the Rhine Province to 
discuss the new situation in Prussia resulting from the dissolution by the Prussian 
Government on April 27 of the Second Chamber of the Prussian Provincial Diet, 
which had approved the Imperial Constitution despite the King's intention to 
reject it. The Prussian Government banned the meeting. Even so, the Cologne 
Municipal Council convoked a congress in Cologne of delegates from the Rhine 
cities on May 8, 1849. The congress came out in support of the Imperial 
Constitution and demanded that the dissolved Diet be convoked. It was made 
clear that, if the Prussian Government ignored the resolution of the congress 
(Engels quotes it below), the Rhine Province would consider secession from 
Prussia. This threat, however, proved empty as it was not backed up by resolute 

=====第687页=====
664 Notes 
action on the part of the liberal majority of the congress, which rejected a proposal 
for arming the people and offering resistance to the authorities. p. 158 
I« See Note 8. p. 158 
147 The description of revolutionary events given below deals mainly with Elberfeld, 
which was one of the main centres of the uprising in Rhenish Prussia in defence of 
the Imperial Constitution. 
The Elberfeld uprising involved mainly workers and petty-bourgeois strata. It 
flared up on May 9, 1849, and served as a signal for armed struggle in a number 
of towns in the Rhine Province (Düsseldorf, Iserlohn, Solingen and others). The 
immediate cause of the uprising was the Prussian Government's attempt to 
suppress the revolutionary uprising on the Rhine with arms, crush democratic 
organisations and the press and disarm those army reserve units which had 
refused to take orders and backed the demand for the Imperial Constitution (the 
army reserve had been mobilised by the Prussian Government itself). After the 
expulsion of the Prussian troops who tried to capture the city, power in Elberfeld 
passed into the hands of the Committee of Public Safety, composed mainly of 
moderate democrats and liberals. In contrast to Elberfeld, the uprising that broke 
out in Düsseldorf on May 9 was suppressed by troops on the following day. In 
Elberfeld and other towns the insurgents were able to hold out longer, p. 159 
148 Engels arrived in Elberfeld on May 11, 1849, from insurgent Solingen, where, the 
day before, he had formed a detachment of workers to help the Elberfeld 
insurgents. In Elberfeld he worked for a reform of the bourgeois civic militia, the 
imposition of a war tax on the bourgeoisie and the extensive arming of workers 
with a view to creating the nucleus of a Rhenish revolutionary army and uniting 
localised uprisings. These efforts were counteracted by the Committee of Public 
Safety, in which considerable influence was wielded by representatives of the 
bourgeoisie. 
Under pressure from bourgeois circles, Engels was deported from the city on 
the morning of May 15. On May 17, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung carried an article, 
entitled "Elberfeld", describing the situation in the insurgent city and Engels' 
activities there (see present edition, Vol. 9). Later an action was brought against 
Engels for his part in the Elberfeld uprising (see this volume, pp. 602-04). Engels 
also touches on his stay in Elberfeld during the uprising in this series of articles. 
p. 163 
149 The arsenal in Prüm was stormed by democrats and workers from Trier and 
neighbouring townships on May 17 and 18, 1849. Their aim was to seize the arms 
and extend the uprising in defence of the Imperial Constitution to the areas on 
the left bank of the Rhine. The insurgents succeeded in capturing the arsenal, but 
government troops soon arrived on the scene and the movement was suppressed. 
p. 163 
150 The tricolour—the black-red-and-gold flag, symbolising Germany's national unity, 
was the banner of the movement in support of the Imperial Constitution. 
p. 163 
151 As a result of behind-the-scenes negotiations between a delegation of the 
Elberfeld bourgeoisie and the government, and the defeatist attitude of the 
Committee of Public Safety, the Committee was dissolved by the city authorities on 
May 16, 1849. On the night of May 17, the workers' detachments, including 
reinforcements from other towns, were led out of Elberfeld under false pretences 
and the previous order was restored in the city. The failure of the Elberfeld 
uprising brought the triumph of reaction throughout Rhenish Prussia, p. 169 

=====第688页=====
Notes 665 
152 See Note 3. p. 171 
Immediately after the Neue Rheinische Zeitung ceased publication, Marx and 
Engels went to Frankfurt am Main and then to insurgent Baden and the 
Palatinate. Their attempts to convince the Left deputies to the Frankfurt As­
sembly and members of the Baden and Palatinate provisional governments of 
the need to extend the movement throughout Germany, to mount a resolute 
offensive, and to persuade the Assembly openly to join in the uprising proved, 
however, unavailing. In late May 1849, Marx and Engels arrived in Bingen 
(Hesse) where they parted. Marx went on to France to establish contacts with 
French democrats and socialists, while Engels returned to the Palatinate to take a 
direct part in the impending armed struggle against the concentrating counter­
revolutionary troops. Besides Marx, two other editors of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, Ferdinand Wolff and Ernst Dronke, went to Paris, where the Montagne 
party and the revolutionary clubs were preparing for mass actions against the 
ruling party of Order (see this volume, pp. 104-09). p. 171 
154 On May 12, 1849, in conditions of general popular ferment and mounting unrest 
in the army, the leaders of democratic organisations assembled in Offenburg 
(Baden) and took preparatory measures for calling a popular meeting. The 
decisions of the assembly, reflecting the attitude of the moderate democrats, were 
confined to a demand for the resignation of the reactionary Beck Ministry and the 
convocation of a Constituent Assembly. By the time the popular meeting opened 
on the following day, however, news had arrived that the army had sided with the 
people everywhere, that insurgent garrisons had captured the Rastatt fortress on 
May 11 and later Karlsruhe and other cities, and that Grand Duke Leopold had 
fled. As a result, more radical decisions were adopted at the meeting, which voted 
for the dissolution of the Baden Diet, universal arming of the people, liberation of 
political prisoners, the return of refugees, and other far-reaching measures. At 
the same time, the republican wing failed to secure approval for a resolution on 
the introduction of a republican government. A Baden provincial committee was 
set up, composed mainly of moderate democrats. The committee soon formed a 
provisional government, the Executive Committee, headed by Lorenz Peter 
Brentano. Its policy, however, was very moderate and irresolute, and gave rise to 
differences between the moderate democrats and more radical elements. On June 
10, the Constituent Assembly was called in Karlsruhe, which consolidated the 
dominant position of the moderate democrats. Brentano was again appointed 
head of the provisional government and vested with extensive powers, p. 172 
155 The Senate was one of the governing bodies of the free city of Frankfurt; it had 
both legislative and administrative functions. p. 173 
156 The Prussian Major Schill first distinguished himself during brave guerrilla 
actions in the war against Napoleon's army in 1806-07. In April 1809, during 
Napoleon's war against Austria, Schill, leading a regiment of hussars and a 
company of riflemen, set out from Berlin on his own account with the aim of 
drawing "neutral" Prussia into a war against Napoleonic rule. After an abortive 
attempt to capture Magdeburg, he tried to fight his way to the Baltic, hoping for 
British support from the sea. At the end of May, his forces were routed at 
Stralsund, Schill himself falling in action. p. 174 
157 Fickler was sent to Württemberg for talks to ensure the neutrality of the 
Württemberg royal government. On June 3, 1849, he was arrested in Stuttgart by 
the Württemberg authorities. p. 175 

=====第689页=====
666 Notes 
158 The Club of  Resolute  Progress,  founded in Karlsruhe on June 5,1849, was the more 
radical wing of the petty-bourgeois democratic republicans (Struve, Tzschirner, 
Heinzen and others) discontented with the conciliatory policy of the Brentano 
Government and the increasing strength of the Rightist elements within it. The 
Club suggested that Brentano should extend the revolution beyond Baden and 
the Palatinate and introduce radicals into his government. Brentano refused, so 
the Club tried, on June 6, to force the government to comply by threatening an 
armed demonstration. The government, however, supported by the civic militia 
and other armed units, proved the stronger party in the conflict. The Club of 
Resolute Progress was disbanded. p. 175 
159 The six scourges of humanity was the phrase used by Gustav Struve in a letter 
published in the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung No. 238 (supplement), October 26, 
1849,  referring to the monarchy, the hereditary nobility, officialdom, the standing 
army, the clergy, and finance magnates. p. 177 
160 The Rastatt fortress on the Murg was the scene of the last major battle of the 
insurgent army against Prussian and imperial forces (June 29 and 30, 1849). The 
13,000 Baden soldiers held out for 24 hours against the 60,000-strong enemy, but 
were ultimately forced to retreat to the Swiss border to avoid encirclement. Engels 
describes the battle in Chapter Four of his essays (see this volume, pp. 227-31). 
p. 178 
161 In the Ständehaus (House of the Social Estates) in Karlsruhe sittings of the 
Brentano Government were held. p. 179 
At Waghäusel, a major battle took place on June 21, 1849, between the insurgent 
army and Prussian troops who had captured the Palatinate and invaded Baden. 
By a vigorous counterattack the insurgents held up the Prussians, thus avoiding 
encirclement, but they were unable to prevent the Prussian army from advancing. 
Engels describes the battle in Chapter Four of his essays (see this volume, p. 219). 
p. 179 
163 This refers to the strategic miscalculation by Görgey, the commander-in-chief of 
the Hungarian revolutionary army, in refusing to take advantage of the victories 
scored by the Hungarians during their spring offensive in 1849 to extend the 
fighting to Austria and launch operations to capture Vienna (see Note 96). 
p. 184 
164 The Central Committee of German Democrats was elected at the Second Democratic 
Congress, held in Berlin from October 26 to 30, 1848. It included d'Ester, 
Reichenbach and Hexamer. Marx was handed a mandate of the Central 
Committee by d'Ester at the end of May 1849. 
The French social-democrats—-the party of petty-bourgeois democrats and 
socialists grouped round the newspaper La Réforme (see Note 50). 
At the time of Marx's trip to France a clash was brewing between the 
Montagne, which represented the Réforme party in the Legislative Assembly, and 
conservative circles. The Montagne took action on June 13, 1849. p. 186 
165 The Fruchthalle —a covered fruit and vegetable market in Kaiserslautern where 
the central administration of the Palatinate revolutionary Provisional Government 
had its offices in 1849. p. 192 
166 Chevaux-légers (literally: light horses)—light cavalry armed with sabres, pistols and 
carbines in some West-European countries. p. 193 

=====第690页=====
Notes 667 
On June 14, 1848, Berlin workers and craftsmen, outraged by the National 
Assembly's renunciation of the March revolution, took the arsenal by storm in an 
attempt to uphold the revolutionary gains. This action, however, was spontaneous 
and unorganised, and army reinforcements and units of the bourgeois civic militia 
were soon able to push back and disarm the people. p. 196 
168 An allusion to the participation of some N.C.O.s of Willich's German refugee 
volunteer corps in France's colonial war in Algeria, which ended on the eve of the 
February 1848 revolution. The war. waged with intermissions from 1830 to 1847, 
aimed at the conquest and subjugation of Algeria. p. 197 
169 An allusion to "wailers" (Heuler) —the name the republican democrats in 
Germany applied to the moderate constitutionalists who, in turn, called their 
opponents "agitators" (Wühler). p. 201 
170 See Note 19. p. 207 
171 An allusion to the statement made by Frederick William IV in his speech at the 
opening of the First United Diet on April 11, 1847, that he was "heir to an 
unimpaired crown" and must pass it on unimpaired to his successors (see Der Erste 
Vereinigte Landtag in Berlin 1847, erster Teil). p. 209 
172 See Note 158. p. 214 
173 This refers to a speech Franz Heinrich Zitz, an extreme Left-wing deputy to the 
Frankfurt parliament, made at a meeting in Frankfurt am Main on September 17, 
1848,  on the eve of the popular uprising sparked off by the parliament's 
ratification of the Malmö armistice, which jeopardised the liberation movement in 
Schleswig-Holstein and Germany's national interests. Zitz condemned the 
parliament's stand and objected to sending petitions to it, declaring that the time 
had come for resolute action. p. 225 
174 See Note 61. p. 226 
175 The Cologne Workers' Association—a workers' organisation founded by Andreas 
Gottschalk on April 13, 1848. By early May its members numbered about 5,000, 
mostly workers and artisans. The Association was led by the President and the 
committee, which consisted of representatives of various trades, and had several 
branches. 
Most of the Association's leaders (Gottschalk, Anneke, Schapper, Moll, Less-
ner, Jansen, Röser, Nothjung, Bedorf) were members of the Communist League. 
After Gottschalk's arrest, Moll was elected President (on July 6). On October 16, 
Marx agreed to assume this post temporarily at the request of Association 
members. From February to May 1849 the post was held by Schapper. 
In the beginning, the Workers' Association was influenced by Gottschalk, who, 
ignoring the proletariat's tasks in the democratic revolution, pursued a policy of 
boycotting elections to representative bodies and came out against an alliance with 
democratic forces. He combined ultra-Left talk with very moderate actions 
(petitions, etc.) and support for the demands of the workers affected by craft 
prejudices. From the outset, Gottschalk's sectarian attitude was challenged by the 
supporters of Marx and Engels. At the end of June 1848 they brought about a 
radical change in the Association's activities, making it a centre of revolutionary 
agitation among the workers, and from the autumn of that year, also among the 
peasants. By studying Marx's works, members of the Association familiarised 

=====第691页=====
668 Notes 
themselves with scientific communism. The Association maintained contacts with 
other workers' and democratic organisations. 
In January and February 1849, Marx, Schapper and other leaders reorganised 
the Association with a view to strengthening it. On February 25, new Rules were 
adopted, proclaiming the Association's main task as raising the class consciousness 
of the workers. 
The mounting counter-revolution and intensified police reprisals prevented 
the Cologne Workers' Association from continuing its work of rallying and 
organising the working masses. After the Neue Rheinische Zeitung ceased publi­
cation and Marx, Schapper and other leaders of the Association left Cologne, it 
gradually turned into an ordinary workers' educational society. p. 226 
176 On September 26, 1848, the authorities, frightened by the upsurge of the 
revolutionary and democratic movement in Cologne, declared a state of siege in 
the city to ensure "security of property and person". An order of the military 
command prohibited all associations pursuing "political and social aims", banned 
meetings, disbanded and disarmed the civic militia, introduced courts-martial and 
suspended publication of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung and several other democratic 
newspapers. A protest campaign forced the Cologne military authorities to lift the 
state of siege on October 2. On October 12, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung resumed 
publication. p. 226 
177 On June 23, 1849, during the retreat of the Baden-Palatinate insurgent army, one 
of its units mutinied. The soldiers, led by their commander Thome, made an 
attempt to arrest Mieroslawski and Sigel and turn them over to the Prussian army. 
p. 226 
178 The Baden Constituent Assembly held its sittings in Freiburg (the last on July 2, 
1849) after moving there from Karlsruhe at the end of June. p. 233 
179 This refers to the battle of Hohenlinden (December 3, 1800), in which General 
Jean Victor Moreau of the French Republic defeated the Austrian army.  9„fi 
180 On September 18, 1849, a German Refugee Committee was set up on Marx's 
initiative under the auspices of the German Workers' Educational Society in 
London. Besides Marx and other members of the Communist League, it included 
a number of petty-bourgeois democrats. At a meeting of the Society on November 
18, the Committee was transformed into the Social-Democratic Refugee 
Committee, the aim being to dissociate the proletarian section of the London 
refugees from the petty-bourgeois elements. The new Committee included only 
members of the Communist League: Karl Marx (who was elected chairman), 
Heinrich Bauer, August Willich, Karl Pfänder and Frederick Engels (see 
document on pp. 599-601 of this volume). Besides providing material assistance 
for the refugees, predominantly those belonging to the proletarian wing, the 
Committee played an important part in restoring ties between members of the 
Communist League, in uniting the supporters of Marx and Engels in London and 
in reorganising the Communist League. In mid-September 1850, following the 
split in the Communist League, when most members of the Educational Society, to 
which the Committee was accountable, came under the influence of the 
Willich-Schapper sectarian group, Marx and Engels, together with their followers, 
withdrew from the Committee (see this volume, pp. 483 and 631-32). p. 240 
181 Appended to the letter were certificates—signed by Ferenc Pulszky, the 
Committee's agent in London in the spring of 1849—testifying that the persons 

=====第692页=====
Notes 669 
named belonged to the unit of Hungarian hussars that had been sent, via Sardinia, 
to reinforce the Hungarian revolutionary army, but arrived too late to join it and, 
after the suppression of the Hungarian revolution, was forced to return to 
London. p. 240 
182 The reviews of Marx and Engels published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue contain a critical analysis of a number of historical, 
sociological and economic works that appeared after the revolution of 1848-49 
and influenced the views of bourgeois ideologists. Their criticism is also directed 
against the petty-bourgeois participants in and interpreters of these events. 
The reviews were published unsigned in the literary section of the second and 
fourth issues of the journal. In 1892 Engels wrote in his biographical essay on 
Marx: "...Besides he wrote (together with Engels) a number of literary and 
political reviews." In 1886, the journal Die Neue Zeit, which for a long time had the 
benefit of Engels' counsel and direction, reprinted the review of the pamphlets by 
Chenu and de la Hodde, giving Marx and Engels as the authors. It may be 
assumed that some of the reviews, such as those dealing with the books of Girardin 
and Guizot, were written by Marx, while the review of Carlyle's book was probably 
by Engels, who had discussed this author's writings previously (see present edition, 
Vol. 3, pp. 444-68). Since this cannot be established with absolute certainty, 
however, all the reviews in this volume are published as the joint works of Marx 
and Engels. 
Appended to the first group of reviews, published in the second issue, was an 
editorial note saying: "All the works indicated here may be obtained in London at 
Mr. D.Nutt's, 270, the Strand, two doors from St. Clement's Church." 
From the reviews belonging to this group, that of Daumer's book was 
published in English in the collection: K.Marx and F.Engels, On Religion, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1966, and the review of Guizot's book in the 
collection: K.Marx, Selected  Essays,  Parsons, London, 1926. p. 241 
183 Presumably a case of double irony: by calling Daumer's statements in the book 
suras (the Arab name for chapters in the Koran), the authors stress their assertive 
didacticism reminiscent of religious preaching, and at the same time hint at 
Daumer's book Mahomed und sein Werk, Hamburg, 1848 (to which there is a direct 
reference later in the review). p. 243 
The prophecies of Nostradamus, the famous sixteenth-century French astrologer 
and physician-in-ordinary to Charles IX, were couched in verse and were ex­
tremely vague and cryptic. 
Second sight in Scotsmen—the ability, attributed by superstition to Scottish 
highlanders, to divine the future and events concealed from ordinary people. 
Animal magnetism—the theory of the Austrian physician Friedrich Anton 
Mesmer (1734-1815) that a man's behaviour can be influenced by hypnotism 
("animal magnetism"). p. 245 
185 In St. Paul's Church, Frankfurt am Main, the Frankfurt National Assembly (see 
Note 8) met in 1848 and 1849. p. 247 
186 On March 28, 1849, the Frankfurt National Assembly, having drawn up an 
all-German Imperial Constitution and elected—by the votes of the liberals and 
moderate democrats—the Prussian King Frederick William IV "Emperor of the 
Germans", sent a deputation to Berlin to offer him the Crown. Frederick William 
rejected it, however (announcing his final decision on April 28, 1849), pleading 
that the Imperial Constitution was unacceptable because of its revolutionary 
origin and contents. p. 247 

=====第693页=====
670 Notes 
187 On June 26, 1849, the liberal deputies of the Frankfurt National Assembly, who 
had walked out after the Prussian King's refusal to accept the Imperial Crown, 
met in Gotha for a three-day conference which resulted in the formation of the 
Gotha party. It expressed the interests of the pro-Prussian German bourgeoisie 
and supported the policy of Prussian ruling circles aimed at uniting Germany 
under the hegemony of Hohenzollern Prussia. p. 249 
In his pamphlet Simon wrote that the deputies to the Frankfurt National As­
sembly who had not renounced their powers (most of them belonged to the Left 
wing) had condemned the Württemberg King's denunciation of the Imperial 
Constitution and pronounced their solidarity with the armed struggle waged in 
the Palatinate and Baden in defence of the Constitution. In particular, Simon 
mentioned the resolution adopted by the remnants of the Assembly on June 8, 
1849,  after it had moved from Frankfurt to Stuttgart. It placed Baden under the 
protection of the Empire, i.e. the Assembly. The resolution was, however, no more 
than a declaration. Fearing a broad popular movement, the remaining members 
of the Assembly gave no specific support to the insurgents and refused to call the 
insurrectionary troops of Baden and the Palatinate to their defence. 
p. 249 
189 This refers to the establishment of the Bank of England (1694). The founders 
loaned its fixed capital to the government. This was the beginning of the national 
debt. p. 252 
190 The  parliaments  in France—judicial institutions that came into being  in the  Middle 
Ages.  The Paris parliament was the highest court of appeal and also performed 
important administrative and political functions, such as registering of royal 
decrees, without which they had no legal force. The parliaments enjoyed the right 
to remonstrate against government decrees. In the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries their members were officials of high birth called the "nobility of the 
mantle". They ultimately became a bulwark of Right-wing opposition to 
absolutism and of resistance to moderate reforms, and were abolished during the 
French Revolution, in 1790. p. 253 
191 The States General—a body representing the social estates in medieval France. It 
consisted of clergymen, nobles and burghers. Convened in May 1789, after a 
175-year interval, at a time when the bourgeois revolution was maturing in 
France, the States General were on June 17 transformed by decision of the 
deputies of the third estate into the National Assembly, which on July 9 
proclaimed itself the Constituent Assembly and became the supreme organ of 
revolutionary France. p. 253 
192 This refers  to popular uprisings against Spanish rule that took place  in Lisbon  in 
1640,  in Naples  in 1647 and 1648 and in  Messina between  1674 and 1676. 
p. 254 
193 The reference is to the Reform Bill of 1832, which was directed against the 
political monopoly of the landed and financial aristocracy and gave representa­
tives of the industrial bourgeoisie access to Parliament. The proletariat and the 
petty bourgeoisie, the main forces in the struggle for the reform, received no 
electoral rights. p. 255 
194 The international reviews in the second, the fourth and the double fifth-sixth 
issues of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue were simply 
entitled "Revue" ("Review") and were not signed. The authors provided the third 

=====第694页=====
Notes 671 
of these reviews with the subheading "May to October". In the present edition the 
editors have therefore added corresponding subheadings to the first and second 
reviews. Numerous passages in the works and letters of Marx and Engels show 
that they wrote the reviews together. 
The first review was intended for the first issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue (see Engels' letter to Jakob Schabelitz of December 22, 
1849) and the greater part of it dated January 31,1850, but for lack of space the 
review was transferred to the second issue, the reader being notified of this by an 
editorial note. The closing part of the review was written in February. 
Excerpts from the first review were first published in English in the collection: 
K. Marx and F. Engels, On Colonialism, Foreign Languages Publishing House, 
Moscow, 1960. In the present edition, account has been taken of the corrections in 
the list of misprints appended to the fourth issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, as 
well as those made later by Engels in his copy of the journal (see Note 63). 
p. 257 
195 See Note 16 p. 257 
196 See Note 20. p. 257 
197 The jjnited Diet—an assembly of representatives from the eight Provincial Diets 
of Prussia, similarly based on the estate principle. It sanctioned new taxes and 
loans,  discussed Bills, and had the right to petition the King. 
The First United Diet, which opened on April 11, 1847, was dissolved in June, 
following its refusal to vote a new loan. The Second United Diet, convened on 
April 2, 1848, passed a law on elections to the Prussian National Assembly and 
sanctioned the loan. The United Diet session closed on April 10, 1848. p. 258 
198 This refers to the trials of Benedikt Waldeck in Berlin (see Note 14) and Karl 
Grün in Trier. The two were Left-wing deputies to the Prussian National 
Assembly who were put on trial in 1849 for their political activities. The trials 
showed that the Prussian authorities were using forgeries to fight their opponents. 
On the other hand, Waldeck and Grün were doing everything to prove their 
loyalty to the Prussian Government. p. 258 
199 This refers to Frederick William I V's attempts, supported by the sovereigns of the 
Prussian Union (see Note 12), to unite Germany under Prussian hegemony, to the 
exclusion of Austria (the plan for a "Little Germany", as against the plan 
for a "Great Germany" advocated by pro-Austrian circles). These attempts were 
backed by the liberals who had walked out of the Frankfurt National Assembly 
and formed, in June 1849, the so-called Gotha party (see Note 187). The latter 
took part in the elections to the German parliament which was to revise the draft 
German Constitution drawn up by the Frankfurt National Assembly in a way 
convenient for Prussian ruling quarters. The parliament met in Erfurt on March 
20, 1850, but counteraction by the Austrian Court and the Russian Emperor 
forced the Prussian Government temporarily to abandon its unification plans and 
dissolve the Erfurt parliament (April 29, 1850). p. 258 
200 See Note 185. p. 258 
201 See Note 9. p. 259 
202 The reference is to the Preussische Seehandlungsgesellschaft (Prussian Maritime 
Trading Company), a trade and credit society founded in 1772 and enjoying a 
number of important state privileges. It granted large credits to the government 

=====第695页=====
672 Notes 
and from 1820 actually acted as its banker and broker. In 1904 it was made the 
official Prussian State Bank. p. 259 
203 The  borderers  were inhabitants of what was known as the Military Border Area, i.e. 
the southern border region of the Austrian Empire under a military administra­
tion. The area included part of Croatia and Southern Hungary. Its population was 
made up of Serbs, Croats and other nationalities who were allotted land in return 
for military service, the fulfilment of other obligations and payment of duties. The 
borderers often rose in revolt against this system of military and feudal 
oppression. ' p. 259 
204 This refers to the rupture of diplomatic relations between Russia and Turkey in 
the autumn of 1849 caused by the Turkish Government's refusal to extradite the 
Polish and Hungarian political refugees as demanded by the Russian and Austrian 
emperors. Unwilling to incur the hostility of Britain and France, Nicholas I 
thought it wiser to settle his conflict with Turkey. Towards the end of the year 
diplomatic relations were resumed. p. 260 
Saint-Jean d'Acre —a fortress in Syria—was taken by the Egyptians in 1832, 
during the Turco-Egyptian war of 1831-33. 
San Juan de Ulua—a fortress in Veracruz, Mexico, the Spaniards' last strong­
hold during Mexico's war of independence—was taken in 1825. p. 260 
206 The continental blockade of the British Isles was proclaimed by Napoleon in 
November 1806. All the European states dependent on Napoleonic France were 
forced to join. Russia and Prussia acceeded in 1807 (under the Peace of Tilsit) and 
Austria in 1809. The forced rupture of trade with Britain greatly harmed Russia's 
economic interests, which was one of the causes of the Franco-Russian war of 
1812.  p. 260 
207 The Federal Council—the central executive of the Swiss Republic, a body 
established under the Constitution of September 12, 1848. Its chairman acted as 
President of the Republic. p. 261 
208 Here reference is made to the agreements under which the Swiss cantons supplied 
mercenaries to European states. They were concluded in the period from the 
fifteenth to the mid-nineteenth century. In many West-European countries Swiss 
mercenaries were used by counter-revolutionary monarchist forces. 
In 1848 Berne and other cantons concluded a series of such agreements with 
the counter-revolutionary government of Ferdinand II, King of Naples. The 
employment of Swiss troops against the revolutionary movement in Italy aroused 
great indignation among the Swiss progressive circles, and this eventually led to 
the annulment of these agreements. p. 261 
209 The Sonderbund —see Note 25. 
Neuchâtel's independence—see Note 24. p. 261 
210 See Note 37. p. 263 
211 This refers to the June 1846 Act of the British Parliament repealing the Corn 
Laws (see Note 29). p. 263 
212 At the end of 1849 and the beginning of 1850 Karl Friedrich August Gützlaff 
delivered a series of lectures on China at London University and a number of 
learned societies. One of these lectures was related in a report published by the 
conservative Neue  Preussische  Zeitung (known also as the Kreuz-Zeitung) in its issue 

=====第696页=====
Notes 673 
No. 7, January 9, 1850. Marx and Engels may have drawn on this report in writing 
this section of their review. p. 266 
213 This refers to one of the main provisions of the Nanking Treaty Britain concluded 
with China as a result of the Anglo-Chinese war of 1840-42 (known as the first 
Opium War). It was the first of a series of unequal treaties imposed on China by 
the Western powers, treaties that reduced it to the status of a semi-colony. Under 
the Nanking Treaty five Chinese cities—Canton, Shanghai, Amoy, Ninbo and 
Fuchou—were opened to English trade. In 1844 unequal treaties were imposed 
on China by the USA and France. p. 266 
214 The reference is to the popular unrest then rife in several provinces of China. In 
mid-1850 it erupted into a peasant war that resulted in the insurgents establishing 
a state of their own over a considerable part of China's territory. The state was 
called Taiping Tango (hence the name of the movement—the Taiping uprising). 
The leaders of the movement put forward a Utopian programme calling for 
China's feudal social order to be transformed into a paramilitary patriarchal 
system based on egalitarianism in production and consumption. The Taiping 
uprising lasted until 1864. p. 266 
215 The Ten Hours' Bill, the struggle for which had been waged for many years, was 
passed by Parliament in 1847, against a background of the sharply intensified 
contradictions between the landed aristocracy and the industrial bourgeoisie 
generated by the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. In revenge against the 
industrial bourgeoisie, a section of the Tory M.P.s supported the Bill. Its 
provisions applied only to children and women. Nevertheless, many manufactur­
ers evaded it in practice. Engels also discussed the ten-hour working day in earlier 
writings, in particular in his book The Condition of the Working-Class in England (see 
present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 460, 461, 465-66). In the present article he took it up in 
connection with a fresh campaign against the Ten Hours' Bill launched by 
manufacturers, who worked in different ways to secure its de facto annulment. 
The article, written for the Chartist journal The Democratic Review, evoked a 
lively response in the British working-class press. In its survey of the journal, The 
Northern Star wrote (No. 645, March 2, 1850): "The Ten Hours' Question  is the title 
of an article which is sure to excite great interest, and, possibly, some discussion. 
We venture to predict that, while it will not greatly please those who are purely 
and simply Ten Hours Bill-men, it will meet with more than the approval of those 
who are 'Ten Hours Bill-men, and Something more. It is an article which all classes 
may read with advantage, although, most likely, it will call down on its author's 
head the hot indignation of those who live by speculating in the labour and 
making profit of the blood and sinews of the wealth-producers." 
Both this article and the article "The English Ten Hours' Bill" published in the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue (see this volume, pp. 288-300) 
show that Marxist political economy had not yet been fully developed. This was 
reflected in a certain underestimation of the struggle for shorter working hours 
and of the positive effects of legal limitation of the working day. Marx and Engels 
gave an exhaustive description of the Ten Hours' Bill in their later works. See, 
e.g., Marx's Inaugural Address of the International Working-Men's Association and 
Capital (Vol. I, Chapter X, Sections 5, 6, 7). p. 271 
216 The Manchester School—a trend in economic thought reflecting the interests of the 
industrial bourgeoisie. It advocated Free Trade and non-interference by the state 
in economic affairs. In the 1840s and 1850s. the Free Traders constituted the Left 
wing of the Liberal Party in England. p. 271 

=====第697页=====
674 Notes 
217 This refers to the  People's  Charter, which formulated the demands of the Chartists. 
It was published on May 8, 1838, as a Bill for submission to Parliament. The 
Charter contained six demands: universal suffrage (for men on reaching the age 
of 21), annual elections to Parliament, a secret ballot, equal constituencies, 
abolition of the property qualification for candidates to Parliament, salaries for 
M.P.s. Petitions for the Charter were rejected by Parliament in 1839 and 1842. 
p. 273 
The relay system—a system for using the labour of women and juveniles applied 
by English manufacturers, especially from 1847 onwards, in an attempt to 
circumvent the Ten Hours' Bill. Under the relay system; women and juveniles 
stayed at work for the full length of the working day for adult men (up to 15 
hours),  but worked at intervals. The length of their actual work did not apparently 
exceed the legal limit. p. 274 
219 On February 8, 1850 the Court of Exchequer acquitted a group of manufacturers 
accused of violating the Ten Hours' Bill. This ruling created a precedent 
unfavourable to the workers and was tantamount to a repeal of the Bill. It was 
resisted by the workers, and on August 5, 1850, Parliament passed a new Bill, 
fixing a 10 '/2 hour working day for women and juveniles and setting the time 
when work was to begin and end. 
The Court of  Exchequer,  one of England's oldest courts, initially dealt mainly 
with financial matters. In the nineteenth century it became one of the country's 
highest judicial bodies. p. 274 
220 The  Address of the Central Authority to the League contained fundamental 
propositions of the Marxist programme and tactics. It played an important part in 
restoring and reorganising the Communist League after the defeat of the 1848-49 
revolution, as a result of which the activities of the League had fallen off, the ties 
between its members had weakened and many of its communities and district 
branches had fallen apart. The Address contained detailed instructions for the 
emissaries of the Central Authority, which had been reconstituted by Marx, and 
for local League leaders in their work in restoring the League. The Address was 
written by Marx and Engels at the end of March (not later than the 24th) and 
unanimously approved by Central Authority members in London. 
According to recent findings, the Address reached a fairly wide circle of League 
members. At the end of March, Heinrich Bauer, Central Authority emissary, 
brought a manuscript copy to Cologne; later the document was secretly circulated 
in handwritten form in Germany, Switzerland and other countries. The Prussian 
police seized a number of copies from League members and in 1851 the Address 
was printed in a number of German newspapers, in particular in the Dresdner 
Journal und Anzeiger No. 177, June 28, the Allgemeiner Polizei-Anzeiger (special 
supplement) No. 52, Dresden, June 30, the Kölnische ZeitungNo. 156, July 1 and 
the Schwäbischer Merkur No. 158, July 4, and also in the Hungarian-language 
Magyar Hirlup, published in Pest (Nos. 503 and 504, July 8 and 9). 
During the trial of Communists in Cologne, the Address, together with other 
Communist League documents, was reprinted in the Bill of Indictment (put out 
as a separate edition under the title Anklageschrift gegen 1) P. G. Roeser,  2) 
J. H.G.Bürgers... [Köln, 1852]) and published in several newspapers. Later it 
appeared in the book by the two police officials Wermuth and Stieber, Die 
Communisten-Verschwörungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, Th. 1, Berlin, 1853, 
which had been compiled for the purpose of compromising the Communist 
League. 

=====第698页=====
Notes 675 
The first authoritative edition of the Address came out in 1885, when Engels 
appended it to the German edition of Marx's Revelations Concerning  the Communist 
Trial in Cologne (Karl Marx, Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-Prozess zu Köln, 
Hottingen-Zürich, 1885). Engels reviewed the text published in the book by 
Wermuth and Stieber, and supplied it with a footnote. The present publication is 
based on the 1885 edition. 
The Address was first published in English in The Marxian, New York, 
1921,  Vol. 1, No. 2, and was later printed in Labour  Monthly,  London, 1922, Vol. 3, 
No. 3. p. 277 
221 The  agreers  was the name given by Marx and Engels to the liberal majority of the 
Prussian National Assembly convened in Berlin on May 22, 1848, to draw up a 
Constitution and introduce a constitutional system by "agreement with the 
Crown". In November 1848, with counter-revolutionary forces on the offensive 
in Prussia, the liberals and democrats secured a resolution calling for the 
non-payment of taxes. Confining themselves to passive resistance, however, they 
failed to rebuff a monarchist coup d'état. On December 5, 1848, the National 
Assembly was disbanded. p. 279 
222 The Stuttgart parliament—those deputies to the all-German Frankfurt Assembly 
(mostly Leftists) who did not relinquish their powers during the conflict with the 
Prussian and other German governments in May qnd June 1849, but moved to 
Stuttgart (see Note 8). p. 279 
223 The proposition advanced here on turning the confiscated landed estates into 
state property and handing them over to associations of agricultural workers is an 
elaboration of the respective provisions of the agrarian programme set forth by 
Marx and Engels in the Demands of the Communist Party in Germany, which also 
called for the break-up of feudal relations in the interests of the peasants: the 
abolition of corvée and other feudal duties without compensation, etc. (see present 
edition, Vol. 7, pp. 3-4). Stressing this proposition in the new document, Marx and 
Engels proceeded from the idea that the proletarian revolution was at hand, a 
notion partly due to their overestimation of the factors conducive to revolution at 
the time. They considered that the measure in question would facilitate the future 
socialist transformation of agriculture, relieving the peasant masses from the 
threat of ruin. Far from regarding this measure as an absolute necessity, however, 
Marx and Engels, and all their followers, made it dependent on actual historical 
conditions. Later events showed that, in countries with deep-rooted survivals of 
feudalism, the need for a stronger alliance with the peasantry sometimes makes it 
necessary for the working class to support the demand for confiscated landed 
estates to be handed over to the peasants, without, however, abandoning the idea 
of a subsequent socialist transformation of agriculture on the basis of collective 
property. p. 285 
Engels wrote this article soon after the article "The Ten Hours' Question", which 
was published in the Chartist Democratic Review (see this volume, pp. 271-76). The 
present article was intended for the German reader, who was less familiar with life 
in Britain. Engels therefore goes into greater detail on the history of the struggle 
for the Ten Hours' Bill and the campaign waged against it by the manufacturers. 
The present publication takes account of corrections made by Engels in his copy of 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue. 
The article was first published in English in the collection: K.Marx and 
F.Engels, Articles on Britain, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. p. 288 

=====第699页=====
676 Notes 
225 See Note 219. p. 288 
226 See Note 193. ' p. 292 
227 See Note 29. p. 293 
228 in the 1830s and 1840s a series of laws against trading in jobs and granting 
sinecures to aristocrats were passed in Britain, under pressure from the industri­
al bourgeoisie. 
For the Poor Law of 1834 see Note 75. p. 294 
229 This refers to the Nanking Treaty of 1842. See Note 213. p. 295 
230 The Navigation Acts passed in 1651 and subsequent years set up a system for 
Asian, African or American produce to be imported for consumption into the 
United Kingdom or its colonial possessions only in ships under the British national 
flag, and for European produce to be carried either in English ships or in those 
belonging to the exporting country. These laws were repealed in 1854. p. 296 
231 On the reviews written by Marx and Engels for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue see Note 182. 
These reviews have never been published in English except for excerpts from 
the review of the pamphlets written by Chenu and de la Hodde, which appeared 
in: Karl Marx, On Revolution, edited and translated by S. K. Padover, New York, 
1971.  Excerpts from the review of Emile Girardin's book were quoted in an article 
by M.Beer, "Further Selections from the Literary Remains of Karl Marx", in 
Labour Monthly, London, 1923, Vol. 5, No. 2. p. 301 
232 In their review of Thomas Carlyle's pamphlets, The Present Time and Model 
Prisons, the authors continue their critical analysis of Carlyle's sociological and 
historical conception which Marx and, particularly, Engels (see present edition, 
Vol. 3, pp. 444-68) began in their earlier works. In the Manifesto of  the Communist 
Party, they criticised "feudal socialism" (see present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 507-08), of 
which Carlyle was an exponent. Their criticism became more intense as Carlyle 
moved to the right after the revolution of 1848-49. 
During the lifetime of Marx and Engels the review was reprinted unsigned in 
Der Volksstaat, Leipzig, 1871, Nos. 93 and 94, November 18 and 22. 
In quotations from Carlyle's pamphlets, the authors of the review do not 
always follow Carlyle's italics; they silently omit some paragraphs, change 
punctuation and introduce their own italics. In the given publication, in places 
where part of the text was left out, the editors have introduced marks of omission. 
p. 301 
233 The Freemasons (called more fully Free and Accepted Masons)—members of a 
religious and ethical movement that arose in England at the beginning of the 
eighteenth century and spread to other European countries and America. 
Freemasons condemned the feudal system and the Established Church and 
sought to set up a world-wide new religion. The Order of Freemasons had secret 
lodges in various countries, and a mystical ritual copied from the ritual of 
medieval masons' guilds (hence the name). Members of the Order set themselves 
the task of ethically purifying and improving'people in order to renovate the 
world. Freemasons believed in eternal and immutable laws of nature known only 
to the wisest leaders of the Order who enjoyed unquestionable authority and 
brought up rank-and-file members in obedience to these laws and in the spirit of 
fraternity, justice and enlightenment. 

=====第700页=====
Notes 677 
The IUuminati (from the Latin illuminatus)—members of a secret society 
founded in Bavaria in 1776, a variety of Freemasonry. The society consisted of 
opposition elements from the bourgeoisie and nobility, who were dissatisfied with 
princely despotism. In 1785 the society was banned by the Bavarian authorities. 
Similar societies also existed in Spain and France. 
Mozart was a Freemason and his opera, The Magic Flute (Die Zauberßöte) (text 
by Emmanuel Schikaneder, first staged in 1791), embodies Masonic ideals in the 
form of a naive fairy-tale. p. 306 
234 Laissez-faire, laissez-aller—the formula of economists who advocated Free Trade 
and non-intervention by the state in economic relations. p. 308 
235 See Note 75. p. 310 
236 This review, slightly abridged, was reprinted during Engels' lifetime in the 
theoretical organ of the German Social-Democratic Party, Die Neue Zeit, Stuttgart, 
1886,  4. Jg., H. 12. 
While preparing the given publication, the editors checked quotations from 
Chenu and de la Hodde according to the 1850 edition of the pamphlets. The 
authors of the review may have used a different edition published in the same 
year, hence the different page numbers. In the text, the pages given by the 
review's authors are followed by those of the edition used by the editors of the 
present publication, which are given in square brackets. p. 311 
237 The secret Société  des nouvelles  saisons  came into being soon after the rout (in U 
of the Société des saisons led by Auguste Blanqui and Armand Barbes, and was 
virtually its successor. Workers formed the main body of the society, which also 
included students. Its members adhered to revolutionary Babouvism and were 
strongly influenced by the Utopian communist ideas of Théodore Dézamy. 
p. 312 
238 See Note 64. p. 315 
239 An allusion to attempts by a small group of conspirators, members of secret 
revolutionary societies, to commit terrorist acts using home-made incendiary 
bombs. Police agents were also involved in the venture, giving regularly infor­
mation about the conspirators' movements. This enabled the police to arrest all 
those involved. Their trial in 1847 revealed that police agents had succeeded in 
infiltrating deeply into secret societies. p. 315 
240 Among Fourier's posthumous works there is the unfinished manuscript Des trois 
unités  externes  which deals partially with the problems of trade. It was published in 
1845 in the journal La Phalange. Lengthy passages from this work were translated 
by Engels into German and published in 1846 in the Deutsches Bürgerbuch (see 
present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 613-44). p. 322 
241 See Note 45. p. 323 
242 On the by-elections to the Legislative Assembly (March 10, 1850) see this volume, 
pp. 129-31.  p. 325 
243 This review of the book by Emile Girardin, an exponent of bourgeois socialism, is 
in effect a critique of bourgeois socialism. Here the authors go on to analyse in 
greater detail the trend in bourgeois social thinking which they described in the 
Manifesto of the Communist Party as an expression of the bourgeoisie's desire to 
redress "social grievances, in order to secure the continued existence of bourgeois 
society". 

=====第701页=====
678 Notes 
When quoting passages from Girardin's work, the authors in a number of cases 
combined texts from different pages, omitted paragraphs and changed the 
punctuation. They also introduced their own italics. This form of quotation has 
been preserved. The pages of the quoted book are given in square brackets. In a 
number of instances, when part of the text is omitted, the editors of this volume 
have introduced omission marks not in the review  itself.  p. 326 
244 Droit d'enregistrement —a tax imposed on the registration and drawing up of 
various documents: sale and purchase contracts, deeds, court decisions, etc. Apart 
from confirming the authenticity of documents, such registration was also a 
source of revenue for the Exchequer. p. 328 
2« See Note 28. p. 328 
246 The bulk of this review was written by Marx and Engels for the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 3 in the middle of March 1850, and 
forwarded to Hamburg not later than April 5. Lack of space prevented the 
material from being published in No. 3. Only part of the review dealing with 
England, as well as a small addendum written later and dated April 18, were 
included in No. 4 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue. 
p. 338 
M See Note 29. p. 340 
248 This article, together with other material for the fourth issue of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue, was sent to Hamburg before April 
18, 1850. Marx wrote it as an addendum to his series of articles "1848-1849" (later 
known as The Class Struggles in France). Marx's main source of information was an 
article published in the newspaper of the French socialists and democrats, La Voix 
du peuple (No. 166, March 17, 1850), which quoted several passages from the 
monarchist newspaper La Patrie. Journal du commerce  (from March 7 to 15). Even 
though the editors of La Voix du peuple avoided giving names of the 
stock-exchange speculators in their commentaries to the quoted passages, Marx 
found corroboration in them for the conclusions he drew in the third article from 
the "1848-1849" series concerning the connection existing between President 
Louis Bonaparte and stock-exchange circles. p. 342 
249 Union électorale —the name used by the bloc of all monarchist groupings in the 
by-elections to the French Legislative Assembly held in March 1850. It united 
Orleanists, Legitimists, Bonapartists, Catholics, etc. The leading role in the bloc 
was played by the so-called party of Order, embracing the main monarchist 
factions. p. 342 
250 Dealing on the Paris Stock Exchange went on between one and three p.m. 
p. 343 
251 The reference is to the Café Tortoni on the Boulevard des Italiens; when the Stock 
Exchange was closed, business transactions were carried on in and around this 
café.  As distinct from the official Stock Exchange, the Café Tortoni and the 
adjacent district became known as the "small Stock Exchange". p. 344 
252 This article was written in response to Gottfried Kinkel's speech in his own 
defence at the court-martial in Rastatt (August 1849). He was a representative of 
the Left in the Frankfurt National Assembly, a participant in the campaign for the 
Imperial Constitution and taken prisoner by the Prussians. (Kinkel's speech was 

=====第702页=====
Notes 679 
published in the newspaper Abend-Post Nos. 78 and 79, April 5 and 6, 1850, 
and later in A. Strodtmann's Gottfried Kinkel. Wahrheit ohne Dichtung, Bd. 2, 
Hamburg, 1851.) The article, in which the authors criticised petty-bourgeois 
democrats for their subservience, cowardice and lack of principles, was censured 
by Otto Liming in his comments on the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch­
ökonomische  Revue, published in the Neue  Deutsche  Zeitung  (No.  151,  June 26, 1850). 
These comments, as well as other accusations, induced Marx and Engels to make a 
refutation (see this volume, pp. 387-88). The members of the Communist League 
welcomed the article in which Marx and Engels exposed Kinkel's behaviour in 
court. 
Later Marx and Engels gave a satiric description of Kinkel in their pamphlet 
The Great Men of the Exile (see present edition, Vol. 11). 
Most of the italics in the passages from Kinkel's speech quoted according to the 
Abend-Post are by the authors. p. 345 
253 See Note 198. p. 345 
254 in the spring of 1848, Mainz was the scene of bloody clashes between the civic 
militia and Prussian soldiers. These had repercussions throughout Germany and 
became a subject for discussion at the Frankfurt National Assembly; the latter 
merely appointed a committee which only submitted its report once the Mainz 
civic militia had already been disarmed by Prussian soldiers. p. 346 
This statement, as well as the letter to the editor of The Times that follows, was 
occasioned by the attempts of the petty-bourgeois democrats Gustav Struve, 
Rudolf Schramm and others to strengthen their position among German political 
refugees in London against the influence of the Social-Democratic Refugee 
Committee (see Engels' letter to Weydemeyer of April 22, 1850). The manuscript 
of the statement in Engels' hand is extant. The statement was circulated in London 
and was also published by a number of democratic newspapers in Germany. The 
Neue Deutsche Zeitung of April 28, 1850, carried an abridged version dated April 
20, 1850; the signature was followed by a request to democratic papers to reprint 
it. The Cologne  Westdeutsche  Zeitung and the Berlin Abend-Post published it under 
the date of April 18, 1850. In this volume the document is dated as in Engels' 
manuscript. p. 349 
256 See Note 180. p. 349 
257 This refers to a decision adopted on November 18, 1849, at the general meeting of 
the German Workers' Educational Society in London and German political 
refugees in London. It is to be found in the report of the Committee of Sup­
port for German Refugees in London of December 3, 1849 (see this volume, 
pp. 599-601). p. 349 
258 This refers to attempts by Gustav Struve, Karl Heinzen, Rudolf Schramm, Arnold 
Ruge, and other German democrats who moved from Switzerland to England in 
October 1849, to rally all German political refugees around the Democratic 
Association, which they founded in London in the spring of 1850, and to enlist 
their support in setting up a general European democratic organisation of 
refugees. These attempts were accompanied by intrigues against proletarian 
refugees and against the Communist League led by Marx and Engels, p. 350 
259 Gustav Struve and Thomas Fothergill, claiming to represent German political 
refugees in London, approached the acting Lord Mayor of London, Alderman 

=====第703页=====
680 Notes 
Gibbs, with a request for employment to be provided for one hundred German 
refugees who were unable to find work to earn a living. Gibbs refused on the 
grounds that many English workers were in the same plight. An item to this effect 
appeared in The Times of May 24, 1850. p. 352 
260 Engels  wrote this work with a view to popularising in England a series of Marx's 
articles published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue under 
the title of " 1848-1849", which later became widely known as The  Class  Struggles in 
France, 1848 to 1850. It was a sort of conspectus or synopsis of Marx's work, from 
which Engels quoted long passages; in some cases he summarised the text that 
followed, gave relevant explanations (some of them in the form of remarks to the 
quoted text given in parenthesis), adding his own words and phrases. In the 
three numbers of The Democratic Review (for April, May and June), Engels gave an 
exposition of the first article from Marx's series (Chapter One of The Class 
Struggles in  France,  see this volume, pp. 48-70). He apparently planned to continue 
popularising Marx's work, for the remark "to be continued" appeared at the end 
of the article in the June number of The Democratic Review just as it did in the 
preceding numbers. However, various circumstances, probably his involvement in 
writing other works, prevented Engels from continuing his synopsis. 
The fact that Engels wrote this conspectus is corroborated by the author's 
excellent knowledge of Marx's work and by the conspectus being written—at least 
the first part—and numerous quotations from Marx's work being translated into 
English within only a fortnight of the publication of the first issue of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue (March 6, 1850), which carried 
the beginning of Marx's work. In addition, all inaccuracies in the Revue were 
corrected in the translation. 
In quoting Marx, Engels sometimes omitted the author's italics and 
paragraphs, but introduced his own; he also added his own explanatory words, in 
some cases omitting the author's words and phrases. By these changes Engels 
sought to make the text more comprehensible to the English reader. 
In the present publication passages from Marx's work are given in small type 
and in inverted commas. They are quoted according to Engels, the most 
significant divergencies of Engels' translation from Marx's original German text 
being indicated in footnotes; whenever Engels made considerable omissions in 
quotations the editors of this volume have inserted omission marks in square 
brackets. p. 353 
261 On the suppression of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung see Note 3. 
Early in June 1849 Marx came to Paris with a mandate from the Central 
Committee of Democrats. He took up his contacts with representatives of the 
French democratic and socialist movement and with leaders of clubs and secret 
workers' organisations. Apart from Marx, three other editors of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung (Georg Weerth, Ferdinand Wolff and Ernst Dronke) were in 
Paris at the time and took part in the events of June 13, 1849 (on these see this 
volume, pp. 105-09). p. 353 
262 See Note 64. p. 357 
263 An allusion to the Guizot Government's refusal to make diplomatic moves against 
the suppression of the Cracow uprising of 1846 and against Austria's annexation 
of the free city of Cracow (see Note 66), and to its political interference in 
Switzerland's internal affairs in favour of the reactionary Sonderbund (see Note 
25) in 1844. p. 358 

=====第704页=====
Notes 681 
264 See Note 67. p. 358 
265 See Note 68. p. 359 
266 This phrase is missing in the text published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische  Revue. Engels may have written his synopsis from the original 
version of Marx's manuscript in which it appeared. p. 362 
267 On the demonstration in Paris on March 17, 1848, see Note 76. 
On April 16, 1848, a peaceful procession of Paris workers marched towards 
the Town Hall to submit a petition to the Provisional Government on "organising 
labour" and "eliminating the exploitation of man by man". The workers encoun­
tered battalions of the bourgeois national guard and were forced to retreat. 
p. 367 
268 On the events of May 15, 1848, see Note 45. 
The June uprising of the Paris proletariat is dealt with in Note 40. p. 368 
269 This letter was written in connection with the campaign against German political 
refugees started by the Prussian conservative papers and taken up by the English 
press.  The campaign was intensified particularly after the attempt on the life of 
the Prussian King Frederick William IV in Berlin on May 22, 1850, by Max 
Sefeloge, a retired soldier. He later died in a lunatic asylum. An item in the Neue 
Preussische Zeitung on May 25, 1850, alleged that while this attempt was being 
prepared Marx made a trip to Germany, including Berlin. The letter is written in 
English in Engels' handwriting. He addressed the envelope to his Excellency 
Chevalier Bunsen, Prussian Ambassador in London. Bunsen disregarded the 
request contained in the letter, so Marx and Engels made a statement to the press 
(see this volume, p. 384). p. 370 
270 The June Address of  the Central Authority to the League was written while the League 
was in the final stages of being reorganised. It was based on information contained 
in reports submitted by the emissaries of the Central Authority (among others, by 
Heinrich Bauer who had distributed the March Address of the Central Authority 
in Germany, returning to London in mid-May 1850) and in letters sent by League 
members from various European countries. 
Handwritten copies of the Address were carried to Germany by Karl Wilhelm 
Klein, emissary of the League's Central Authority, and other confidential agents 
and to Switzerland by Ernst Dronke to be distributed secretly. 
Somewhat later, extracts from the Address or summaries of it were published 
by a number of newspapers, such as the Leipziger Zeitung No. 192 (special 
supplement), July 11, 1850; the Karlsruher Zeitung No. 172, July 24, 1850; the 
Norddeutsche  Correspondent,  Rostock, No. 177, July 31, 1850. In their letters written 
in 1850 and 1851, the members of the Communist League,  Stumpf,  Dronke and 
Weydemeyer, informed Marx and Engels that the Address was published in other 
newspapers as well. 
It was also published in the Bill of Indictment against the League members at 
the Cologne trial of Communists— Anklageschrift gegen 1) P.G.Roeser, 2) 
J. H. G. Bürgers... [Köln, 1852] and in Die Communisten-Verschwörungen des 
neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, Th. 1, Berlin, 1853, by Wermuth and Stieber. In the 
USA part of the Address was published by Karl Heinzen in Der Pionier, Boston, 
Jg. 17, No. 17, April 24, 1870. 
In 1885 Engels published the June Address as a supplement to a new edition of 
the pamphlet: Karl Marx, Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-Prozess zu Köln, 

=====第705页=====
682 Notes 
Hottingen-Zürich, 1885. This publication is the most reliable of all those extant 
and has usually been taken as the basis for subsequent publications. p. 371 
271 The reference is to the Revolutionary Centralisation, a secret organisation founded 
at the beginning of 1850 by German refugees in Switzerland, most of whom were 
petty-bourgeois democrats. 
Its Central Committee, based in Zurich, was headed by Tzschirner, a leader of 
the Dresden uprising in May 1849; prominent members were Fries, Greiner, 
Sigel, Techow, Schurz and J. Ph. Becker, all participants in the 1849 Baden-
Palatinate uprising. Members of the Communist League, d'Ester, Bruhn and 
others, as well as Wilhelm Wolff also belonged to this organisation. In July and 
August 1850 the leaders of the Revolutionary Centralisation approached the 
representatives of the Communist League Central Authority with a proposal to 
amalgamate. On behalf of the League's Central Authority, Marx and Engels 
rejected their proposal as detrimental to the class independence of the proletarian 
party. By the end of 1850, the Revolutionary Centralisation had disintegrated due 
to the mass expulsion of German refugees from Switzerland. Marx and Engels 
drew information concerning the activities of the Revolutionary Centralisation 
and the intrigues of its agents against Communist League leaders (referred to in 
the Address) from Wilhelm Wolff's letter of May 9, 1850. They later received 
similar information from Dronke, the emissary of the League's Central Authority 
in Switzerland. p. 372 
272 This refers to an attempt by German democrats, Gustav Struve among others, to 
set up a Democratic Association. In April 1850, Struve and others distributed in 
England and Germany a Circular Letter Addressed to All Friends of German 
Refugees, which reported that a single German organisation of all democratic 
refugees was to be set up under the guidance of the Central Bureau of the United 
German Emigration. In the summer of the same year, they called upon German 
refugees to unite with the Central Committee of European Democracy. However, 
none of these plans for unification materialised. 
The Central Committee of European Democracy was set up in London in June 
1850 on the initiative of Giuseppe Mazzini, who took steps to organise it at the end 
of 1849 while still in Switzerland. His endeavours were supported by Gustav 
Struve and Arnold Ruge, the latter joining the Committee as a representative of 
the German democratic party. The Central Committee members held sharply 
different ideological views and the strained relations between Italian and French 
democratic refugees led to its dissolution in March 1852. The Inaugural 
Manifesto of the Central Committee of European Democracy issued on July 3, 
1850,  under the title "Aux peuples!" was criticised by Marx and Engels in their 
international review (see pp. 529-32 of this volume). p. 373 
273 Early in 1846 Marx and Engels, who were living in Brussels at the time, organised 
a Communist Correspondence Committee there to rally the more progressive 
German and Belgian socialists. In August 1847 this Committee served as the basis 
on which the communities of the Communist League were organised. Following 
the February 1848 revolution in France, the Belgian Government started 
repressions against Karl Marx, Wilhelm Wolff and other German revolutionary 
refugees and expelled them from Belgium. Tedesco and other Belgian members 
of the Communist League were prosecuted in connection with the so-called 
Risquons-Tout trial, which was a fabrication by the Government of Leopold, the 
King of the Belgians, against the participants in the revolutionary movement. The 
pretext was a clash, which took place on March 29, 1848, between the Belgian 

=====第706页=====
Notes 683 
Republican Legion bound for its home country from France and a detachment of 
soldiers near the village of Risquons-Tout, not far from the French border. The 
trial was held in Antwerp from August 9 to 30, 1848. Mellinet, Ballin, Tedesco 
and other principal accused were sentenced to death, but this was later commuted 
to 30 years imprisonment, and still later they were pardoned. p. 374 
274 The German Workers' Society in Brussels was founded by Marx and Engels at the 
end of August 1847, its aim being to provide a political education for German 
workers living in Belgium, and to spread the ideas of scientific communism among 
them. With Marx, Engels and their followers at its head, the Society became the 
legal centre rallying German revolutionary proletarian forces in Belgium, and 
maintained direct contact with Flemish and Walloon workers' clubs. Its most active 
members belonged to the Brussels community of the Communist League. The 
Society played an important part in founding the Brussels Democratic Associa­
tion. Its activities ceased soon after the February 1848 revolution in France, 
when its members were arrested and deported by the Belgian police. p. 374 
275 The Workers' Fraternity, founded at the Workers' Congress which met in Berlin 
between August 23 and September 3, 1848, united many workers' associations. 
Under the influence of Stephan Born, the Fraternity at first limited its activities to 
implementing narrow craft-union demands. Towards the end of 1848, however, 
its leaders were drawn into the revolutionary events and admitted the necessity for 
the workers to take an active part in the political struggle. Voices were raised for 
setting up an all-German workers' organisation. In the spring of 1849 the 
Workers' Fraternity and several regional congresses of workers' associations put 
forward a proposal to convene a national workers' congress in Leipzig to found a 
General Workers' Union. However, these plans were frustrated by a counter­
revolutionary offensive. The Fraternity was suppressed in  1850-51,  though some 
of its branches survived for a number of years. p. 375 
276 See Note 61. p. 376 
277 In mid-April 1850, with a view to consolidating the international unity of the 
revolutionary representatives of the working class in the context of the expected 
new revolutionary tide, Marx and Engels concluded an agreement with the 
French Blanquist refugees then residing in London and with the leaders of the 
revolutionary wing of the Chartist movement to set up a Universal Society of 
Revolutionary Communists. The parties to this agreement signed a special treaty 
of 6 articles, written in Willich's hand and signed by Marx, Engels and Willich on 
behalf of the Communist League, by Adam and Vidil for the Blanquists, and by 
Harney for the Chartists (see this volume, pp. 614-15). p. 377 
278 Apart from The Sun, this letter was published in The Northern Star No. 660, June 
15, 1850, and also in some German democratic papers—the  Westdeutsche  Zeitung, 
Cologne, No. 145, June 20, 1850 (reprinted from The Northern Star); the 
Tages-Chronik, Bremen, No. 298, June 21, 1850; Die Hornisse, Cassel, No. 144, 
June 22, 1850. p. 378 
279 The Align BMt enacted by the British Parliament in 1793, was renewed in 1802, 
1803,  1816, 1818 and, finally, in 1848 (An Act to Authorise for One Year, and to 
the End of the Then Next Session of Parliament, the Removal of Aliens from the 
Realm) in connection with revolutionary developments on the Continent and the 
Chartist manifestation of April 10, 1848. In 1850 public opinion obstructed the 
renewal of this Bill despite Conservative efforts. p. 378 

=====第707页=====
684 Notes 
280 On Sefeloge's attempt on the life of the Prussian King see Note 269. 
Treubund (the Union of the Loyal)—Prussian monarchical society founded in 
Berlin at the close of 1848. Late in 1849 a split occurred between ultra-royalists 
and supporters of the constitutional monarchy. p. 378 
281 This is a rough copy of the letter sent to Robert Stephen Rintoul, editor of The 
Spectator,  together with the article "Prussian Spies in London" written iji the form 
of a statement and signed by Marx, Engels and Willich (see this volume, 
pp. 381-84). The rough copy is in Engels' handwriting. p. 380 
The Spectator editors published this statement and commented on it in a note 
carried in the same issue in the "News of the Week" section. Some time later Marx 
and Engels quoted this note in their letter of July 2, 1850, to the editors of the 
Weser-Zeitung (see this volume, pp. 390-91). 
A somewhat abridged version of the statement was reprinted from The 
Spectator in Galignani's Messenger, Paris, No. 11030, June 18, 1850, where it was 
supplied with editorial comments hostile to revolutionary refugees. These 
comments were also printed by the Weser-Zeitung, Bremen, No. 2037, June 22, 
1850,  the Allgemeine Zeitung, Augsburg, No. 173, June 22, 1850, and the Neue 
Preussische  Zeitung, Berlin, No. 144, June 26, 1850, which attributed them to The 
Spectator. This was why Marx and Engels wrote the letter to the editors of the 
Weser-Zeitung. Part of the rough copy of the statement in Engels' handwriting is 
extant. p. 381 
283 Marx's statement to the editor of The Globe was, apparently, translated into 
English by Engels, since Marx had a poor knowledge of the language at the time. 
The statement was not published in the newspaper, and only a rough copy of it in 
Engels' handwriting is extant. p. 385 
284 This refers to the court decisions during the two trials that took place in Cologne 
on February 7 and 8, 1849. In the first, legal proceedings were brought against 
Marx, editor-in-chief of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Engels, its co-editor, and 
Korff,  the newspaper's responsible publisher, all of them being accused of having 
insulted the Chief Public Prosecutor and having libelled the police. In the second 
trial, charges were brought against members of the Rhenish District Committee of 
Democrats, Marx, Schapper and the lawyer Schneider, who were accused of 
inciting a riot. In both cases the jury acquitted the accused. For Marx's and Engels' 
speeches made at the trials see present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 304-22. p. 386 
285 This statement, in fact two statements, one by Marx and the other by Engels, are 
published as one document in this edition. They were occasioned by a review of 
the four numbers of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue, that 
appeared in the Neue Deutsche Zeitung (Nos.  148-51,  June 22, 23, 25 and 26, 
1850).  It was written by the paper's editor, the petty-bourgeois democrat Otto 
Liming, whose criticisms were directed mainly against Marx's "1848-1849" (The 
Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850) and Engels" The Campaign, for the German 
Imperial Constitution. Initially Marx and Engels intended to reply to Lüning in the 
Revue itself (see Marx's letter to Weydemeyer of June 27, 1850), but due to the 
unfavourable prospects for continuing publication of the journal, they wrote 
directly to the Neue Deutsche Zeitung. p. 387 
286 This statement was written as a result of the following: the Bremen Weser-Zeitung 
(No.  2037, June 22, 1850) reprinted comments from Galignani's  Messenger  on the 
letter written by Marx and Engels about Prussian spies in London. Moreover, 

=====第708页=====
Notes 685 
these comments, hostile to revolutionary German refugees, were attributed to The 
Spectator (see Note 282). Marx and Engels, who were not aware of the publication 
in Galignani's Messenger, addressed their protest directly to the Weser-Zeitung. 
Their statement was not printed. However, in No. 2052, July 10, 1850, the editors 
of the Weser-Zeitung were forced to admit that the comments came from 
Galignani's Messenger and not from The Spectator. 
The same day, July 10, the full text of the statement made by Marx and Engels 
was published in the Tages-Chronik, Bremen, No. 314. p. 390 
287 This article belongs to the Letters from Germany series (see this volume, pp. 7-16) 
but was written later than the other articles of the series and deals with a separate 
subject. It was the last of Engels' contributions to The Democratic Review. From July 
1, 1850, its editor George Julian Harney began to publish The Red Republican, a 
weekly journal that merged with The Democratic Review, which appeared until 
September 1850. The weekly carried the first English translation of the Manifesto 
of the Communist Party. Its publication ceased in November 1850. Between 
December 1850 and the summer of 1851, Harney published another weekly, 
Friend of  the People,  for which Engels promised to write a series of articles criticising 
petty-bourgeois democracy. Before long, however, Marx and Engels decided to 
break off their friendly relations with Harney, who took a dubious position with 
respect to the split in the Communist League and maintained close contacts with 
petty-bourgeois émigrés. At the same time Marx and Engels were in close touch 
with Ernest Jones and enlisted Johann Georg Eccarius, Konrad Schramm, and 
Wilhelm Pieper as contributors to the Notes  to the  People,  a weekly founded by Jones 
in May 1851. By assisting the Chartist press, Marx and Engels wanted to 
strengthen revolutionary Chartist traditions in the English labour movement. 
p. 392 
An allusion to the so-called Risquons-Tout trial (see Note 273). p. 392 
289 This refers to money exacted by the Danish monarchy from foreign vessels 
passing through the Sound (from the early half of the fifteenth century to 1857). 
p. 393 
290 This evidently refers to a secret Russo-Danish treaty concluded in 1767 and 
endorsed in 1773. Under this treaty, Pavel, the heir to the throne (who later 
became Emperor Paul I), relinquished his hereditary rights to the Duchy of 
Hottorp (part of Schleswig-Holstein) in favour of the Danish royal family in 
exchange for Oldenburg and Delmenhorst in Northern Germany. As a result, the 
whole of Schleswig-Holstein came into the possession of the Danish Crown. 
p. 393 
291 By decision of the Congress of Vienna (1815), the duchies of Schleswig and 
Holstein were incorporated into the Kingdom of Denmark (the personal union of 
Schleswig, Holstein and Denmark had existed since 1499), even though the 
majority of the population in Holstein and in Southern Schleswig were Germans. 
Under the impact of the March 1848 revolution in Prussia, the national liberation 
movement among the German population of the duchies grew in strength, 
becoming radical and democratic and forming part of the struggle for the 
unification of Germany. Volunteers from all over the country rushed to the aid of 
the local population when it took up arms against Danish rule. 
Prussia and other states of the German Confederation also sent federal troops 
to the duchies. However, the Prussian Government, which feared a popular 
outbreak and an intensification of the revolution, sought an agreement "with the 
Danish monarchy to the detriment of overall German interests. An armistice 

=====第709页=====
686 Notes 
between Prussia and Denmark was concluded on August 26, 1848, at Malmö. At 
the end of March 1849, Prussia resumed hostilities, but under pressure from 
England and Russia who interfered in favour of Denmark, was forced to conclude 
a peace treaty (July 2, 1850), temporarily relinquishing its claims to Schleswig and 
Holstein and abandoning them to continue fighting alone. The Schleswig-
Holstein troops were defeated and gave up all resistance. As a result, the two 
duchies remained part of the Kingdom of Denmark. p. 394 
292 On April 8, 1848, during his secret mission on behalf of the King of Prussia, Major 
Wildenbruch handed a Note to the Danish Government stating that Prussia was 
not fighting in Schleswig-Holstein to rob Denmark of the duchies, but merely to 
combat radical and republican elements in Germany. The Prussian Government 
tried every possible means to avoid official recognition of this compromising 
document. p. 394 
293 The Danish army routed the Schleswig-Holstein troops in the battle at Fredericia 
on July 6, 1849. 
The peace treaty between Prussia and Denmark concluded in Berlin on July 2, 
1850,  restored the pre-war status quo. Prussia withdrew its troops from 
Schleswig-Holstein, abandoning the Schleswig-Holstein army to face the superior 
forces of the Danes. p. 394 
294 Engels wrote The Peasant War in Germany in London in the summer and autumn 
of 1850. It was published in the double issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue (No. 5-6). In this momentous work the author 
generalises the experience of the 1848-49 revolution in Germany by comparing it 
with the revolutionary events of the period of the Reformation and the Great 
Peasant War of 1525 It is also one of the principal Marxist works on the liberation 
struggle led by the peasant and plebeian masses. 
Engels' main source of facts was the book Allgemeine Geschichte des grossen 
Bauernkrieges, Th. 1-3, Stuttgart, 1841-43, by Wilhelm Zimmermann, a German 
democratic historian. In 1870 Engels wrote that for a long time this book had been 
"the best compilation of factual data". He found it an extremely useful large 
collection of documents, either quoted in full or in long excerpts. Engels thus 
quoted most original sources (Luther's writings, Münzer's pamphlets, leaflets 
listing the demands of the insurgent peasants) from Zimmermann's book. (In the 
footnotes and the Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature, the editors of this 
volume supply bibliographical data on the first editions of the quoted material in 
the transcription of the time and indicate the pages of Zimmermann's book from 
which the quotations are taken.) 
The Peasant War in Germany appeared repeatedly during Engels' lifetime. It 
was reprinted in the Turn-Zeitung, New York, Nos. 3-20 (January 1852-February 
1853).  In 1870, Engels and Wilhelm Liebknecht prepared the second edition of 
The Peasant War, originally as a reprint in the 29 numbers of Der Volksstaat,  Leipzig 
(April 2-October 15, Nos.  27-83,  at irregular intervals). Numbers 27 and 28 of the 
newspaper carried Engels' February 1870 Preface to this edition. Engels was not 
satisfied with the explanatory footnotes by Liebknecht (see Engels' letter to Marx 
of May 8, 1870). 
In October 1870 this work was published in book form— Der deutsche 
Bauernkrieg von Friedrich Engels. Zweiter, mit einer Einleitung versehener 
Abdruck, Leipzig, Verlag der Expedition des Volksstaat, 1870. 
A new, third, authorised edition came out in 1875: Der deutsche Bauernkrieg 
von Friedrich Engels. Dritter Abdruck, Leipzig, 1875. For this edition Engels 
wrote a special addendum to the 1870 Preface, dated July 1, 1874. 

=====第710页=====
Notes 687 
295 Excerpts from Chapter VI of Engels' Peasant War were also printed in the 
Sozialdemokratische Monatsschrift, Wien, 1890, No.  10-11,  November 30, and in the 
Népszava, Budapest, 1891, February 6 (translated from the Sozialdemokratische 
Monatsschrift). 
In the 1880s Engels intended to revise his Peasant War in Germany and 
incorporate extensive supplementary material on the history of Germany. In his 
letter to Sorge dated December 31, 1884, Engels wrote: "I am radically revising 
my Peasant War. The war of the peasants will be presented as the cornerstone 
of German history in its entirety." Work on the second and third volumes of 
Capital and other urgent matters prevented Engels from carrying out his 
intentions. In the 1890s he made another attempt at the supplement, but failed to 
complete it. Only an unfinished manuscript and several rough notes are extant. 
(The former was published under the editorial heading "Decay of Feudalism and 
Rise of National States".) 
In this edition sources are quoted in the form given by Engels; whenever he 
introduces his own italics, this is mentioned in a footnote. Where the meaning 
differs significantly from that of the last authorised edition of 1875 and the 
previous author's publications of 1850 and 1870, this is also indicated in footnotes. 
Account is also taken in this edition of corrections made by Engels in his copy of 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue (see Note 63). Obvious 
misprints and inaccuracies in dates, geographical and personal names are silently 
corrected. p. 397 
The Hanseatic League—a commercial and political alliance of medieval German 
towns along the southern coasts of the North and Baltic Seas, and their feed 
rivers;  its aim was to establish a trade monopoly in Northern Europe. The 
Hanseatic League was in its prime in the latter half of the fourteenth century and 
the early half of the fifteenth century, and began to decay at the end of the 
fifteenth century. p. 400 
296 Tributes—one of the feudal obligations imposed on the holders of small plots of 
land. 
Death taxes  ( Sterbefall,  Todfall) were levied on the land and property inherited 
from the deceased peasant on the basis of the feudal lord's right (in France, "the 
right of the dead hand"). In Germany the feudal lords usually took the best cattle. 
Protection  moneys (  Schutzgelder) —a tax levied by the feudal lord in payment for 
the "judicial protection" and "patronage" which he claimed to extend to his 
subjects. p. 404 
297 T\ie  "general pfennig" (der gemeine Pfennig)—a tax collected in German lands in 
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries and appropriated by the Emperor; it was a 
combination of a poll-tax and a property tax, the main burden of which fell on the 
peasantry. p. 405 
298 Annates were lump sums paid to the Pope by persons appointed to church offices. 
In the fourteenth century they equalled half the first year's income or more. 
Holders of church benefices made up this loss by levying additional taxes and by 
extortions from the population. p. 405 
299 Engels is alluding to the German liberals who were in the majority in the 
Frankfurt National Assembly and in the assemblies of some German states during 
the revolution of 1848-49. In the first months of the revolution, liberals headed 
"constitutional governments" in a number of states (Prussia, for example), but 
were later replaced by members of the bureaucracy and nobility. The conciliatory 

=====第711页=====
688 Notes 
tactics of the liberals were one of the chief reasons for the defeat of the German 
revolution. p. 407 
300 The reference is to Charles V's criminal statutes ( Constitutio criminalis Carolina), 
adopted by the Imperial Diet in Regensburg in 1532; the statutes prescribed 
extremely harsh punishments. p. 409 
301 The reference is to a religious philosophical doctrine opposed to the medieval 
Catholic Church and its orthodox teaching; mysticism was widespread in the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Mystics, who believed it possible to know God 
through direct intercourse with the divine spirit, undermined the faith in the need 
for a church hierarchy. Particularly radical ideas were preached by the Italian 
twelfth-century monk Joachim of Calabria and other plebeian and peasant 
ideologists, with whom they assumed the form of a chiliastic dream of a 
millennium of equality (see Note 308). p. 413 
The Waldenses—a religious sect that originated among the urban lower classes of 
Southern France at the end of the twelfth century and later spread to Northern 
Italy, Germany, Bohemia, Spain and Switzerland. Its founder is said to have been 
Petrus Waldus (or Peter Waldo), a Lyons merchant who gave his wealth to the 
poor. The Waldenses repudiated property and advocated insubordination to the 
ecclesiastical and secular authorities; they condemned the accumulation of wealth 
by the Catholic Church and called for a return to the customs of early Christianity. 
Among the backward rural population of the mountainous regions of South­
western Switzerland and Savoy, the heresy of the Waldenses amounted to a 
defence of the survivals of the primitive communal system and patriarchal 
relations. p. 413 
303 The Albigenses—a religious sect that existed in the twelfth and thirteenth 
centuries in the towns of Southern France (particularly in Provence and Toulouse) 
and in Northern Italy. This movement took the form of a "heresy", being directed 
against the power and doctrine of the Catholic Church, as well as against the 
secular power of the feudal state. Its adherents—the townspeople and the lesser 
nobility, supported by the peasants—were called Albigenses from the city of Albi, 
one of the sect's main centres. Between 1209 and 1229 the feudal magnates of 
Northern France, together with the Pope, waged wars against the Albigenses that 
wiped out the movement and resulted in a considerable part of Southern France 
being annexed to the lands of the French kings. p. 413 
304 The Hungarian teacher in Picardy—a preacher by the name of Jakob said to be 
born in Hungary. He was one of the leader's of the anti-feudal peasant revolt in 
France in 1251, known as the shepherds' revolt, whose participants called 
themselves "God's shepherds". p. 413 
305 The Calixtines (from Calix, the Latin for cup)—a moderate trend in the Hussite 
national liberation and reformation movement in Bohemia (first half of the 
fifteenth century) against the German nobility, the German Empire and the 
Catholic Church. The Calixtines (who maintained that the laity should receive the 
cup as well as the bread in the Eucharist, i.e. "sub utraque specie"—for which they 
were also known as Utraquists), supported by the burghers and part of the Czech 
nobility, sought no more than a national Czech church and the secularisation of 
church estates. p: 413 
306 The Taborites (so called from their camp in the town of Tabor, in Bohemia)—a 
radical trend in the Hussite movement. In contrast to the Calixtines, they formed 
a revolutionary, democratic wing of the Hussites and their demands reflected the 

=====第712页=====
Notes 689 
desire of the peasantry and the urban lower classes for an end to all feudal 
oppression, all manifestations of social and political arbitrariness. The Taborites 
were the core of the Hussite army. The betrayal of the Taborites by the Calixtines 
led to the suppression of the Hussite movement. p. 414 
The Flagellants (from flagellantis in Latin, one who whips himself)—an ascetic 
religious sect widespread in Europe in the thirteenth to fifteenth centuries. They 
propounded self-castigation as a means of expiating sins. 
The Lollards (from the middle Dutch lollaert, literally, one who is murmuring 
prayers)—a religious sect (that originated in the fourteenth century) widespread 
in England and other European countries, which bitterly opposed the Catholic 
Church. The Lollards were followers of Wycliffe, the English reformer, but they 
drew more radical conclusions from his teaching and their opposition to feudal 
privileges took a religiously mystical form. Many Lollards, who came from the 
people and the lower clergy, were active participants in Wat Tyler's rebellion of 
1381 and were cruelly persecuted in the late fourteenth century. p. 414 
308 Chiliasm (from the Greek chilias, a thousand,—a mystical religious doctrine that 
Christ would come to earth a second time and usher in a millennium of justice, 
equality and well-being. Chiliastic dream-visions sprang up during the decay of 
slave-owning society; they were widespread among the oppressed during early 
Christianity and were continuously revived in the doctrines of the various 
medieval sects, which voiced the opinions of the peasants and plebeians. 
p. 415 
S09 The Confession of Augsburg (Augsburgische Konfession, Confessio Augustana) —a 
statement of the Lutheran doctrine read to Emperor Charles V at the Imperial 
Diet in Augsburg in 1530; it adapted the burgher ideas of a "cheap church" 
(abolition of lavish rites, modification of the clerical hierarchy, etc.) to the interests 
of the princes. A sovereign prince was to replace the Pope at the head of the 
church. The Confession of Augsburg was rejected by the Emperor. The war 
waged against him by princes who adopted the Lutheran Reformation ended in 
1555 in the religious peace of Augsburg, which empowered the princes to 
determine the faith of their subjects at their own discretion. p. 417 
310 See Notes 16 and 199. p. 417 
311 This date was cited by Zimmermann in the first edition of his book. According to 
later data Thomas Münzer was born about 1490 (the first date known from his 
biography, October 1506, is mentioned in his matriculation as a student of Leipzig 
University, when he was apparently sixteen years of age). In various sources, both 
in his own works and in historical writings, his name is transcribed differently 
(Munczer, Muntzer, Müntzer). Engels writes Münzer, the way Zimmermann wrote 
it in Part Three of his book. p. 420 
312 The Anabaptists (those who baptise over again) belonged to one of the most radical 
and democratic religious-philosophical trends spread in Switzerland, Germany 
and the Netherlands during the Reformation. Members of this sect were so called 
because they repudiated infant baptism and demanded a second, adult baptism. 
p. 420 
313 Engels refers to the views of David Strauss and other Young Hegelians who 
treated questions of religion from a pantheist standpoint in their early writings. 
p. 421 

=====第713页=====
690 Notes 
314 According to later verified data Münzer went first to the imperial city of 
Mühlhausen, from where he was banished by municipal authorities in September 
1524 for his part in disturbances among the city poor. From Mühlhausen Münzer 
came to Nuremberg. p. 426 
315 The Puritans (from the Latin puritas—purity)—participants in a religious political 
movement in England and Scotland at the close of the sixteenth and in the early 
half of the seventeenth centuries. Their object was a Protestant Calvinist 
Reformation and purification of the Church of England of every trace of 
Catholicism (elimination of bishops, simpler church rites, etc.). They advocated 
modesty, abstinence, thrift, encouraged prudence and enterprise. The Puritans 
expressed the religious opposition of the bourgeoisie to absolutism and played an 
important part in the ideological preparations for the English bourgeois 
revolution. 
The Independents—representatives of one of the Protestant trends in England. 
In the 1580s and 1590s they formed the Left wing of Puritanism and represented 
radical opposition to absolutism and the Church of England by the commercial 
and industrial bourgeoisie and the "new" bourgeois nobility. During the English 
revolution of the seventeenth century, the Independents formed a separate 
political party which came to power under Oliver Cromwell at the end of 1648. 
p. 429 
316 The Swabian League of princes, noblemen and patricians of the imperial cities of 
South-Western Germany was founded in 1488. Its chief purpose was to combat 
the peasant and plebeian movement. The South- and West-German princes who 
headed this League also viewed it as a means to consolidate their oligarchic rule. 
The League had its own administrative and judicial bodies, and an army. It fell 
apart in 1534 due to internal squabbles. p. 432 
317 This refers to the government of the viceregent of the Austrian Habsburgs in 
Ensisheim, the centre of the Austrian Forelands, the name used to denote the 
possessions of the Habsburgs and their immediate vassals in Upper Alsace, Upper 
Swabia and the Black Forest. p. 435 
318 Szeklers—an ethnic group of Hungarians, mostly free peasants. In the thirteenth 
century their forefathers were settled by Hungarian kings in the mountain regions 
of Transylvania to protect the frontiers. The region inhabited by them was usually 
called Szekler land. p. 438 
319 The reference is to a popular rising in Sicily against the French Anjou dynasty, 
which conquered Southern Italy and Sicily in 1267. On the evening of March 31, 
1282,  the population of Palermo took the vespers bell-toll as a signal to massacre 
several thousand French knights and soldiers. As a result, the whole of Sicily was 
freed from French domination and came under the Aragon King. p. 438 
320 Engels refers to the 95 theses that Luther (who began his clerical career as a simple 
monk in the Augustinian monastery in Thuringia) nailed to a church door in 
Wittenberg on October 31, 1517. The theses contained a vigorous protest against 
the sale of indulgences and the abuses by the Catholic clergy. They also presented 
the initial outline of Luther's religious teaching in the vein of burgher ideals. 
p. 441 
321 Burlesque—satirical literature and parodies by writers of the Renaissance and 
humanitarian ideologists who ridiculed the high-flown style of court poetry and 
the strict behaviour of upper feudal society. p. 441 

=====第714页=====
Notes 691 
322 The Wars of the Roses (1455-85)—wars between the feudal Houses of York and 
Lancaster fighting for the throne, the white rose being the badge of the House of 
York, and the red rose of the House of Lancaster. The Yorkists were supported by 
some of the big feudal landowners from the south-eastern, more economically 
developed part of the country and also by the knights and the townspeople, while 
the Lancastrians were backed by the feudal aristocracy of the backward north and 
of Wales. The wars almost completely wiped out the ancient feudal nobility and 
brought Henry VII to power to form a new dynasty, that of the Tudors, who set 
up an absolute monarchy in England. p. 443 
323 The reference is to the Polish national liberation uprising in November 
1830-October 1831, and also to that in Cracow in 1846 (see Note 66). p. 444 
324 See Note 317. p. 446 
325 xhis refers to the black-red-and-gold banner symbolising German unity. The 
information on such a banner provided by Zimmermann is not, however, 
corroborated by contemporary sources, i.e. chronicles, etc. The usual peasant 
colours were red-white, red-black, etc. p. 446 
326 Emperor Maximilian's edict ruled that only representatives of "noble" estates 
could be members of provincial courts. p. 448 
327 Another big credit was advanced to Archduke Ferdinand by the Augsburg 
banking house of Fuggers, who owned vast tracts of land north of Lake Constance 
and had a vital interest in suppressing the peasant insurrection. p. 448 
328 The reference is to the southern mountainous part of Baden adjacent to 
Switzerland. In the sixteenth century, part of this region was owned by the 
Margrave of Baden and the rest of it either belonged to the Austrian land of 
Breisgau or to petty ecclesiastical and secular feudal lords. p. 448 
329 Engels refers to the anonymous pamphlet printed in Nuremberg in early 1525, 
entitled An die Versammlung gemeiner  Pawerschaft,  so in Hochteutscher  Nation und viel 
anderer Ort, mit empörung und uffruhr entstanden, ob ihr Empörung billicher oder 
unbillicher gestalt  geschehn,  und was sie der Oberkeit schuldig oder nicht schuldig  seind, 
gegründet aus der heil, göttlichen Geschrift, von Oberlendischen Mitbrüdern guter 
maynung ausgangen und beschriben (To the Assembly of All the Indignant and 
Insurgent Peasantry of the Upper German Nation and Many Other Places on 
Whether or Not Its Indignation Is Just and What It Should or Should Not Do to 
the Authorities. Based on the Holy Scripture, Composed and Rendered with the 
Full Approval of the Highland Brotherhood). Wilhelm Zimmermann believed this 
pamphlet to have been written by Thomas Münzer (Allgemeine Geschichte des 
grossen Bauernkrieges, Th. 2, S. 113). p. 448 
Judica Sunday (from judex —judge, literally "judgment Sunday")—the fifth 
Sunday in Lent. p. 450 
331 The small and the great tithe—two varieties of tax paid to the Catholic Church.The 
size and nature of this tax varied in different parts of Germany, and in most cases 
greatly exceeded a tenth of the peasants' produce. As a rule the great tithe ( décima 
major) was imposed on the corn and vine harvest whereas the small tithe ( décima 
minor) was imposed on other crops. p. 451 

=====第715页=====
692 Notes 
332 The Grand Chapter of Würzburg —an ecclesiastical collegium governing the 
Würzburg bishopric, whose head, the Bishop of Würzburg, also had the title of 
Duke of Franconia. p. 452 
333 The Teutonic Order—a German religious Order of knights founded in 1190 
during the crusades. The Order seized vast possessions in Germany and other 
countries. These were administered by dignitaries known as commandores (or 
comthurs). In the thirteenth century, East Prussia fell under the rule of the Order 
after it was overrun and the local population exterminated. In 1237 the Order 
amalgamated with the Livonian Order, which also had its seat in the Baltic area. 
The Eastern possessions of the Order became a seat of aggression against Poland, 
Lithuania and the adjoining Russian principalities. After the defeat at Chudskoye 
Lake in 1242 and in the battle at Grunwald in 1410, the Order rapidly declined 
and was only able to maintain a small part of its former possessions. p. 454 
334 Later research into the Peasant War in Germany proves that the Heilbronn 
Councillor Hans Berlin who, as Engels describes, became a traitor and negotiated 
with Truchsess, military chief of the Swabian League, on behalf of patricians and 
wealthy burghers (see p. 461 of this volume), and the author of the Declaration of 
the Twelve Articles who induced the peasant leaders to accept it, were two 
different people, the latter being the Heilbronn notary and procurator Hans 
(Johannes) Berlin. p. 455 
335 T\\e agreement of Offenburg, concluded by the Breisgau insurgents and the 
Austrian Government on September 18, 1525, stipulated the restoration of 
former peasant services and the institution of harsh measures against peasant 
societies and "heretics". For its part, the government undertook to pardon 
rank-and-file members of the movement and confine itself to relatively modest 
fines.  The amnesty, however, did not extend to the leaders of the uprising. Even 
this agreement, unfavourable as it was to the peasants, was soon violated by the 
Austrian authorities and local feudal lords, who subjected the insurgents to bloody 
reprisals as soon as they had laid down their arms. p. 467 
336 The agreement, concluded with the Austrian Government on November 13, 
1525,  forced the Black Forest peasants to repeat their oath of allegiance to the 
Habsburgs, to resume their former feudal services and not to interfere with the 
bloody reprisals of the victors against the town of Waldshut, headquarters of the 
movement. The defenders of Waldshut, however, stood their ground for several 
weeks, and the town fell only due to the treachery of the rich burghers. 
p. 467 
337 Later research has proved that Münzer held no official post in the Mühlhausen 
"eternal council", but his presence at its sittings and his advice to the council made 
him the virtual head of the new revolutionary government. p. 469 
338 Engels refers to Louis Blanc and Albert (Alexandre Martin), who represented the 
proletariat in the bourgeois Provisional Government of the French Republic 
instituted in February 1848 (see this volume, p. 53). p. 470 
339 See Note 11. p. 470 
340 The Articles of the Alsatian peasants not only defined more sharply the 
anti-feudal demands of the Twelve Articles (see this volume, p. 451) of the 
Swabian and Franconian peasantry (abolition of serfdom, return of common lands 
usurped by the nobility, etc.), but in many respects went even further. They were 
also directed against usurers (the clause on the abolition of usurers' interest, and 

=====第716页=====
Notes 693 
others); they demanded the abolition not only of the small, but of the great tithe as 
well, and proclaimed the right of the local population to depose and replace 
officials with whom they were dissatisfied. p. 473 
341 The Fourteen Articles of the insurgent peasants and pitmen of the Salzburg 
archbishopric in the main reproduced the demands of the Twelve Articles of the 
Swabian and Franconian peasants. In addition, they contained certain local 
demands. Among other things, the insurgents demanded that the independence 
of the courts from the influence of feudal lords and their puppets be secured, that 
the responsibility of the whole community for crimes committed on its territory be 
abolished and measures be taken to maintain roads in good repair and to protect 
trade. p. 475 
The Thirty Years' War (1618-48)—a European war, in which the Pope, the 
Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs and the Catholic German princes rallied under 
the banner of Catholicism and fought the Protestant countries: Bohemia, 
Denmark, Sweden, the Republic of the Netherlands and a number of Protestant 
German states. The rulers of Catholic France—rivals of the Habsburgs— 
supported the Protestant camp. Germany was the main battle arena or the object 
of plunder and territorial claims. The Treaty of Westphalia (1648) sealed the 
political dismemberment of Germany. p. 478 
343 This document reflects an acute struggle waged by Marx, Engels and their 
followers against sectarian elements in the Communist League. By August 1850, 
Marx and Engels realised that, in the context of the general economic prosperity, 
there was no prospect for a new revolution in the near future (see this volume, 
pp. 509-10). They believed that most efforts should be concentrated on 
strengthening the proletarian party's independence from petty-bourgeois democ­
racy, both ideologically and organisationally. This sober analysis and logical 
approach were opposed by Willich and Schapper, members of the Communist 
League Central Authority. Willich also disagreed with Marx's understanding of 
the theory of the proletarian revolution; he thought that communism could be 
enforced by the minority once and for all. Marx wrote to the Cologne Communists 
on their disagreements as far back as June 1850. The contents of his letter were 
recorded in the evidence of Peter Röser, one of the accused at the Cologne trial 
(1852),  which he gave late in 1853 and early in 1854 while in prison. Willich, 
Schapper and their followers, instead of analysing objective reality as Marx and 
Engels did, proposed pseudo-revolutionary phrases and employed adventurist 
tactics in an attempt to provoke new insurrections in Germany. This led to 
disagreements in the Central Authority which became clear during its meetings in 
August and the early half of September, and intensified on September 15, 1850, 
when the Communist League split (see this volume, pp. 625-29). 
This meeting decided to transfer the seat of the League's Central Authority to 
Cologne and instruct the local authority there to form a new Central Authority of 
the League (see this volume, p. 630). The factionalists, being in the minority, 
walked out, appealed to League members of the London district, and, with their 
support, formed their own central authority. The majority of the members of the 
German Workers' Educational Society in London (see Note 61) also sided with the 
separatist faction of Willich and Schapper, causing Marx, Engels and their 
followers to resign from this Society. 
The statement was printed in Cologne in 1852 in the Bill of Indictment 
of the Cologne communist trial under the title: Marx, K., Engels, F., An den 
Dienstagspräsidenten der Gesellschaft in Great Windmill Street, London, 17. September, 
24-1124 

=====第717页=====
694 Notes 
1850, and in the book: Wermuth-Stieber, Die Communisten-V erschwörungen des 
neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, Th. 1, Berlin, 1853. p. 483 
344 Following the split in the Communist League, the Blanquist refugees in London 
supported the sectarian adventurist faction headed by Willich and Schapper. In 
view of this Marx and Engels, backed by the spokesmen of revolutionary Chartists, 
decided to cancel the agreement to found the Universal Society of Revolutionary 
Cqmmunists concluded with the Blanquists and signed in mid-April 1850 (see 
Note 277). The letter published in this volume was written on this occasion. A 
rough copy of it in Engels' handwriting is extant. p. 484 
345 Eccarius wrote his article "Die Schneiderei in London oder der Kampf des 
grossen und des kleinen Capitals" (which was published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 5-6) with Marx's direct assistance, Marx 
being the editor. 
The editorial comment written by Marx and Engels follows directly after the 
article. It was later reproduced in Eccarius' Preface to his other work, also written 
with Marx's assistance: Eccarius, Eines Arbeiters Wiederlegung der national­
ökonomischen Lehren John Stuart Mill's, Berlin, 1869, and also in the second German 
edition of this book published in Hottingen-Zürich, 1888. p. 485 
346 This is an unfinished rough draft of an article intended for No. 5 of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue. Engels wrote it in connection with 
the stand taken by some of the Young Hegelians (Eduard Meyen, Julius Faucher, 
Ludwig Buhl and Max Stirner), who in 1842 were members of the Berlin circle 
"The Free" and from the early 1850s rallied around the Berlin periodical 
Abend-Post and the Stuttgart Deutsche Monatsschrift für Politik, Wissenschaft, Kunst 
und Lebens. They preached extreme individualism and anarchy, claiming them to 
be products of "higher democracy" and the "free association of people". Actually, 
however, this group championed Free Trade and rejected such democratic 
institutions as universal suffrage. The fact that, from April 1850 onwards, the 
subtitle "Democratic Paper" was omitted from the name of its organ was further 
proof that this group was becoming anti-democratic and anti-revolutionary. The 
Abend-Post frequently printed articles directed against "the law-abiding people 
among the democrats", against socialism and communism, as well as against "the 
revolutionary terror", the servile dependence of the individual on the masses, etc. 
These ideas were also current among some of the German petty-bourgeois 
refugees. 
At the beginning of his article, Engels quotes passages from the review of 
Emile Girardin's Le Socialisme et l'impôt, which he wrote together with Marx and 
published in the Revue No. 4. The italics at the beginning of the quotation are 
introduced by Engels. Engels again refers to this review below. p. 486 
347 Speaking about the "German disciples of Proudhon" Engels is apparently 
alluding to Karl Grün and Arnold Ruge, who translated some of Proudhon's 
works into German and popularised his ideas in the press. 
The '"noblest minds of the nation' of the Stuttgart parliament and the 
Imperial Regency" refers to Ludwig Simon and Karl Vogt —deputies to the 
Stuttgart parliament (the remnants of the Frankfurt parliament that moved to 
Stuttgart in the summer of 1849—see Note 222). They were also among the five 
imperial regents appointed by the parliament (see Note 11). In 1850 Vogt and 
Simon used the Stuttgart journal Deutsche Monatsschrift to propagate anarchist 
ideas of abolishing every kind of state. p. 487 

=====第718页=====
Notes 695 
348 This, third, international review, just like the first and the second published in the 
previous issues of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue, is a joint 
work by Marx and Engels (see Note 194), a fact corroborated by Marx's letter to 
Engels, dated October 20, 1857. Yet, when passages from this review were 
published during their lifetime, the only author mentioned was Marx. Marx, 
apparently, wrote the bulk of the text, particularly sections dealing with the 
economic situation in European countries, and also an analysis of the events in 
France which Engels later incorporated in the work The Class Struggles in France, 
1848 to 1850. In September and October 1850 Marx took extracts from David 
Morier Evans' The Commercial Crisis 1847-1848, London, 1848, and Thomas 
Tooke's A History of Prices, and of the State of the Circulation, from 1839 to 1847 
Inclusive, London, 1848 (Vol. 4 of the five-volume history of prices), which were 
used for the review. 
The full text of the review was never published during the authors' lifetime. 
Part of it dealing with England, France and Germany was published in the 
Deutsche Londoner Zeitung (Nos. 305-07, January 31, February 7 and 14, 1851) 
under the title "Revue der politischen Ereignisse der letzten sechs Monate" von 
Carl Marx. Another passage, entitled "Geschichteder Handelskrisis von 1845-47" 
nach Karl Marx, was reproduced in Weydemeyer's New York weekly Die 
Revolution Nos. 1 and 2 of January 6 and 13, 1852. 
In 1895, when Engels was preparing a separate edition of Marx's  Class  Struggles 
in France for publication, he added a fourth chapter which included sections of the 
review dealing with the economic situation and events in France (see this volume, 
pp. 507-10 and 516-25). Only these sections, as part of The Class Struggles, have 
ever been published in English. 
The editors of this volume have taken account of corrections made by Marx 
and Engels in the margin of their copies of the Revue. p. 490 
349 Tne reference is to the speculative machinations of the Scottish economist and 
financier John Law in France between 1716 and 1720; he dealt with the issue of 
securities and the foundation of joint-stock trading companies. The bank which 
he founded in 1716, and later transferred to the French Government, as well as a 
number of companies for trade with foreign countries, went bankrupt in 1720. 
The South Sea Companyv/as founded in England about 1711, officially for trade 
with South America and the Pacific islands, but its real purpose was speculation in 
state bonds. The government granted several privileges to the Company, 
including the right to issue paper money. The Company's large-scale speculation 
brought it to bankruptcy in 1720. p. 492 
350 An Act to Regulate the Issue of Bank Notes, and for Giving to the Governor and 
Company of the Bank of England Certain Privileges for a Limited Period was 
introduced by Robert Peel on July 19, 1844. It envisaged the division of the Bank 
of England into two completely independent departments, each with its own cash 
account—the Banking Department which performed purely credit operations 
and the Issue Department which issued bank-notes. The Act established the 
maximum quantity of bank-notes in circulation guaranteed by definite reserve 
funds of gold and silver not to be used for the credit operations of the Banking 
Department. Additional issue of bank-notes was allowed only if the precious metal 
reserves were increased proportionally. During the 1847 monetary crisis the Act 
was suspended. p. 496 
351 In mid-October 1850 the Emperor of Austria and the Kings of Bavaria and 
Württemberg met in Bregenz (on the shores of Lake Constance) to conclude a 
convention against Prussian claims to the hegemony in Germany. 
24* 

=====第719页=====
696 Notes 
On October 28, 1850, Warsaw was the scene of a meeting between the Russian 
Emperor Nicholas I, the Austrian Emperor Francis Joseph and the head of the 
Prussian Government, Count Brandenburg, during which Nicholas I resolutely 
took the side of Austria in the Austro-Prussian conflict. p. 500 
352 In 1833 the English Parliament adopted an Act for the Abolition of Slavery 
Throughout the British Colonies. A sum of £20 million was allocated to 
compensate slave-owners. p. 501 
353 On the events in Schleswig-Holstein see Note 291. 
In September 1850, a Constitutional conflict flared up in the electorate of 
Hesse-Cassel between the Elector Frederick William I and the Chamber of 
Representatives. The head of the government, Hans Hassenpflug, who advocated 
absolutism, dissolved the Chamber and introduced a state of siege in the country, 
thus evoking vehement protests from the entire population. The Elector and 
Hassenpflug sought assistance from Austria, disregarding the fact that Hesse-
Cassel belonged to the confederation of German states headed by Prussia. Austria 
and Prussia contended for the right to mount a punitive expedition against the 
Hesse constitutional movement and their rivalry in Germany became even more 
acute. Austria countered Prussia's plans by proposing a revival of the German 
Confederation of 1815, and early in September 1850, at a conference of minor 
German states in Frankfurt am Main, she secured the restoration of the 
Confederation and its Diet, where she exercised the predominant influence. Early 
in November 1850 there were even clashes between Prussian and Austrian 
detachments on Hesse-Cassel territory. Before long, however, Nicholas I forced 
Prussia to make concessions, temporarily abandon her plans for hegemony in 
Germany and let Austria fulfil the punitive mission in Hesse-Cassel. p. 507 
354 See Note 122. p. 509 
355 See Note 123. p. 509 
356 xhis refers to the international congress of pacifists held in Frankfurt am Main in 
August 1850 and attended by such prominent figures as the American 
philanthropist Elihu Burritt, the leader of the English Free Traders Richard 
Cobden, and the former head of the liberal government in Hesse, Heinrich Jaup; 
representatives of the Quaker religious sect were also among the delegates. 
p. 511 
357 The reference is to the debate on the Anglo-Greek conflict at the June 1850 
session of the English Parliament. In 1850 the British Government presented 
Greece with an ultimatum and sent ships to blockade Piraeus using as a pretext the 
burning (in Athens in 1847) of the house of the Portuguese merchant Pacifico, 
who was a British subject. The real object of this move, however, was to make 
Greece surrender several strategically important islands in the Aegean Sea. 
Russia and France protested and the French Government even recalled its 
Ambassador from London. During the debate, Lord Palmerston made a speech in 
the House of Commons demagogically exposing the policy of European states and 
presenting the Whig Government as the champion of civil rights and liberties. 
p. 511 
358 See Note 279. p. 511 
359 During his stay in London in 1850, Julius Haynau, the Austrian field marshal 
notorious for his cruel repressive measures against the participants in the 
revolutionary movement in Hungary and Italy, visited the Barclay, Perkins & 

=====第720页=====
Notes 697 
Co. brewery, and was physically attacked and forced to flee by its indignant 
workers. The people of London warmly approved this news. p. 511 
360 The enumerated reforms were enacted on Peel's initiative (these included the 
Bank Act of 1844 and the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846—see Notes 350, 29). 
The Bill submitted in 1818 and enacted in 1819 stipulated that the Bank of 
England was to resume the exchange of bank-notes for gold. 
In 1829 the English Parliament passed an Act for Relief of His Majesty's 
Roman Catholic Subjects. The Catholics, the majority of whom were Irishmen, 
were given the right to be elected to Parliament and to occupy certain official 
posts,  while the property qualifications for the electorate were raised fivefold. By 
this would-be emancipation of the Catholics, the English ruling classes sought to 
enlist the support of Catholic landowners and the upper Irish bourgeoisie. 
In 1829, Peel, the Home Secretary, secured the adoption of a law to form a 
special police corps in London, who were to be directly subordinate to the Home 
Office. The latter was granted the right to effect control over the police force 
throughout the country, a role previously fulfilled by the local authorities. 
The tariff reform of 1842 lowered customs duties on corn and other imported 
goods, but introduced income tax as a compensation for the treasury. p. 512 
361 Puseyism—a trend in the Anglican Church from the 1830s to the 1860s, named 
after one of its founders, Pusey, an Oxford University theologian. He advocated 
the restoration of Catholic rites and dogma in the Anglican Church. Many of the 
Puseyites were converted to Catholicism. p. 513 
362 The High Church—a group in the Anglican Church, most of whom belonged to 
the aristocracy; they emphasised the doctrine of apostolic succession and attached 
great importance to ceremony and symbols. The Low Church included members of 
the middle classes and the lower ranks of the clergy and laid special stress on 
Christian morality. 
Dissenters were members of Protestant religious sects and trends in England 
who to some extent rejected the dogmas and rituals of the official Anglican 
Church. p. 513 
The constituent assembly that proclaimed the Roman Republic was elected on 
January 21, 1849; the majority of its deputies were democrats—supporters of 
Mazzini. The assembly deprived the Pope of his secular power and introduced a 
number of progressive social measures. After the downfall of the Republic in July 
1849,  some of the deputies emigrated to England where they formed a provisional 
Italian National Committee under Mazzini. p. 514 
364 In the spring of 1850, the Austrian Government floated a so-called voluntary loan 
of 120 million lire in Lombardy and Venice. Since the population refused to 
subscribe voluntarily, however, it was enforced compulsorily. p. 514 
365 T^ reference is to the Chartist Land Cooperative Society founded on the 
initiative of O'Connor in 1845 (later the National Land Company, that lasted till 
1848).  The aim of the Society was to buy plots of land with the money collected, 
and to lease them to worker shareholders on easy terms. Among the positive 
aspects of the Society were its petitions to Parliament and printed propaganda 
against the aristocracy's monopoly of land. (These aspects were emphasised by 
Engels in 1847 in his article "The Agrarian Programme of the Chartists", see 
present edition, Vol. 6.) However, the idea of liberating the workers from 
exploitation, of reducing unemployment, etc., by returning them to the land 
proved Utopian. The Society's activities were not successful in practice, p. 515 

=====第721页=====
698 Notes 
366 See Note 46. p. 516 
367 See Note 125. p. 516 
368 See Note 48. p. 517 
369 See Note 127. p. 520 
370 See Note 56. p. 521 
371 See Note 129. p. 522 
372 The reference is to the so-called Wiesbaden Manifesto (see Note 130). p. 522 
373 See Note 131. p. 523 
374 See Note 132. p. 523 
375 Following the victory of the popular uprising in Berlin on March 18, 1848, the 
Prussian King Frederick William IV rode on horseback through the streets of the 
capital (on March 21), wearing a black-red-and-gold armband symbolising 
German unity. The same day in an appeal "To My People and the German 
Nation" he swore to take the cause of unifying Germany into his own hands. 
? The Federal Diet—see Note 7. 
The Little Germany—see Note 199. p. 525 
376 See Note 187. p. 526 
377 Médiatisation —transformation of princes, formerly independent members of the 
Imperial German Confederation, into subjects of a bigger German sovereign. In 
the present case, the reference is to Prussia's attempts to subordinate smaller 
German princes to her hegemony. p. 526 
378 In 1849 the Grand Duchy of Hesse-Darmstadt and the Hesse-Cassel electorate 
agreed to join the confederation of German states under the hegemony of Prussia 
(Prussian Union), but under pressure from Austria and Russia they withdrew in 
1850 and sided with Austria. p. 526 
379 An ironical allusion to what Frederick William IV said to the delegates of the 
Frankfurt National Assembly when he received them on April 3, 1849. He agreed 
to accept the Imperial Crown offered him by the delegation provided the other 
sovereigns were in agreement. It was virtually a refusal to accept the Crown, which 
the Prussian King accompanied with the pompous statement: "If the Prussian 
shield or sword is needed to Germany against external or internal enemies, I shall 
not be found wanting, even if I am not called upon." p. 527 
380 The reference is to the Protocol signed on July 4, 1850, by the representatives of 
Austria, England, France, Denmark, Prussia, Russia and Sweden who met in 
London to discuss Schleswig-Holstein. The document supported the indivisibility 
of lands belonging to the Danish Crown, including the Duchy of Schleswig-
Holstein. Only Prussia refused to sign the Protocol, since two days previously she 
had concluded a separate peace treaty with Denmark in violation of her allied 
commitments to the Provisional Government of Schleswig-Holstein. In 1852, 
however, Prussia too had to give official recognition to this document, p. 527 
381 The reference is to the Central Committee of European Democracy (see Note 
272).  p. 529 
382 An allusion to the polemic that developed in the late 1830s between the clerical 
historian and journalist Heinrich Leo and the Young Hegelian Arnold Ruge, who 

=====第722页=====
Notes 699 
is ironically referred to as Arnold Winkelried, the name of a semi-legendary hero 
of the Swiss liberation wars. In his pamphlet Die Hegelingen (Halle, 1838) Leo, who 
was a bitter opponent of the Hegelian philosophy, accused Ruge and other Young 
Hegelians of being atheists and, in particular, of not seeing the difference between 
divinity and humanity. p. 532 
383 When the Communist League split and Marx, Engels and their followers 
withdrew from the German Workers' Educational Society in London (see this 
volume, p. 483), the spokesmen of the Willich-Schapper faction brought a suit on 
behalf of the Society against Heinrich Bauer and Karl Pfänder, supporters of the 
majority of the League's Central Authority, who, as trustees, held part of the 
Society's money to be used under the Central Authority's control for the needs of 
the League and to help political refugees. Bauer and Pfänder were willing to 
return the money in instalments, provided it was not spent by the factionalists to 
the detriment of the Communist League. The latter insisted on a prompt return 
of the entire sum. On November 20, 1850, the English court rejected the Society's 
suit, but the followers of Willich and Schapper did not halt their insinuations 
against Bauer and Pfänder and started a libel campaign in the press. (One of their 
statements was published in the Schweizerische National-Zeitung, January 7, 1851.) 
This draft statement, intended to refute the insinuations spread by the 
Willich-Schapper faction, must have been written between December 24 and 31, 
1850.  In mid-November Engels moved to Manchester and started working for the 
Ermen and Engels firm (prompted by the necessity of providing material 
assistance to Marx's family), but towards the end of December he returned to 
London for a couple of days. The draft, in Engels' handwriting with Marx's 
corrections, is written in Marx's notebook. 
In January 1852, Pfänder, probably with Marx's assistance, drew up a further 
statement for the press concerning this affair (it was published in the Schweizerische 
National-Zeitung and the manuscript is extant). p. 533 
384 This statement was written by Marx after discussion with Engels (see Marx's letter 
to Engels of January 22 and Engels' letter to Marx of January 25, 1851). It was 
aimed against Arnold Ruge, who attacked Marx and Engels in the press accusing 
them, among other things, of being party to the appropriation of the funds 
belonging to the German Workers' Educational Society in London. (Ruge's 
insinuations were partly provoked by the Willich-Schapper faction.) On January 
27, Marx sent the text of the statement to Manchester for Engels to sign and 
forward to the press. Marx intended to publish it in the Bremen newspaper 
Weser-Zeitung and then in the New-Yorker Staatszeitung but it was not printed in 
either. The extant original is in Jenny Marx's handwriting. p. 535 
385 At the time Engels was working on a series of articles intended for the Friend of  the 
People, the weekly edited by George Julian Harney, about leaders of European 
petty-bourgeois democrats. His intention did not materialise, however, owing to 
disagreements with Harney. At a later date Marx and Engels used this material for 
their pamphlet The Great Men of  the Exile where, giving a satirical characteristic of 
Ruge, they employed such expressions as the "gutter", "Arnold Winkelried 
Ruge" and the like, which originally must have occurred in the articles intended 
for the Friend of  the People  (see present edition, Vol. 11). In the pamphlet, just as in 
the given statement, Ruge is described as "the fifth wheel on the carriage of state 
of European central democracy" (this refers to his being a member of the Central 
Committee of European Democracy—see Note 272). p. 536 

=====第723页=====
700 Notes 
386 On February 24, 1851, London was the scene of an international rally known as 
the "banquet of the equal". It was organised by some of the French refugees 
headed by Louis Blanc and by the society of Blanquist emigrants (Barthélémy, 
Adam and others), together with the Willich-Schapper faction, to celebrate the 
anniversary of the February revolution. Marx and Engels asked their followers 
Konrad Schramm and W. Pieper to attend the banquet, but the latter were driven 
from the hall. The organisers of the banquet deliberately concealed the toast sent 
by Auguste Blanqui, who was in prison at the time, exposing Louis Blanc and 
other members of the Provisional Government of the French Republic (see Engels' 
letter to the editor of The Times). However, it was published on February 27 in La 
Patrie No. 58 and in a number of other French papers. Early in March, Marx and 
Engels translated the toast into German and English. The German version was 
sent to Cologne and printed in leaflet form (30,000 copies), with Berne given as 
the place of publication. The leaflet was circulated in Germany, where Blanqui's 
toast was also printed in several German papers. What became of the English 
translation is not known. 
In their letters and works Marx and Engels discuss the circumstances 
connected with Blanqui's toast (The Great Men of the Exile, The Knight of 
Noble-Minded  Consciousness,  see present edition, Vols. 11 and 12). 
For this volume the text, of the toast itself was translated from the French 
original published in La Patrie (No. 58, February 27, 1851) and is given according 
to the German edition prepared by Marx and Engels. p, 537 
387 This letter and the English translation of Blanqui's toast attached to it (see this 
volume, pp. 537-39) were not published. Engels intended to send this letter to 
Blanqui (see Engels' letter to Marx of March 10, 1851) but it is not known whether 
he did so. The extant manuscript is a rough copy of the letter. p. 540 
388 Engels is apparently referring to the disputes over the question of the state which 
Proudhon and Louis Blanc carried on in La Voix du peuple from November 25, 
1849,  to January 18, 1850. Proudhon asserted that Blanc, in his capacity as the 
French Provisional Government Minister, was, more than any other person, 
responsible for the defeat of the revolution, and that he was a pseudo-socialist and 
a pseudo-democrat. p. 541 
389 In March 1849 Proudhon was sentenced to three years imprisonment and a fine. 
p. 541 
390 Engels worked on this manuscript in April 1851, without intending to publish it. 
As he promised Marx in his letter of April 3, 1851, he here gave a detailed 
analysis, from the military point of view, of the prospects of a war waged by the 
coalition of counter-revolutionary powers (the resurrected Holy Alliance accord­
ing to Engels' terminology) against a revolutionary France. Such an analysis of the 
military potential of the European powers and the correlation of forces between 
counter-revolutionary and revolutionary camps in the event of a new revolu­
tionary outbreak was necessary as a basis for criticising the adventurist plans of 
the democratic refugees, including the sectarian group of Willich and Schapper, 
who gave a voluntarist and superficial appraisal of the prospects of military clashes 
in Europe and believed that the victory of the revolutionary army was inevitable 
(by analogy with the events of the French Revolution). 
This work opened up a'new stage in Engels' regular studies of military theory 
and history in which he had engaged since his arrival in Manchester in November 
1850.  He studied thoroughly such works as W. P. Napier's History of  the War in the 
Peninsula and in the South of France, from the Year 1807 to the Year 1814, 6 vols., 
London, 1828-40, an atlas to Alsison's  Geschichte  von Europa, A. Thiers' Histoire du 

=====第724页=====
Notes 701 
Consulat et de l'Empire, and others. Engels elaborated many of the theoretical 
propositions in this manuscript in his later works. 
The manuscript was published for the first time in 1914 in Die Neue Zeit, the 
theoretical organ of the German Social-Democratic Party. The editors gave a 
wrong date of writing and supplied the tide—"Die Möglichkeiten und Voraus­
setzungen eines Krieges der Heiligen Allianz gegen Frankreich im Jahre 
1852"  — which did not quite correspond to the contents of the manuscript. A 
more exact title was given in Vol. 7 of the second Russian edition of the Collected 
Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels published in 1956. In this volume the 
abbreviated words and dates are written out in full and subdivision into 
paragraphs is somewhat changed. p. 542 
391 At Jemappes (Belgium) on November 6, 1792, the French army under General 
Dumouriez won a major victory over the Austrian troops. p. 543 
392 At Neerwinden (Belgium) on March 18, 1793, the French army under General 
Dumouriez suffered a defeat from troops commanded by the Austrian field 
marshal, Duke of Coburg. p. 543 
398 At Fleurus (Belgium) on June 26, 1794, the French troops defeated the Austrian 
army under the Duke of Coburg. This victory enabled the French revolutionary 
army to enter and occupy Belgium. p. 544 
394 The reference is to the Girondist Ministry formed after the popular insurrection 
of August 10, 1792, triumphed and the monarchy was overthrown; it remained in 
power until June 2, 1793, when the Jacobin dictatorship was established. 
p. 544 
395 At Tourcoing (France) on May 18, 1794, French troops under General Moreau 
defeated those of the Duke of Coburg. p. 545 
396 An allusion to the initial stage of the Italian campaign undertaken by Napoleon 
Bonaparte in 1796-97. In April 1796 Bonaparte's army began its offensive from 
Nice and moved through mountain passes into Northern Italy. Between April 12 
and 15, by bold manoeuvring of large military contingents, Bonaparte succeeded 
first in defeating the isolated groups of Austrians and then (on April 22) in 
routing their allies, the Piedmontese. By threatening to march on Turin, 
Bonaparte forced the Kingdom of Sardinia to dissociate itself from the 
anti-French coalition (April 28). p. 545 
39? See Note 93. p. 545 
398 Ninth Thermidor (July 27-28, 1794)—counter-revolutionary coup d'état that 
overthrew the Jacobin government and established the rule of the big bourgeoisie. 
Carnot took an active part in preparing this coup. 
Eighteenth Fructidor (September 4, 1797)— coup d'état effected by the 
Directory, with the support of Napoleon Bonaparte, to thwart the restoration of 
the monarchy. Carnot, discredited by his association with royalist conspirators, 
fled from France. 
Eighteenth Brumaire (November 9, 1799)—Napoleon Bonaparte's coup d'état 
that led to his dictatorship (first he was proclaimed First Consul and then, in 
1804 — Emperor). Carnot approved of the coup d'état, though on several 
occasions he made timid attempts to oppose Napoleon. p. 546 
The Seven Years' War (1756-63)—a European war, in which England and Prussia 
fought against the coalition of Austria, France. Russia, Saxony and Sweden. In 

=====第725页=====
702 Notes 
1756-57, the Prussian troops of Frederick II won a number of victories over the 
Austrian and French armies; however, the success of the Russian forces in Prussia 
(1757-60) put Frederick II in a critical position, bringing the results of his victories 
to nought. The war ended with France having to cede some of her colonies 
(including Canada and almost all of her possessions in East India) to Britain, while 
Prussia, Austria and Saxony had to recognise the pre-war frontiers. p. 546 
The Rhenish Federation—a confederation of the states of Western and Southern 
Germany founded in 1806 under the protectorate of Napoleon. These states 
officially broke with the Holy Roman Empire of the German nation, which shortly 
ceased to exist. When Napoleon lost the military campaign of 1813 the 
confederation fell apart. p. 547 
401 See Note 92. p. 547 
402 In April 1809 the battle between Napoleon's army and Austrian troops raged for 
five days in the district of Regensburg in Bavaria. The engagements at Abensberg 
and Eggmühl were stages in this major battle, in which the Austrian army was 
defeated and had to retreat. p. 548 
403 During the Russo-Turkish war (1787-91) Russian troops, under Alexander 
Suvorov, captured the fortress of Ochakov on December 17, 1788. The success of 
this operation was prepared by the utter defeat of the Turkish landing force at 
Kinburn on October 12, 1787. Suvorov himself took part in storming the fortress 
of Ismail, which was taken on December 22, 1790. p. 548 
404 See Note 168. p. 549 
405 See Note 203. p. 553 
406 In Prussia, young educated people who could afford to buy uniform and weapons 
could be enlisted as volunteers and, after one year's service, could claim 
promotion to the rank of an officer in the army reserve. p. 554 
407 See Note 105. p. 559 
408 The article "The Constitution of the French Republic", printed in the organ of 
the revolutionary wing of the Chartist party, Notes to the  People  No. 7 for June 14, 
1851,  was to be the first of a series of articles dealing with the constitutions of 
European states, as shown by the general heading—"The Constitutions of 
Europe, Compiled from Original Sources; with the Assistance of Leading 
Continental Democrats", written above the title of the article. That it was Marx 
who wrote this article is proved by letters written to Marx by Ernest Jones, the 
editor of the journal, on May 23, 25 and 30, 1851, as well as by its ideological 
kinship with Marx's The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (see present 
edition, Vol. 11). The article may have been translated into English by Engels, 
since Marx did not know English well enough at the time. One more article from 
this series appeared in the Notes to the People under the title "The Prussian 
Constitution", but it was not written by Marx. 
The text of the Constitution, which Marx analyses in the given article, was 
originally published in Le Moniteur universel No. 312, November 7, 1848. The 
same year it appeared in Paris as a pamphlet. We may assume that Marx used this 
separate edition. When quoting or rendering some article from the Constitution, 
Marx introduced his own italics. The articles of the Constitution quoted in the 
Notes to the People are designated as paragraphs (§§). p. 567 

=====第726页=====
Notes 703 
409 Marx is referring to the intervention against the Roman Republic undertaken by 
the French Government in 1849 (see Note 91). p. 567 
410 The reference is to the French press law adopted on June 9, 1819. Under this law, 
the amount of security-money to be invested by various periodicals depended on 
the frequency and place of their publication. 
Under the law of July 23, 1850, the previous high rates were extended to 
publications printed in Lyons and the Rhone department. (This law was originally 
adopted on July 16, 1850, but it appeared in the press with Article 22 missing, 
which led the National Assembly to adopt on July 23 a decision to publish it once 
more. This was done in Le Moniteur universel No. 205, July 24, 1850.) p. 569 
411 In 1832, Louis Bonaparte took Swiss citizenship in the canton of Turgau; during 
his stay in England in 1848 he volunteered as a special constable (the constabulary 
was a civilian police reserve); together with the police, special constables dispersed 
the workers' demonstration organised by the Chartists on April 10, 1848. 
p. 572 
4>2 See Note 53. p. 576 
413 By details the English revolutionary Chartists meant, in their agitation, points 2-6 
of the People's Charter: annual elections to Parliament, salaries for M.P.s, a secret 
ballot, equal constituencies and abolition of the property qualification for 
candidates. They believed these demands would guarantee the implementation of 
universal suffrage, which was the first point of the Charter. p. 578 
414 This passage was omitted from the official publication of the speech made by 
Louis Bonaparte in Dijon on June 1, 1851 {Le Moniteur universelNo. 154, June 3, 
1851) as was pointed out in the newspaper Le National of June 3. It was included, 
however, in an interpellation addressed to the Minister of the Interior in the 
National Assembly (Le Moniteur universelNo. 155, June 4, 1851). The full text of 
the speech appeared in Le Nationalon June 4. English and German papers quoted 
this passage directly or indirectly. It is not yet known which source was used by 
Marx. p. 579 
415 Marx wrote this note when he and Engels were preparing the third international 
review (see this volume, pp. 490-532). It is a sort of conspectus or plan of the 
section of the review in which the authors analyse developments in Germany. 
Some of the ideas were later developed thoroughly in the review  itself,  while 
others were left out of the final version, for instance the economic rivalry between 
Austria and Prussia. p. 583 
416 See Note 353. p. 583 
417 This refers to measures taken by the government to place the National Bank of 
Austria under state protection; these included the ministerial decree of May 22, 
1848,  which allowed the Bank to limit the exchange of bank-notes for hard cash 
and introduced a compulsory exchange rate; the issue of state paper money with 
the Bank's assistance early in 1849, and the agreement of December 6, 1849, to 
regulate reciprocal claims between the Bank and the Exchequer. p. 583 
418 Marx's work "Reflections" is to be found in Notebook VII (pp. 48-52), one of the 
twenty-four notebooks in which Marx wrote extracts between September 1850 

=====第727页=====
704 Notes 
and August 1853. These notebooks contain Marx's excerpts from and synopses of 
various publications, with his own comments. But in "Reflections" (the text of 
which is separated from the preceding material and from what follows by 
horizontal lines), Marx gives a coherent exposition of his own thoughts in order to 
clear up a number of economic problems for  himself.  Such a digression from his 
rule may have been due to the passages from Thomas Tooke's An Inquiry into the 
Currency Principle, quoted in the same notebook, in which the difference between 
two kinds of trade — trade between various dealers and trade between dealers and 
consumers—is given according to Adam Smith. In his exposition, however, Marx 
went beyond this problem and gave a preliminary formulation of his views on 
certain other economic problems which he examined in detail in his later 
economic works. 
In this work Marx occasionally uses English economic terms such as "dealers", 
"consumers", "money", "transfer", "trade", "retail dealers", "currency", 
"savings-banks", "convertibility", "securities" and "short bills". These have not 
been indicated in footnotes. 
The editors have broken the text into smaller paragraphs to facilitate the 
reading. p. 584 
419 when speaking about trade between "dealers and dealers" and between "dealers 
and consumers" Marx is referring to Adam Smith's division of trade in its 
entirety into two different spheres: trade between businessmen alone and trade 
between businessmen and individual consumers. In Adam Smith's work, An 
Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, published in London in 
1835-39, this problem is dealt with in Chapter II of Volume III, and in an earlier 
two-volume edition—in Chapter II, Book II, Volume II. A similar distinction is 
made by Thomas Tooke in his work An Inquiry into the Currency Principle, the 
Connection of Currency with Prices, and the Expediency of a Separation of Issue from 
Banking, 2nd ed., London, 1844, pp. 34-36. p. 584 
420 This refers to the English East-India Company, founded in 1600, which for a long 
time enjoyed monopoly trading rights with India, China and other Asian 
countries. In India the Company maintained an army and exercised administra­
tive functions. It was one of the principal initiators of territorial annexations and 
colonial subjugation of the population. During the popular insurrection in India 
in 1857-59 the British Government was forced to change the form of colonial 
administration, and in 1858 the East-India Company was liquidated. p. 585 
421 The reference is to the economic crises that developed in England in 1793, 1825 
and 1847. The 1847 crisis also enveloped other European countries and the USA. 
p. 587 
422 The reference is to the standpoint of what was known as the "little shilling men" 
school, founded by the Birmingham banker Thomas Artwood. Their views were 
expressed in the book The Currency Question. The Gemini Letters, published in 
1844.  Its authors, Thomas Wright and John Harlow, wrote under the pseudonym 
of Gemini. p. 588 
423 This document dates from the time of Engels' stay in Switzerland after the defeat 
of the Baden-Palatinate uprising (see Note 133). At first Engels lived in Vevey, 
then in the latter half of August 1849 moved to Lausanne. In his letters of August 
1,17 and 23, 1849, Marx invited Engels to London to take part in publishing the 
journal Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue, as well as in 

=====第728页=====
Notes 705 
reorganising the ( ommunist League. When he received his permit to leave 
Switzerland, Engels decided to travel to England via Italy, since the French 
authorities refused him the right of transit through France. On October 6, 1849, 
he sailed from Genoa, and after a five-week voyage around the Iberian Peninsula, 
reached London some time around November 10. p. 595 
This and other documents published in this volume reflect Marx's efforts to 
gather together revolutionary forces scattered after the defeat of the 1848-49 
revolution and to render support to the revolutionary refugees suffering poverty 
and privation in England. (On the Committee of Support for German Democrats 
in Need which later became the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee see Note 
180.) 
The Appeal of the Committee of Support for German Refugees (which 
appeared in some of the German newspapers) evoked a response from broad 
democratic circles. The Workers' Committee of Support for Political Refugees set 
up in Cologne published a pamphlet entitled Die Westdeutsche Zeitung und die 
Westkalmücken. On September 28, the Workers' Association in Frankfurt, led by 
Weydemeyer, decided to render support to refugees and announced a collection 
of funds. 
The Hamburg newspaper Der Freischütz  (No. 86, October 26, 1849) carried the 
following item describing the activities of the London Committee: "Appeal for 
Support for German Refugees signed by Karl Marx ("former editor of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung"), Karl Blind ("former envoy in Paris of the Baden-Palatinate 
Government"), Anton Füster ("former member of the Austrian Imperial Diet in 
Vienna" who lived for some time in Hamburg), Heinrich Bauer (master shoemaker 
in London) and Karl Pfänder (painter in London).—Friendly donations should be 
addressed to: Heinrich Bauer, 64 Dean Street, Soho Square, and marked 'for the 
Refugee Committee'. That the appeal yielded results is proved, inter alia, by the 
following receipt sent to us. 
"Receipt: 
"We acknowledge the receipt of a seven-pound bill on the London and 
Westminster Bank issued in the name of Herr E. Thiessen in Stettin and, on behalf 
of the German refugees, extend our gratitude to those who contributed. 
"London, October 16, 1849. The Committee of Support for German Political 
Refugees." 
"Karl Marx, Karl Blind, Heinrich Bauer, Karl Pfänder." p. 596 
Serezhans and other South-Slav army formations performed compulsory military 
service on the Austro-Turkish border. In 1848 and 1849 the Austrian authorities 
and Right-wing bourgeois-landowning nationalist elements drew them into the 
war against revolutionary Hungary. p. 596 
See Note 180. p. 600 
This document consists of excerpts from the Indictment of the participants in the 
Elberfeld uprising in May 1849 (see pp. 159-69 of this volume; Notes 147, 148). 
The trial took place between April 23 and May 7, 1850, in Elberfeld; altogether 
122 people were accused. The Indictment was published in the Cologne 
newspaper, Westdeutsche Zeitung, during April and May. The majority of the 
defendants were found guilty and sentenced to various terms of imprisonment. 
The document presented here reflects the official point of view of the Prussian 
judicial authorities, yet at the same time proves that Engels played an important 
part in the uprising, for which he was regarded by Prussian justice as a dangerous 
state criminal. It is not by chance that Marx wrote to him on August 23, 1849, 

=====第729页=====
706 Notes 
urging him to leave Switzerland for London. "In any case your safety demands it. 
The Prussians would shoot you twice over: 1) because of Baden, 2) because of 
Elberfeld." p. 602 
428 This refers to the Military Commission of the Elberfeld Committee of Public 
Safety. The Commission was responsible for forming and equipping the 
insurgents' armed forces, as well as for preparing the city's defences against 
imminent invasion by Prussian forces. The Committee of Public Safety did all it 
could to obstruct and impede the work of the Military Commission. p. 602 
429 The reference is to the uprising in Solingen and the surrounding area that broke 
out early in May 1849 in support of the Imperial Constitution. On May 10 the 
insurgents stormed the arsenal at the neighbouring Gräfrath to obtain the 
necessary weapons. The municipal authorities were replaced by the Committee of 
Public Safety. A considerable number of workers took part in the Solingen 
uprising, but it was defeated owing to the treachery of the bourgeoisie, p. 603 
430 The banquet arranged by Blanquist refugees took place in London on February 
25, 1850. It was attended by revolutionary refugees of various nationalities, 
including Karl Marx, Frederick Engels and Ferdinand  Wolff. 
A report on the banquet was published in The Northern Star No. 645, March 2, 
1850.  Engels' toast was mentioned along with the others, but its author was not 
named. 
A more detailed report on the banquet appeared in the  Westdeutsche  Zeitung 
No. 51 (the newspaper bears the number 50, which is mistaken) on March 1, 1850, 
and was marked "London, February 26". This report was also reprinted in the 
Dresdener Zeitung No. 55, March 5, 1850. Other versions describing the banquet 
appeared in the Neue Deutsche ZeitungNo. 55, March 5, 1850, and in Die Hornisse 
No. 54, March 5, 1850. The latter mentioned that the guests included the editors 
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Marx, Engels and Wolff,  that Engels raised a toast 
in honour of the June insurgents, and Wolff of the revolution without 
phraseology. p. 607 
431 The report on the meeting, published in Die Hornisse, stated that "Karl Marx, 
editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, was also present among the guests". The 
Democratic Review for May 1850 carried the report but only the following 
was said concerning Engels' speech: "A German exile responded and concluded 
an excellent speech with giving 'The Proletarians of England'". 
The Fraternal Democrats—an international democratic society founded in 
London on September 22, 1845. The society embraced representatives of the Left 
Chartists, German workers and craftsmen—members of the League of the 
Just—and revolutionary emigrants of other nationalities. Marx and Engels helped 
in founding this society, and later kept in constant touch with the Fraternal 
Democrats trying to influence the proletarian core of the society, which joined the 
Communist League in 1847, and through it the Chartist movement, in the spirit of 
proletarian internationalism. The society ceased its activities in 1853. p. 611 
432 Levellers—representatives of a radical-democratic trend during the English 
revolution of the mid-seventeenth century. In 1647 they became an independent 
group on the national scale. The Levellers wanted to transform England into a 
republic with a one-House Parliament elected by universal suffrage, to remove all 
inequalities and implement other democratic reforms. p. 611 
433 The minutes in Engels' handwriting mirror the struggle waged by the 
Social-Democratic Refugee Committee, led by Marx and Engels, against attempts 

=====第730页=====
Notes 707 
by Rudolf Schramm, Gustav Struve and other petty-bourgeois refugees to form 
their own committee and to utilise the assistance to the refugees in need for 
political intrigues against proletarian revolutionaries (see this volume, p. 617). 
p. 612 
434 On the Universal Society of Revolutionary Communists see Note 277. 
The agreement referred to was annulled on October 9, 1850, as a result of the 
split in the Communist League and disagreements that arose between Marx and 
Engels on the one hand, and the French Blanquist refugees, who supported the 
sectarian faction of Willich and Schapper, on the other (see this volume, p. 484). 
The document was apparently written down or copied by Willich. p. 614 
435 Heinrich Bauer, previously the treasurer of the Social-Democratic Refugee 
Committee, stayed in Germany until the end of May 1850. He had been sent there 
as an emissary of the Central Authority of the Communist League. p. 618 
In the same issue of Der Freischütz (No. 98, August 15, 1850) that carried the 
present accounts, the editors published Karl Pfänder's letter and his receipt issued 
in the name of the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee. At the same time, the 
editors voiced their perplexity at not receiving a similar receipt from the other 
committee (the one consisting of petty-bourgeois refugee leaders). p. 621 
437 The meeting was organised by the Fraternal Democrats society to express their 
solidarity with the workers who had assailed the Austrian Field Marshal Julius 
Haynau (see Note 359). Reports on the meeting and Engels' speech were 
published in several English newspapers. The most detailed account appeared in 
the Reynold's Weekly Newspaper No. 5, September 15, 1850. In Germany reports on 
this meeting were published by the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung No. 285, September 
13, 1850, which wrote the following: "Engels (former editor of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung) expressed his heartfelt thanks to the English workers for giving such a 
worthy welcome to their distinguished countryman (Haynau was born in 
Churhessen)", and by Die Hornisse No. 218, September 18, 1850. p. 624 
438 The minutes and some of the documents that follow deal with the struggle waged 
by Marx and Engels and their supporters against sectarian elements in the 
Communist League (see Note 343). 
In 1852 Marx quoted an excerpt from the minutes in his pamphlet Revelations 
Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (see present edition, Vol. 11). The 
complete text of the minutes, however, remained unknown for a long time and 
only in 1956 appeared in the magazine of the Amsterdam International Institute 
of Social History, where it was published according to the two extant copies made 
from the original, which has not yet been discovered. One of the copies is written 
by Hermann Wilhelm Haupt who, following the split in the Communist League, 
was sent to Cologne to report on the London decisions; the other copy is in an 
unknown hand (probably Wilhelm Liebknecht's). In this volume the translation 
has been made from the copy written by Haupt and checked against the second 
copy. Essential differences in wording are mentioned in footnotes. p. 625 
439 The Rules of the Communist League (see present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 633-38) were 
adopted at its Second Congress in December 1847. In the latter half of 1848, the 
London Central Authority of the League made changes in the Rules and gave this 
document the vague title of "The Rules of a Revolutionary Party". The clear 
formulation of the ultimate aims of the proletarian movement given in Article 1 
(the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the rule of the proletariat and the foundation 

=====第731页=====
708 Notes 
of communist society without classes) was replaced by a demand for a social 
republic. The demand to acknowledge communism was omitted from Article 2, 
which formulated the conditions of membership. Marx and Engels resolutely 
opposed these changes. On Marx's initiative, the Central Authority formed in 
Cologne from the local authority worked out new Rules (see this volume, pp. 
634-36). p. 626 
440 The reference is to the following Communist League members who belonged to 
the London district: Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, the district's President Johann 
Georg Eccarius, Heinrich Bauer, Hermann Wilhelm Haupt, August Hain, 
G. Klose, Wilhelm Liebknecht, Karl Pfänder, Konrad Schramm, Sebastian Seiler 
and Ferdinand  Wolff.  p. 627 
441 See Note 50. p. 627 
442 An allusion to Louis Blanc's participation in the bourgeois Provisional Govern­
ment of France from February to May 1848 (see this volume, pp. 53, 55-56). 
p. 628 
443 The reference is to the Paris Commune of 1789-94, which administered the 
French capital during the revolution. It played an important part in organising 
the revolutionary struggle of the masses and in implementing revolutionary 
measures introduced after the victory of the Jacobins on the eve of the popular 
uprising of August 10, 1792, up to the counter-revolutionary coup of 9 
Thermidor (July 27), 1794. p. 629 
444 The text of the resolution of the London Central Authority of the Communist 
League, similar in content to the proposals submitted by Marx to the Central 
Authority meeting of September 15, 1850 (see this volume, pp. 625-27), has come 
down to us as part of another document—the Address of the Cologne Central 
Authority issued on December 1, 1850. (The Cologne Central Authority was 
formed early in October 1850, its members being Röser, Bürgers and Otto; some 
time later they were joined by Daniels and Heinrich Becker.) The Address of the 
Cologne Central Authority did not fully expose the reasons for the split in the 
Communist League and even accused both conflicting parties of violating the 
Rules.  Even so, it unequivocally condemned the splitting activities of the sectarian 
and adventurist faction led by Willich and Schapper and approved the policy of 
Marx and his followers. In May 1851 Peter Nothjung, emissary of the Cologne 
Central Authority, was arrested in Leipzig. The minutes found on him were 
confiscated by the Saxon police and sent to the official organ Dresdner Journal und 
Anzeiger (No. 171, June 22, 1851) to be published as evidence that democrats and 
Communists were involved in secret conspiratorial intrigues. In addition, both the 
Address and the resolution of the London Central Authority were published in 
the bourgeois Kölnische Zeitung No. 150, June 24, 1851, and at a later date in 
the Bill of Indictment against the Cologne Communists— Anklageschrift gegen l) 
P.G.Roeser... [Köln, 1852] and in Wermuth-Stieber's Die Communisten-
Verschwörungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, Th. 1, Berlin, 1853. p. 630 
445 This document is the last account presented by the Social-Democratic Refugee 
Committee, which ceased its activities owing to the split in the Communist League 
and the resignation of Marx, Engels and their followers from the German 
Workers' Educational Society in London (see this volume, p. 483). p. 631 
446 The proposal to expel the representatives of the sectarian faction from the 
Communist League was made after the factionalists had refused to abide by the 

=====第732页=====
Notes 709 
decision of the Cologne Central Authority to set up in London two independent 
districts of the League, directly subordinate to the Central Authority. Willich, 
Schapper and their followers formed their own central authority in an attempt to 
influence all the League organisations and isolate the supporters of Marx and 
Engels, whose expulsion they announced. In opposition to the Communist 
League, Willich and Schapper set up their own organisation, which in this and 
other documents is referred to as the Sonderbund, by analogy with the separatist 
union of seven Swiss cantons (see Note 25). On November 11, 1850, the London 
district formed from the supporters of Marx and Engels submitted the proposal in 
question to the Cologne Central Authority to expel members of the Sonderbund, 
and particularly its leaders, from the Communist League. The Central Authority 
endorsed the proposal and incorporated it in its Address of December 1. The text 
of the proposal has come down to us as part of this Address, which fell into the 
hands of the police in 1851 and later appeared in bourgeois semi-official 
periodicals and police-sponsored publications (see Note 444). p. 633 
447 T}^ Ru]es  Qf the Communist League were drawn up by the Cologne Central 
Authority in November 1850 in conformity with the decision of the London 
Central Authority adopted on September 15, 1850 (see this volume, p. 630). A 
copy of the Rules in Heinrich Bürgers' handwriting as well as the Address of the 
Cologne Central Authority of December 1, 1850, and other documents, were 
received in London on December 18 (see Jenny Marx's letter to Engels of 
December 19, 1850). On January 5, 1851, the Rules were approved at a meeting of 
the London district of the Communist League, at which Marx was also present. He 
made several remarks in the copy of the Rules which in this volume are in bold 
type.  These remarks may have been made at a later date (early in March 1852) 
when Marx forwarded the Rules to Weydemeyer in New York (see Marx's letter to 
Weydemeyer of March 5, 1852). 
The police confiscated a copy of the Rules from Peter Nothjung, one of the 
League members, when he was arrested in May 1851. Among other documents 
the Rules were printed in the police-sponsored edition: Wermuth-Stieber, Die 
Communisten-Verschwörungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts. p. 634 
448 The annual meeting and the New Year's party arranged by the Fraternal 
Democrats society were attended by delegations from the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London (Marx and Engels were no longer among its 
members), the Hungarian, Polish and other refugee organisations. Marx was 
present at the meeting together with his wife. Engels, who had come from 
Manchester for a few days, addressed the meeting in English. p. 637 

=====第733页=====
710 
NAME INDEX 
A 
Adam—French tanner, Blanquist, mem­
ber of secret revolutionary societies 
during the July monarchy; committee 
member of the French society of 
Blanquist emigrants in London 
(1850).—484, 615 
Albert (also named Martin, Alexandre) 
(1815-1895) —French worker, a 
leader of secret revolutionary societies 
during the July monarchy; member of 
the Provisional Government (1848).— 
53, 55, 66, 312-14, 316, 320, 323, 359, 
360, 367, 537 
Albert (Albrecht) III (1443-1500)—Duke 
of Saxony (1464-1500), commanded 
the army which suppressed the popu­
lar revolt in the Netherlands in 1491-
92 and the Frisian peasant revolt in 
1500.—431 
Alexander I (1777-1825)—Emperor of 
Russia (1801-25).—260, 547 
Alexander of  Macedon  (Alexander  the Great) 
(356-323 B.C.)—general and states­
man of antiquity.—143, 524 
Alexandra Fyodorovna (Charlotte Louise) 
(1798-1860)—daughter of Frederick 
William III, wife of Emperor 
Nicholas I.—8 
Alken, Nikolaus —German soldier, took 
part in storming the arsenal in Prüm; 
executed in October 1849.—171 
Alva or Alba, Fernando Alvarez de Toledo, 
Duke o/(1507-1582) —Spanish general and statesman, viceroy of the Nether­
lands (1567-73), brutally crushed the 
popular uprising in the Netherlands in 
the sixteenth century.—447 
Anne (1665-1714)—Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1702-14).—252 
Anneke, Friedrich (1818-1872)—Prussian 
artillery officer discharged from the 
army for his political views; member of 
the Communist League; one of the 
founders of the Cologne Workers' 
Association (1848), editor of the Neue 
Kölnische Zeitung, member of the 
Rhenish District Committee of Demo­
crats;  lieutenant-colonel in the Baden-
Palatinate revolutionary army (1849). 
— 194,  196, 220 
Antony (1489-1544)—Duke of Lorraine 
(1508-44), brutally suppressed the 
peasant uprising in Alsace (1525); 
opposed the Reformation.—474 
Arago,  Dominique François Jean (1786-
1853)—French astronomer, physicist 
and mathematician, republican politi­
cian; member of the 1848 Provisional 
Government, helped to suppress the 
June uprising of the Paris pro­
letariat.—537 
Ariosto, Lodovico (1474-1533) — Italian 
poet of the Renaissance, author of 
L'Orlando furioso.—62, 86 
Arndt, Ernst Moritz (1769-1860)— 
German writer, historian and philo­
logist; took part in the liberation strug­
gle against Napoleon's rule; deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 

=====第734页=====
Name Index 711 
(Right Centre) in 1848-49.—258, 346 
Arnold of Brescia (c. 1100-1155)—Italian 
reformer, ideologist of the movement 
of the urban poor against the Pope 
and ecclesiastical feudalism; executed 
as a heretic.—413 
Ashley (Cooper, Anthony Ashley, 7th Earl 
of Shaftesbury) (1801-1885)—English 
politician, Tory philanthropist.—272, 
291, 293, 297-98 
Aston, Luise (pseudonym of Meier, Luise) 
(1814-1871)—German democratic 
writer.—242 
Athenaeus (late 2nd-early 3rd cen­
tury)—Greek rhetorician and gram­
marian.—105 
Auerbach, Berthold (1812-1882)—Ger­
man liberal writer, later an apologist 
of Bismarck.—242, 244 
Aylva, Sjoerd (d. 1509)—leader of the 
Frisian peasant revolt (1500).—431 
B 
Bach,  Walter—mercenary who joined 
the insurgent peasants in South Ger­
many in 1525; a leader of the Allgäu 
Troop, betrayed the peasants at the 
crucial moment.—466, 468 
Baden, Grand Duke of—see Leopold Karl 
Friedrich 
Ball, John (d. 1381)—English priest and 
social agitator, an inspirer of the 
peasant revolt of Wat Tyler (1381).— 
413,  414 
Bamberger, Ludwig (1823-1899)—Ger­
man journalist, democrat, took part in 
the Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849; 
subsequently a liberal, deputy to the 
Imperial Diet.—196, 224 
Bantelhans (Bantel, Hans)—a leader of 
the Poor Konrad society and the 
peasant uprising in Württemberg and 
the mountain regions of Swabia in 
1514.—436 
Baraguay d'Hilliers, Achille, comte (1795-
1878)—French general, deputy to the 
Constituent and Legislative Assem­
blies during the Second Republic, 
Bonapartist.—109 
Barbes, Armand (1809-1870)—French 
revolutionary, a leader of secret societies during the July monarchy; 
deputy to the 1848 Constituent As­
sembly; sentenced to life imprison­
ment for participation in the popular 
insurrection of May 15, 1848, and 
pardoned in 1854; emigrated to Bel­
gium.—35,  37, 88, 129, 316, 541, 576 
Barnabas—Hungarian priest, took part 
in the peasant war in Hungary in 
1514.—438 
Baroche, Pierre Jules (1802-1870)— 
French lawyer and politician, deputy 
to the Constituent and Legislative As­
semblies; procurator-general of the 
Court of Appeal in 1849, Bonapart­
ist; member of several cabinets prior to 
and after the coup d'état of 1851. 
—38,  129 
Barrot, Camille Hyacinthe Odilon  (1791-
1873)—French politician, leader of 
the liberal dynastic opposition until 
February 1848; from December 1848 
to October 1849 headed a monarchist 
coalition ministry.—53, 73, 82-84, 86-
89, 93, 102, 103, 109, 111, 113, 248 
Barthélémy, Emmanuel (c. 1820-1855) 
—French worker, Blanquist, member 
of secret revolutionary societies 
during the July monarchy and par­
ticipant in the June 1848 uprising 
in Paris; a leader of the French 
society of Blanquist emigrants in Lon­
don; executed on a criminal charge 
in 1855.—484 
Bastiat, Frédéric (1801-1850)—French 
economist and politician.—48 
Bastide, Jules (1800-1879)—French pol­
itician and journalist, an editor of the 
newspaper Le National (1836-46); 
moderate republican, Minister of 
Foreign Affairs from May to De­
cember 1848.—76 
Batory, Stefan VII de Ecséd (d. 1535) 
—representative of a feudal family 
in Transylvania, led an army which 
took part in squashing the peasant 
uprising in Hungary in 1514.—439 
Bauer, Heinrich (b. 1813)—German 
shoemaker, prominent figure in the 
German and international working-
class movement, a leader of trie 
League of the Just, member of the 
Central Authority of the Communist 

=====第735页=====
712 Name Index 
League; emigrated to Australia in 
1851.—278,  351, 352, 371, 375, 483, 
533, 597-99, 601, 610, 618, 619, 623, 
625, 629, 632 
Bauer, Ludwig (Louis)—German physi­
cian, participant in the 1848-49 
revolution, President of the London 
Democratic Association committee for 
support to refugees.—350, 617 
Beaumarchais, Pierre Augustin Caron de 
(1732-1799)—French dramatist.—89 
Beaune, Jean Baptiste Augustin de (1796-
1849)—French politician, monarchist, 
deputy to the Constituent and Legisla­
tive Assemblies.—22, 122 
Becker, Johann Philipp (1809-1886)— 
German revolutionary, took part 
in the democratic movement of 
the 1830s and 1840s in Germany and 
Switzerland and in the 1848-49 revolu­
tion; commanded the Baden people's 
militia during the Baden-Palatinate 
uprising of 1849; prominent figure in 
the First International in the 1860s 
and delegate to all its congresses; 
friend and associate of Marx and 
Engels.— 180, 223, 224, 231-36 
Becker, Max Joseph (d. 1896)—German 
engineer, democrat, took part in the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849 and 
after its defeat emigrated to Switzer­
land and subsequently to the 
USA.—210 
Bern,  J6zef( 1795-1850)—Polish general, 
prominent figure in the national liber­
ation movement, took part in the 
Polish insurrection of 1830-31 and the 
revolutionary struggle in Vienna in 
1848;  a leader of the Hungarian 
revolutionary army (1848-49); after 
the defeat of the revolution emigrated 
to Turkey.—169 
Benz —Berne innkeeper.—249 
Berlichingen, Götz (Gottfried) von (1480-
1562)—German knight, tried to use 
the peasant uprising of 1525 for his 
own ends; elected the leader of the 
Gay Bright Troop, he betrayed the 
peasants at the crucial moment.—453-
55, 462, 463 
Berlin, Hans—town councillor of Heil-
bronn; tried to foist a moderate pro­
gramme on the insurgent peasants after their capture of the town in 
1525;  deserted to the feudal camp.— 
461 
Berlin, Hans (Johannes) (died c. 1560)— 
in 1525 notary and procurator in 
Heilbronn, author of the Declaration 
of the Twelve Articles, interpreted the 
insurgent peasants' demands in a 
moderate vein.—455 
Bernigau (d. 1849)—German democrat, 
member of the Cologne Committee of 
Public Safety in 1848; took part in the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849; 
sentenced by a Prussian court martial 
and executed.—346 
Berryer, Pierre Antoine (1790-1868)— 
French lawyer and politician, deputy 
to the Constituent and Legisla­
tive Assemblies during the Second 
Republic, Legitimist.—113 
Bertin, Louis Marie Armand  (1801-
1854)—French journalist, Orleanist; 
publisher of the Journal des Débats in 
1841-54.—39 
Beseler, Wilhelm Hartwig (1806-1884) 
—Schleswig-Holstein politician; head 
of the Provisional Government of 
Schleswig-Holstein in 1848, deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Right Centre).—527 
Beust, Friedrich von (1817-1899)— 
Prussian officer, committee member 
of the Cologne Workers' Association 
(1848);  an editor of the Neue 
Kölnische Zeitung (September 1848-
February 1849); took part in the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849; 
emigrated to Switzerland, professor of 
pedagogy.—218 
Beyerle—refugee in London.—612 
Blanc, Jean Joseph Louis (1811-1882)— 
French petty-bourgeois socialist, 
historian, member of the Provisional 
Government and President of the 
Luxembourg Commission in 1848; 
pursued a policy of conciliation with 
the bourgeoisie; emigrated to England 
in August 1848.—53, 55, 59, 63-66, 
73, 85, 97, 128, 307, 359, 360, 366, 
367, 537, 540, 541, 628 
Blanqui, Louis Auguste (1805-1881)— 
French revolutionary, Utopian com­
munist, organised several secret socie-

=====第736页=====
Name Index 713 
ties and plots; adhered to the ex­
treme Left of the democratic and 
proletarian movement during the 
1848 revolution.—27, 35, 37, 64, 65, 
88-89,  127, 128-29, 316, 322, 377, 
537-40, 576 
Blenker, Ludwig (1812-1863)—German 
democrat, former officer, took part in 
the Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849; 
subsequently emigrated to the USA 
and fought in the Civil War on the side 
of the Northerners.—149, 196-99, 
206, 209, 226, 230, 232, 233, 234 
Blind,  Karl (1826-1907)—German jour­
nalist, democrat, took part in the 
revolutionary movement in Baden in 
1848-49; a leader of the German 
petty-bourgeois emigrants in London 
in the 1850s; became a national-liberal 
in the 1860s.—175, 182,354, 597, 600 
Bloem,  Anton (1814-1885)—German 
lawyer, deputy to the Prussian Nation­
al Assembly (Left wing, later Left 
Centre) in 1848.—158 
Bhmfield, Charles James (1786-1857) 
—English theologian, bishop of Lon­
don (1828-56).—513 
Blum,  Robert (1807-1848)—German 
democrat, journalist, leader of the 
Left in the Frankfurt National Assem­
bly; took part in the defence of Vienna 
in October 1848; court-martialled and 
executed.—149, 198, 220, 222 
Bobzin, Friedrich Heinrich Karl (b. 1826) 
—German artisan; member of the 
German Workers' Society in Brus­
sels in 1847; took part in the Baden-
Palatinate uprising of 1849; together 
with Struve headed the German petty-
bourgeois emigrants in London. 
—617,  619 
Boccaccio, Giovanni (1313-1375)—Italian 
author of the Renaissance.—413 
Bocquet, Jean Baptiste —French demo­
crat, supporter of the newspaper La 
Réforme; took part in the 1848 revolu­
tion in France and emigrated to Lon­
don after its defeat; friend of Alexan­
der Herzen; member of the General 
Council of the First International 
(1864-65).—314 
Boecker (Baker)—member of the Co­
logne Town Council.—158 Böheim, Hans (Pfeiferhänslein, Pauker) 
(d. 1476)—shepherd, popular preach­
er in Niklashausen, inspirer of the 
peasant movement in the bishopric 
of Würzburg and surrounding dis­
tricts;  burned at the stake.—428-32 
Boisguillebert, Pierre Le Pesant, sieur de 
(1646-1714)—French economist, pre­
decessor of the physiocrats, founder of 
classical political economy in 
France.—119 
Bolingbroke, Henry St. John, 1st Viscount 
(1678-1751)—English deist philoso­
pher and politician.—253 
Bonaparte—see Napoleon III 
Bonaparte, Jérôme (1784-1860)—younger 
brother of Napoleon I, King of 
Westphalia (1807-13).—112 
Bonaparte, Napoléon Joseph Charles Paul, 
Prince (1822-1891)—son of Jérôme 
Bonaparte, cousin of Louis Bona­
parte; deputy to the Constituent and 
Legislative Assemblies during the Sec­
ond Republic—112, 113 
Borgia (Borja),  Cesare,  Duke of Valentinois 
and Romagna (c. 1475-1507)— 
member of an influential Italian 
feudal family, son of Pope Alexan­
der VI, tried to establish a power­
ful absolutist state, famous for his 
unscrupulousness.—112 
Borme, Daniel (called Borme fils) (1821-
c. 1872)—French chemist, participant 
in political conspiracies, police agent. 
—37 
Born,  Stephan (real name Buttermilch, 
Simon) (1824-1898)—German type­
setter, member of the Communist 
League; leaned towards reformism 
during the 1848-49 revolution; su­
preme commander of the Dresden 
uprising of 1849; turned his back on 
the workers' movement after the 
revolution.—215 
Bötticher, Karl Wilhelm, from 1864 von 
(1791-1868)—Prussian statesman, 
Oberpräsident of Eastern Prussia (1842-
48).—10 
Bouchotte, Jean Baptiste Noël (1754-
1840)—French officer, prominent 
figure in the French Revolution, Jaco­
bin, War Minister (1793-94).—545, 
563 

=====第737页=====
714 Name Index 
Bourbons—royal dynasty in France 
(1589-1792, 1814-15, 1815-30).—13, 
16, 17, 36, 95, 112 
Brandenburg, Friedrich Wilhelm, Count 
von (1792-1850)—Prussian general 
and statesman, head of the counter­
revolutionary Ministry (November 
1848-November 1850).—158, 596 
Bréa Jean Baptiste Fidèle (1790-1848)— 
French general, took part in sup­
pressing the June uprising of 1848, 
shot by the insurgents.—97 
Breitenstein, Sebastian von (1464-1535) 
—Prince-abbot of Kempten  (1523-
35)—449,  479 
Brentano, Lorenz Peter (1813-1891)— 
Baden democrat, lawyer; deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assem­
bly (Left wing) in 1848; headed the 
Baden Provisional Government in 
1849;  after the defeat of the upris­
ing emigrated to Switzerland and 
then to the USA.—174-76, 178-80, 
183-85,  188-90, 214, 215, 220, 234, 
238, 239 
Briessmann, Johannes (1488-1549)— 
German theologian, follower of 
Luther.—426 
Bright, John (1811-1889)—English man­
ufacturer, a leader of the Free Traders 
and founder of the Anti-Corn Law 
League.—19, 116, 272 
Brougham and Vaux, Henry Peter, 1st 
Baron (1778-1868)—British states­
man, lawyer and writer, Whig.—511 
Brüggemann, Karl Heinrich (1810-1887) 
—German journalist, moderate libe­
ral; editor-in-chief of the Kölnische 
Zeitung (1845-55).—526 
Bruhn, Karl von (b. 1803)—German 
Journalist, member of the League 
of Outlaws, the League of the Just, 
and subsequently of the Communist 
League from which he was expelled in 
1850;  later editor of the Lassallean 
paper Nordstern in Hamburg  (1861-
66).—372 
Brunswick, Duke of—see Karl Wilhelm 
Ferdinand 
Bucher, Lothar (1817-1892)—Prussian 
official, journalist; deputy to the Prus­
sian National Assembly (Left Centre) 
in 1848; emigrated to London; subse-quendy a national-liberal, adherent 
of Bismarck.—349 
Bugeaud de la Piconnerie, Thomas Robert 
(1784-1849)—Marshal of France, 
member of the Chamber of Deputies 
during the July monarchy, Orleanist; 
commander-in-chief of the army of 
the Alps, deputy to the Legislative 
Assembly in 1848-49.—83 
Bunsen, Christian Karl Josias, Baron von 
(1791-1860)—Prussian diplomat, wri­
ter, theologian; Ambassador to Lon­
don (1842-54).—370, 378, 382-83, 
391, 511 
Burg-Bernheim, Gregor —a leader of the 
peasant uprising in the Margraviate of 
Ansbach in 1525.—464 
Burritt, Elihu (1810-1879)—American 
linguist, philanthropist and pacifist, 
organiser of several international 
pacifist congresses.— 511 
c 
Cabet, Etienne (1788-1856)—French 
writer, Utopian communist, author 
of Voyage en Icarie.—64-65, 320 
Camphausen, Ludolf (1803-1890)— 
German banker, a leader of the 
Rhenish liberal bourgeoisie; Prime 
Minister of Prussia from March to 
June 1848; Prussian envoy to the 
Central Authority (July 1848-April 
1849).—13,  156 
Capefigue, Jean Baptiste Honoré Raymond 
(1801-1872)—French journalist and 
historian, monarchist.—39, 138, 519 
Carlier, Pierre Charles Joseph (1799-
1858)—Prefect of the Paris police 
(1849-51), Bonapartist.—124, 338 
Carlyle, Thomas (1795-1881) —British 
writer, historian, philosopher, Tory; 
preached views bordering on feudal 
socialism up to 1848; later a relentless 
opponent of the working-class move­
ment.—301-10 
Carnap, Johann Adolph von (born c. 
1793)—Prussian official, Chief Bur­
gomaster of Elberfeld from 1837 to 
1851.—165 
Carnot, Lazare Hippolyte (1801-1888)— 
French journalist and politician, 

=====第738页=====
Name Index 715 
moderate republican; Minister of 
Education in the Provisional Govern­
ment, deputy to the Constituent As­
sembly (1848); after 1851 a leader of 
the republican opposition to the 
Bonapartist regime.—27, 128-29, 344 
Carnot, Lazare Nicolas Marguerite  (1753-
1823)—French mathematician, politi­
cal and military figure in the French 
Revolution, Jacobin; took part in the 
Thermidor coup in 1794.—128, 
545, 546, 562, 563 
Carrière, Moriz (1817-1895)—German 
philosopher, professor of aesthet­
ics.—242 
Casimir (1481-1527)—Margrave of 
Brandenburg, Ansbach and Bayreuth, 
member of the Franconian line of the 
Hohenzollerns; organised the sup­
pression of the peasant and urban 
uprising in Ansbach and Rothen­
burg.— 462-66 
Cato,  Marcus Porcius (Cato the Elder) 
(234-149 B.C.)—Roman statesman 
and writer, upheld aristocratic 
privileges.—76 
Caulaincourt, Armand Augustin Louis, 
Marquis de, from 1808 Duke of Vicenza 
(1772-1827)—French general and 
statesman, Ambassador to Russia 
(1807-11); Minister of Foreign Affairs 
(1813-14, 1815).—260 
Caussidière, Marc (1808-1861)—French 
democrat, took part in the Lyons 
uprising of 1834; Prefect of the Paris 
police after the February revolution of 
1848,  deputy to the Constituent As­
sembly; emigrated to England in June 
1848.—59, 73, 97, 311-16, 321-24 
Cavaignac, Louis Eugène (1802-1857) 
— French general and politician, mod­
erate republican; took part in the 
conquest of Algeria; after the Feb­
ruary 1848 revolution, Governor of 
Algeria; from May 1848 War Minister 
of France, directed the suppression of 
the June uprising; head of the execu­
tive (June-December 1848).—34, 68, 
69, 72, 75-82, 85, 87, 91, 92, 93, 98, 
105, 549, 579-80 
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de (1547-
1616)—Spanish writer.—174, 246, 
512 Chambord,  Henri Charles Ferdinand Marie 
Dieudonné d'Artois, duc de Bordeaux, 
comte de (1820-1883)—representative 
of the elder line of the Bourbons, 
pretender to the French throne under 
the name of Henry  V.—13,  16, 36, 
110, 141, 521 
Changarnier, Nicolas Anne Théodule 
(1793-1877)—French general and 
politician, monarchist; deputy to the 
Constituent and Legislative Assem­
blies;  after June 1848 commanded 
the Paris garrison and national guard; 
took part in dispersing the demonstra­
tion of June 13, 1849, in Paris; 
banished from France in 1851.—25, 
26, 83, 89, 90, 99, 106, 109, 140, 
143-44, 520, 523-25 
Charles I (1600-1649)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1625-49), exe­
cuted during the English revolu­
tion.—253 
Charles V (1500-1558)—Holy Roman 
Emperor (1519-56), King of Spain as 
Charles I (1516-56).—461 
Charles X (1757-1836)—King of France 
(1824-30).—129 
Charles Albert (Carlo Alberto) (1798-
1849)—King of Sardinia and Pied­
mont (1831-49).—93, 547 
Chenu, Adolphe (b. 1816)—took part in 
secret revolutionary societies in France 
during the July monarchy; agent pro­
vocateur of the secret police.—311-16, 
319-24 
Christoph I (1453-1527)—Margrave of 
Baden (1473-1527).—435, 466 
Clement, Albert—battalion commander 
of the Baden-Palatinate insurgent 
army in 1849.—215, 218 
Clement VII (Giulio de'Medici) (1478-
1534)—Pope (1523-34).—405, 419, 
480 
Cobbett, William (1762-1835)—English 
politician and radical writer.—301 
Cobden, Richard (1804-1865)—English 
manufacturer and politician, a leader 
of the Free Traders and founder of 
the Anti-Corn Law League.—11, 19, 
116,265,299,510,511 
Columbus, Christopher (Cristobal Colon) 
(1451-1506)—Genoa-born navigator, 
discoverer of America.—332, 334 

=====第739页=====
716 Name Index 
Cooper, James Fenimore (1789-1851)— 
American writer.—312-14 
Copway, George (Kah-Ge-Ga-Gah-Bowh) 
(1818-c. 1863)—chief of the Ojibway 
Indian tribe, methodist missionary; 
took part in the Frankfurt am Main 
Pacifist Congress in August 1850. 
—511 
Corvin-Wiersbitzki, Otto Julius Bernhard 
von (1812-1886)—German democrat, 
former Prussian lieutenant; took part 
in the republican uprisings in Baden 
in 1848; chief of the general staff in 
Rastatt during the Baden-Palatinate 
uprising of 1849.—224 
Crémieux, Isaac Moïse (called Adolphe) 
(1796-1880)—French lawyer and 
politician, a liberal in the 1840s; 
member of the Provisional Govern­
ment (February-May 1848); deputy to 
the Constituent and Legislative As­
semblies.—53,  91, 359, 537 
Creton, Nicolas Joseph (1798-1864)— 
French lawyer; deputy to the Con­
stituent and Legislative Assemblies 
during the Second Republic, Orle-
anist.—118 
Cromwell, Oliver (1599-1658)—leader of 
the English revolution, became Lord 
Protector of England, Scotland and 
Ireland in 1653.—256, 301, 302 
Csâky, Miklos (Nikolaus) (1465-1514)— 
bishop of Csanâd (1500-14); killed by 
insurgents during the peasant upris­
ing in Hungary.—439 
Cubieres, Amédée Louis Despans de (1786-
1853)—French general, Orleanist; 
War Minister in 1839 and 1840; de­
graded in 1847 for bribery and shady 
dealings.—117 
Cyrus the Great (Koresh) (d. 530 B.C^— 
King of Persia (558-530 B.C.), founder 
of the Persian Empire.—421 
D 
Daire, Louis François Eugène (1798-
1847)—French economist, publisher 
of works on political economy.—328 
Dairnvaell,  G.M.—French  worker, au­
thor of pamphlets against the financial 
aristocracy.— 51 Danton, Georges Jacques (1759-1794)— 
prominent figure in the French 
Revolution, leader of the Right wing 
of the Jacobins.—165, 302 
Darasz, Albert (1808-1852)—prominent 
figure in the Polish national liberation 
movement, took part in the 1830-31 
insurrection; belonged to the demo­
cratic circles of the Polish emigrants; 
member of the Central Committee of 
European Democracy.—528 
Daru, Napoléon, comte (1807-1890)— 
French statesman, member of the 
Chamber of Peers (1832-48); dep­
uty to the Constituent and Legislative 
Assemblies (Right wing) during the 
Second Republic and Vice-President 
of the Legislative Assembly (1850-
51).—128 
Daumer, Georg Friedrich (1800-1875)— 
German writer on the history of 
religion.—241-46 
Delamarre, Theodore Casimir (1797-1870) 
—French banker; journalist; from 
1844 onwards owner of the news­
paper La Patrie; Bonapartist. 
39> 342 
Delane,' John Thaddens (1817-1879)— 
. editor-in-chief of The Times (1841 
-77).—352, 540, 541 
Delessert, Gabriel Abraham Marguerite 
(1786-1858)—Prefect of the Paris 
police (1836-48).—312, 319 
Dembiiiski, Henryk (1791-1864)—Polish 
general and prominent figure in the 
national liberation movement, took 
part in the Polish insurrection of 
1830-31;  commander-in-chief of the 
Hungarian revolutionary army (Feb­
ruary-April 1848) and the Northern 
Theiss army; after the defeat of the 
revolution emigrated to Turkey and 
later to France.—152, 169 
Demosthenes (c. 384-322 B.C.)—Greek 
orator and politician.—113 
Devaisse—participant in the 1848 rev­
olution in France, member of the 
Mountain party.—321 
Dickens, Charles John Huffam (1812-
1870)—English novelist.—302 
Didier, Heinrich —German emigrant to 
the USA; one of the editors of the 
Deutsche Schnellpost in 1850.—348 

=====第740页=====
Name Index 717 
Dietrichstein, Sigmund, from 1515 Baron 
von (1484-1540)—Viceroy of Styria; 
suppressed the peasant uprising in the 
Alpine regions of Austria in 1515-16; 
taken prisoner by the insurgents dur­
ing the 1525 uprising and later set 
free.—440, 475, 476 
Dietz, Oswald (c. 1824-1864)—German 
architect, participated in the 1848-49 
revolution; emigrated to London; 
Communist League member, be­
longed to the Willich-Schapper sec­
tarian group; subsequently took part 
in the American Civil War.—633 
Dingelstedt, Franz, from 1876 Baron von 
(1814-1881)—German poet and 
novelist, court dramatist from the 
mid-1840s.—242 
Disraeli, Benjamin, 1st Earl of  Beaconsfield 
(1804-1881)—British politician and 
writer; adhered to the Young England 
group in the 1840s, subsequently be­
came a Tory leader; Prime Minister 
(1868 and 1874-80).—495 
Doll, Friedrich —German democrat, com­
mercial traveller; took part in the 
republican uprisings in Baden in 
1848;  commanded a division during 
the Baden-Palatinate uprising of 
1849.—232, 233, 236 
Dortu, Max (1826-1849)—German rev­
olutionary democrat; took part in the 
Berlin uprising of March 18, 1848, 
and in the Baden-Palatinate uprising 
of 1849; sentenced by a Prussian court 
martial and executed.—346 
Dôzsa, Georg(c. 1474-1514)—small land­
owner of the Szekler region of Tran­
sylvania, a leader of the peasant upris­
ing in Hungary in 1514.—438-39 
Dozsa Gregor (d. 1514)—brother of 
Georg Dozsa; took part in the peasant 
uprising of 1514 in Hungary.—438 
Dreher, Ferdinand—participant in the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849; 
commanded a battalion of the people's 
militia in Karlsruhe.—204, 210, 212, 
213, 233 
Dronk'e, Ernst (1822-1891)—German 
journalist, at first "true socialist", later 
member of the Communist League 
and an editor of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung; emigrated to England after the 1848-49 revolution; subsequently 
withdrew from politics.—353, 371, 
373, 375, 376 
Drouyn de Lhuys, Edouard (1805-1881) 
—French diplomat and politician; 
in the 1840s Orleanist; after 1851 
Bonapartist; Minister of Foreign Af­
fairs (1848-49, 1851, 1852-55, 1862-
66), Ambassador to Britain (1849-
50).—511 
Duelerc, Charles Theodore Eugene (1812-
1888)—French journalist and politi­
cian, moderate republican; member of 
the National editorial board (1840-46); 
Minister of Finance (May-June 
1848).—91 
Dufaure, Jules Armand Stanislas (1798-
1881)—French lawyer and politician, 
Orleanist; deputy to the Constituent 
Assembly (1848), Minister of the In­
terior (October-December 1848) in the 
Cavaignac Government; one of the 
organisers of the suppression of the 
Paris Commune.—78, 81, 117 
Dujarrier—French financier.— 358 
Dumouriez, Charles François du Périer 
(1739-1823)—French general, com­
manded the northern revolutionary 
army in 1792-93; betrayed the revolu­
tion in March 1793.—542-43 
Dupin, André Marie Jean Jacques  (1783-
1865)—French lawyer and politician, 
Orleanist; deputy to the Constituent 
Assembly (1848-49), President of the 
Legislative Assembly (1849-51); subse­
quently Bonapartist.—26, 102, 137, 
518 
Dupont de l'Eure, Jacques Charles (1767-
1855)—French liberal politician, par­
ticipated in the French revolutions of 
1789-94 and 1830; close to the moder­
ate republicans in the 1840s; President 
of the Council of Ministers in the 
Provisional Government in 1848.—53, 
359, 537 
Dupoty, Michel Auguste (1797-1864)— 
French journalist, took part in pub­
lishing several republican-democratic 
newspapers.—312 
Duprat, Pascal Pierre (1815-1885)— 
French journalist, politician, repub­
lican; deputy to the Constituent and 
Legislative Assemblies during the 

=====第741页=====
718 Name Index 
Second Republic, opponent of Louis 
Bonaparte.—25 
E 
Eccarius, Johann Georg (1818-1889)— 
German tailor, prominent figure 
in the German and international 
working-class movement, member of 
the League of the Just and later of the 
Communist League; a leader of the 
German Workers' Educational Society 
in London; member of the General 
Council of the First International; 
later took part in the English trade 
union movement.—483, 485, 625, 
627, 629 
Eckermann, Johann Peter (1792-1854)— 
German writer, author of the Ge­
spräche mit Goethe in den letzten Jahren 
seines Lebens.— 242 
Eichfeld, Karl —War Minister of the 
Baden Provisional Government in 
1849.—180 
Eisenhut, Anton (d. 1525)—clergyman at 
Eppingen (Palatinate); leader of the 
local peasant and urban uprising in 
1525.—460 
Eitel, Hans —leader of the Lake Troop 
of the insurgent peasants (Swabia) in 
1525;  signed the Weingarten Treaty 
with Truchsess after which disbanded 
his troop.—449 
Elector Palatine—see Ludwig V 
Emmermann, Karl—rcommander of rifle­
men in the Baden-Palatinate revolu­
tionary army (1849).—229 
Engelhard, Magdalene Philippine (née Gat­
terer) (1756-1831)—German poetess. 
—242 
Engels, Frederick (1820-1895).—3, 5, 7, 
10, 14, 15,  21, 22, 25,  41, 58, 186, 190, 
192-95,  197, 200-05, 208-37, 240, 241, 
257, 271, 274, 288, 318, 336, 338, 345, 
348-51,  353, 354, 370, 371, 378, 379, 
380,  381,  384, 388, 389, 390,  391,  392, 
398, 430, 483, 487, 490, 533-37, 540, 
542, 564, 588-89, 595, 601, 606, 607, 
610,  611, 615, 616, 618,619,623, 637 
Ernest Augustus (1771-1851)—King of 
Hanover (1837-51).—8 Ernst (1464-1513)—archbishop of Mag­
deburg (1476-1513).—420 
Estancelin, Louis Charles Alexandre (1823-
1906)—French politician; deputy to 
the Legislative Assembly during the 
Second Republic, Orleanist.—109 
DEster, Karl Ludwig Johann  (1813-
1859)—German socialist and demo­
crat, physician, member of the Co­
logne community of the Communist 
League; deputy to the Prussian Na­
tional Assembly (Left wing) in 1848; 
became member of the Central Com­
mittee of German Democrats in Oc­
tober 1848; played a prominent part 
in the Baden-Palatinate uprising of 
1849;  subsequendy emigrated to Swit­
zerland.—186, 190, 192, 201, 220, 
224, 233 
Eugène of Savoy (François Eugène), Prince 
(1663-1736)—Austrian general and 
statesman.—198 
Evans, David Morier (1819-1874)— 
British economist.—496 
Ewerbeck, August Hermann (1816-1860) 
—German physician and man of let­
ters, leader of the Paris communi­
ties of the League of the Just; later 
member of the Communist League, 
which he left in 1850.—376 
F 
Falloux, Frederic Alfred Pierre, comte de 
(1811-1886)—French politician, Le­
gitimist and clerical; Minister of 
Education and Religious Affairs 
(1848-49); initiated the closure of na­
tional workshops and inspired the 
suppression of the June 1848 uprising 
of the Paris workers.—83, 92, 103, 113 
Faucher, Julius (Jules) (1820-1878)— 
German writer, Young Hegelian; 
advocate of free trade, professed indi­
vidualistic, anarchist views in the early 
1850s.—334, 486 
Faucher, Léon (1803-1854)—French 
writer and politician, Malthusian econ­
omist, Orleanist; Minister of the Inte­
rior (December 1848-May 1849); later 
Bonapartist.—48, 83, 88, 90 
Favand, Etienne Edouard Charles Eugène 

=====第742页=====
Name Index 719 
(1793-1854)—French politician, re­
publican; deputy to the Constituent 
and Legislative Assemblies during the 
Second Republic; supporter of the 
Mountain party; opposed the Decem­
ber 2, 1851, coup d'état.— 22, 123,263 
Fenner von Fenneberg, Daniel (1820-
1863)—Austrian officer, commanded 
the Vienna national guard in 1848; 
later commander-in-chief and chief of 
staff of the Palatinate insurgent 
army.—195 
Ferdinand I (1503-1564)—Austrian 
Archduke; Holy Roman Emperor 
(1556-64).—448,456,466,467,475-77 
Feuerbach, Ludwig Andreas (1804-
1872)—German philosopher.—487 
Feuerbacher, Matern (c. 1484-c. 1567)— 
town councillor and a leader of the 
burgher opposition in Gross-Bottwar 
(Württemberg); in 1525 leader 
of the Gay Christian Troop of the 
insurgent Württemberg peasants and 
townsmen.—456, 457, 459, 460 
Fickler, Joseph (1808-1865)—German 
journalist, a leader of the Baden 
democratic movement in 1848-49; 
member of the Baden Provisional 
Government (1849).—175 
Flocon, Ferdinand (1800-1866)—French 
democratic politician and journalist, 
an editor of the newspaper La Ré­
forme; member of the Provisional Gov­
ernment (1848).—53, 323, 359, 537 
Florian —see Greisel, Florian 
Flotte, Paul Louis François René de (De-
flotte) (1817-1860)—French naval offi­
cer, democrat and socialist, Blanquist; 
took part in the 1848 revolution in 
France; deputy to the Legislative As­
sembly (1850-51).—27,32,128-29,344 
Forner, Anton—Burgomaster of the im­
perial city of Nördlingen (Franconia); 
joined the insurgent peasants in 1525 
and headed the plebeian party in the 
town.—452 
Fothergill, Thomas—British officer, hon­
orary secretary of the London union 
of the German refugees  (1850).—  352 
Fouché, Joseph, due d'Otrante (1759-
1820) — prominent figure in the 
French Revolution, Jacobin; took part 
in the Thermidor coup; Minister of Police under Napoleon I, notorious 
for his lack of principle.—124, 347 
Fould,  Achille (1800-1867)—French 
banker and politician, Orleanist, sub­
sequently Bonapartist; Minister of Fi­
nance several times from 1849 to 
1867.—20, 61, 75, 86, 114, 115, 117, 
118, 342, 364-65 
Fouquier-Tinville, Antoine Quentin (1746-
1795)—figure in the French Revolu­
tion; Public Prosecutor of the Rev­
olutionary Tribunal in 1793.—94 
Fourier, François Marie Charles (1772-
1837)—French Utopian socialist.— 
322 
Foy, Maximilien Sébastien Auguste Arthur 
Louis Fernand (1815-1871)—French 
politician; candidate of the party of 
Order for the Seine department dur­
ing the by-elections to the Legislative 
Assembly on March 10, 1850.—344 
Francis I (1494-1547)—King of France 
(1515-47)—328, 447 
Francis Joseph I (1830-1916) — Emperor 
of Austria (1848-1916).—11, 528 
Fränkel —German worker residing in 
London, member of the Communist 
League and of the London German 
Workers' Educational Society (1847); 
member of the Central Authority of 
the Communist League (1849-50); 
supporter of the Willich-Schapper sec­
tarian group.—625, 633 
Frederick II (the Great) (1712-1786) 
— King of Prussia (1740-86) 
—252,  546, 551, 552, 556 
Frederick III (the Wise) (1463-1525)— 
Elector of Saxony (1486-1525); 
patron of Luther; one of Münzer's 
persecutors.—417 
Frederick VII (1808-1863)—King of 
Denmark (1848-63).—394 
Frederick Augustus 7/(1797-1854) — King 
of Saxony (1836-54).—8 
Frederick William 7(1802-1875)—Elector 
of Hesse-Cassel (1847-66); Regent 
(1831-47).—528 
Frederick William II (1744-1797)—King 
of Prussia (1786-97).—542 
Frederick William 7V(1795-1861)—King 
of Prussia (1840-61).—8, 10, 12-16, 
171, 207, 247, 257, 258,  261,  267, 378, 
382, 383, 385, 394, 525-28 

=====第743页=====
720 Name Index 
Freiligrath, Ferdinand (1810-1876)— 
German romantic and later revolu­
tionary poet; member of the Com­
munist League; one of the editors of 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848-49). 
—353 
Fries, Peter (born c. 1822)—German 
lawyer, democrat; took part in the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849; 
member of the Palatinate revolution­
ary Provisional Government; emig­
rated to Switzerland.— 372 
Frundsberg, Georg von (1473-1528)— 
commander of German mercenaries; 
took part in suppressing the peasant 
uprising in Swabia and the arch­
bishopric of Salzburg in 1525-26.— 
468, 476 
Füster, Anton (1808-1881)—Austrian 
theologian, professor of Vienna Uni­
versity; deputy to the Imperial Diet 
(1848),  democrat; emigrated to Lon­
don and later to the USA.—597, 600 
G 
Gagern, Heinrich Wilhelm August, Baron 
von (1799-1880)—German moderate 
liberal politician; deputy to and Presi­
dent of the Frankfurt National Assem­
bly (Right Centre), Imperial Prime 
Minister (December 1848-March 
1849);  a leader of the Gotha party 
after May 1849.—511, 526 
Galeer, Albert Frédéric Jean (1816-
1851)—Swiss teacher and man of 
letters; democrat, took part in the war 
against the Sonderbund (1847) and in 
the Baden-Palatinate uprising of 
1849.—350, 612 
Gamier-Pages, Louis Antoine  (1803-
1878) — French politician, moderate 
republican, member of the Provisional 
Government and Mayor of Paris in 
1848.—53,  323, 359, 537 
Gatterer—see Engelhard, Magdalene Phi­
lippine 
Gaude—member of the Communist 
League, close to the Willich-Schapper 
sectarian group during the split in the 
League (1850).—633 Gebert, August—Mecklenburg joiner, 
member of the Communist League in 
Switzerland, later in London, be­
longed to the Willich-Schapper sec­
tarian group.—633 
Geier (Geyer), Florian (c. 1490-1525) 
—German knight, went over to 
the insurgent peasants (1525), com­
manded the Black Troop.—453-55, 
462-65 
Geismaier (Gaismair), Michael (c. 1490-
1532)—son of a miner, leader of the 
peasant uprising in Tirol and the 
archbishopric of Salzburg; secretary of 
the bishop of Salzburg; later customs 
official.—476-78 
George (called George the Bearded)  (1471-
1539)—Duke of Saxony (1500-39), 
one of the organisers of the suppres­
sion of the peasant uprising in 
Thuringia in 1525.—425 
George I (1660-1727)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1714-27).—251 
George II (1683-1760)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1727-60).—251 
Gerber, Erasmus (d. 1525)—a leader of 
the insurgent Alsatian peasants 
(1525).—474 
Gerber, Theus (died c. 1541)—leader of 
a troop of Stuttgarters, which joined 
the Württemberg insurgent Gay 
Christian Troop in 1525.—457, 460 
Ghillany, Friedrich Wilhelm (1807-1876) 
—German historian and theologian. 
—242 
Gibbs—a London alderman, acting 
Lord Mayor of London in May 1850. 
—352 
Girardin, Emile de (1806-1881) — French 
journalist and politician, editor of La 
Presse; often changed his political 
views;  opposed the Guizot Govern­
ment in 1847; a republican during the 
1848-49 revolution; deputy to the 
Legislative Assembly (1850-51); later 
Bonapartist.—137,  326-31,  333-37, 
487, 518 
Gnam—German democrat, took part in 
the 1848-49 revolution in Germany; 
emigrated to England, and in 1852 to 
the USA.—612, 613. 
Goegg, Amand (1820-1897)—German 
journalist, democrat; member of the 

=====第744页=====
Name Index 721 
Baden Provisional Government (1849) 
and of the First International, joined 
the German Social-Democrats in the 
1870s.—182, 220 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-
1832)—German  poet.—241,  242, 246 
Gör gey, Arthur (1818-1916)—military 
leader of the 1848-49 revolution in 
Hungary, a commander and, from 
April to June 1849, commander-in-
chief of the Hungarian army; voiced 
the conservative sentiments of the 
nobility; advocated agreement with 
the Habsburgs and later capitulation; 
War Minister (from May 1849).—184 
Götz —see Berlichingen, Götz von 
Götz, Christian (1783-1849)—Austrian 
general, took part in suppressing the 
Italian national liberation movement 
and in the war against revolutionary 
Hungary in 1848-49.—547 
Goudchaux, Michel (1797-1862)—French 
banker, republican, Minister of Fi­
nance in the Provisional Government 
in 1848.—73 
Gourgaud, Caspar, baron (1783-1852) 
— French general and monarchist 
politician, deputy to the Legislative 
Assembly during the Second Re­
public—109 
Grail, E. de—French Legitimist politi­
cian; lost the by-election to the Legisla­
tive Assembly in the department of 
Gard on January 13, 1850.—22 
Grandin, Victor (1797-1849)—French 
manufacturer and conservative politi­
cian, member of the Chamber of 
Deputies (1839-48); deputy to the 
Constituent and Legislative Assem­
blies during the Second Republic. 
—48 
Grandménil —French journalist, demo­
crat; member of secret revolutionary 
societies during the July monarchy; 
one of the founders and publishers of 
the newspaper La Réforme. —313 
Granier de Cassagnac, Bernard Adolphe 
(1806-1880) — French journalist, 
lacked principles in politics; prior to 
the 1848 revolution, Orleanist, later 
Bonapartist.—39, 138, 519 
Gray, Simon (18th-19th cent.)—English 
economist.— 588 Grebel, Konrad (1489-1526)—head of 
an Anabaptist sect in Zurich, follower 
of Münzer; agitated for a revolution in 
South Germany.—426 
Greiner, Theodor Ludwig —German law­
yer, democrat; member of the Palati­
nate Provisional Government in 1849; 
emigrated to Switzerland and subse­
quently to the USA.—200-02, 
372 
Greisel, Florian —German priest, took 
part in the 1525 Peasant War in 
Swabia.—458 
Grey, Sir George (1799-1882)—British 
Whig statesman, Home Secretary 
(1846-52, 1855-58 and 1861-66) and 
State Secretary for the Colonies (1854-
55).—3,  274, 297, 383-84 
Grün,  Karl Theodor Ferdinand (pen-
name Ernst von der Haide) (1817-
1887)—German writer, "true social­
ist" in the mid-1840s; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing).—345 
Gudin, Charles Gabriel César (1798-
1874)—adjutant of Louis Philippe; 
from 1846 Marshal of France; was 
dismissed from his post in 1847 for 
swindling.—358 
Gugel-Bastian (d. 1514)—leader of the 
peasant conspiracy in the Margraviate 
of Baden in 1514.—438 
Guinard, Auguste Joseph (1799-1874) 
—French democrat, deputy to the 
Constituent Assembly (1848-49); 
took part in the Mountain party 
actions on June 13, 1849.—129 
Guizot, François Pierre Guillaume (1787-
1874)—French historian and con­
servative statesman; from 1840 up 
to the February revolution of 1848 vir­
tually directed France's foreign and 
domestic policy.—19, 36, 48, 51, 
52, 69, 76, 83, 90, 109, 113, 251-56, 
301 
Gutzkow, Karl Ferdinand (1811-1878) 
—German writer, member of the 
Young Germany group; editor of 
the journal Telegraph für Deutschland 
(1838-43).—242 
Gützlaff,  Karl Friedrich August  (1803-
1851)—German missionary in Chi­
na.—266 

=====第745页=====
722 Name Index 
H 
Habern, Wilhelm von —Palatinate mar­
shal, commander-in-chief under Lud­
wig, Elector of the Palatinate; took 
part in suppressing the 1525 peasant 
uprising in the Palatinate.—456, 466 
Hadrian (Publius Aelius Hadrianus) (76-
138)—Roman Emperor (117-38).— 
591 
Hafiz, Shams ud-din Mohammed (c. 1300-
c. 1389)—Persian poet, Tajik by 
birth.—244 
Hain,  August—German emigrant re­
siding in London; member of the 
Communist League, supported Marx 
during its split.—483 
Hanover, House of—British royal house 
(1714-1901).—252 
Hansemann, David Justus (1790-1864) 
—German capitalist, a leader of the 
Rhenish liberal bourgeoisie; Prussian 
Finance Minister (March-Septem­
ber 1848).—156 
Harlow, John (mid-19th cent.)—British 
economist of the Birmingham school 
known as the "little shilling men"; 
wrote with Wright under the pseudo­
nym of Gemini.—588 
Harney, George Julian (1817-1897)— 
prominent figure in the English 
labour movement; a leader of the 
Chartist Left wing; editor of the 
newspaper Northern Star and the jour­
nal Democratic Review; friend of 
Marx and Engels.— 3, 484, 514, 615 
Hassenpflug, Hans Daniel Ludwig  Fried­
rich (1794-1862)—German statesman, 
advocate of absolutism, Minister of 
Justice and the Interior of Hesse-
Cassel (1832-37), head of the Hesse-
Cassel Ministry (1850-55).—527 
Haupt, Hermann Wilhelm (born c. 1831) 
—German business clerk; member 
of the Communist League; turned 
traitor during the Cologne communist 
trial and was released by the police 
during investigation.—483 
Häusner, Karl —German engineer, com­
manded the Rhenish Hessian corps of 
the Baden-Palatinate insurgent army 
in 1849.—196 
Haussez, Charles Lemercier de Longpré, baron d' (1778-1854)—French conser­
vative politician; Minister for the Navy 
(1829-30).—129 
Hautpoul, Alphonse Henri, marquis d' 
(1789-1865)—French general, Legiti­
mist, later Bonapartist; War Minister 
(1849-50).—22, 26, 32, 113, 123, 128, 
137, 143, 144, 261, 518, 523, 524 
Haynau, Julius Jakob, Baron von (1786-
1853)—Austrian Master of Ordnance; 
took part in suppressing the 1848-49 
revolution in Italy; commanded the 
Austrian troops in Hungary (1849-
50); initiated violent repressions 
against the Hungarian revolu­
tionaries.—110, 511, 624 
Hecker, Friedrich Karl Franz  (1811-
1881)—German democrat, a leader of 
the Baden republican uprising in 
April 1848; emigrated to the USA.— 
149, 198, 232, 238 
Hecker, Karl—one of the leaders of the 
Elberfeld uprising in 1849.—164 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-
1831)—German philosopher.—248, 
267, 302, 422, 488-89, 530 
Heine, Heinrich (1797-1856)—German 
revolutionary poet.—182-83, 536 
Heintzmann, Atem (born c. 1812)—Prus­
sian lawyer, liberal; member of the 
Committee of Public Safety during the 
Elberfeld uprising in May 1849; emig­
rated to London.—164 
Heinzen, Karl (1809-1880)—German 
journalist, radical; took part in the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849; 
emigrated to Switzerland, later to 
England and in the autumn of 1850 to 
the USA.—3, 4, 183 
Helfenstein, Ludwig, Count von (c. 1480-
1525)—Austrian Viceregent in 
Weinsberg (Württemberg); was 
treacherous and cruel towards the 
peasants; executed by the in­
surgents.—453-54, 462 
Helvétius, Claude Adrien (1715-1771)— 
French philosopher, atheist, Enlight-
ener.—99 
Henneberg, Johann, Count von—Abbot of 
Fulda (1521-41).—472, 479 
Henry IV (1553-1610) — King of France 
(1589-1610).—253 
Henry  V—see  Chambord,  Henri Charles 

=====第746页=====
Name Index 723 
Ferdinand Marie Dieudonne dArtois, due 
de Bordeaux, comte de 
Henry VIII (1491-1547)—King of 
England (1509-47).—254 
Henuegh, Georg Friedrich (1817-1875)— 
German democratic poet, a leader 
of the German Democratic Society in 
Paris.—112 
Heydt, August, Baron von der  (1801-
1874)—Prussian conservative states­
man, Elberfeld banker; from Decem­
ber 1848 to 1862, Minister of Trade, 
Industry and Public Works; deputy to 
the Second Chamber (1848).—603 
Hillmann, Hugo (1823-1898)—German 
democrat, took part in the 1848-49 
revolution; emigrated to London; 
later became member of the Lassal-
lean General Association of German 
Workers; joined the Social-Demo­
cratic Workers' Party in 1869.—612 
Hipler, Wendel (c. 1465-1526)—German 
nobleman who sided with the insur­
gents during die peasant uprising in 
Franconia in 1525; principal author of 
the "Heilbronn programme".—452-
54, 461-63 
Hirschfeld, Karl Ulrich Friedrich Wilhelm 
Moritz von (1791-1859)—Prussian 
general, commanded a corps which 
took part in suppressing the Baden-
Palatinate uprising (1849).—208 
Höchster, Ernst Hermann (born c. 1811) 
—Elberfeld lawyer, democrat, Chair­
man of the Elberfeld Committee of 
Public Safety in May 1849.—164, 175 
Hodde, Lucien de la (Delahodde) (1808-
1865)—French writer, member of se­
cret revolutionary societies during the 
Restoration and the July monarchy, 
police agent.—311-16, 320, 323 
Hohenlohe, Albrecht and Leopold, Counts 
von—petty Franconian rulers.—452, 
453 
Hohenzollerns—dynasty of Brandenburg 
electors (1415-1701), Prussian kings 
(1701-1918) and German emperors 
(1871-1918).—171,  209, 347, 464 
Homer—semi-legendary Greek epic po­
et, author of the Iliad and the Odys­
sey.—  195,  258 
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) (65-8 
B.C.)—Roman poet.—105 Hosszû, Anton—a leader of the peasant 
uprising in Hungary in 1514.—439 
Hubmaier, Balthasar (c. 1480-1528) 
—Waldshut priest, follower of Mün­
zer, one of the inspirers of the peas­
ant and urban uprising in the Black 
Forest.—426, 446 
Hudson, George (1800-1871)—British 
capitalist, known as the "railway 
king".—358 
Hugo,  Victor Marie (1802-1885)— 
French writer; deputy to the Constitu­
ent and Legislative Assemblies during 
the Second Republic—33, 112, 136, 
138, 517 
Hühnerbein (Hünerbein), Friedrich Wil­
helm (born c. 1817)—German tailor, 
member of the Communist League 
and of the Committee of Public Safety 
during the Elberfeld uprising in May 
1849.—602 
Huss or Hus, John or Jan (c. 1369-
1415)—Bohemian religious reformer 
and ideologist of the national move­
ment; professor of Prague University 
from 1398, and rector of the same 
from October 1402 to April 1403; 
burnt at the stake as a heretic.—413 
Hütten, Frowin von—cousin of Ulrich 
von Hütten, courtier of the Elector of 
Mainz; took part in suppressing the 
peasant uprising (1525).—466 
Hütten, Ulrich von (1488-1523) 
—German poet, advocate of Reforma­
tion, ideologist of and participant in 
the knights' uprising in 1522-23.— 
417,  442-45, 466 
J 
Jacoby, Johann (1805-1877)—German 
physician, petty-bourgeois journalist, 
deputy to the Frankfurt National As­
sembly; joined Social-Democrats in 
1872.—9 
Jakob—a leader of the peasant uprising 
of "shepherds" (1251) in France; born 
in Hungary.—413 
Jansen, Johann Joseph (1825-1849)— 
German democrat, member of the 
Communist League; a leader of the 

=====第747页=====
724 Name Index 
Cologne Workers' Association (1848), 
supporter of Gottschalk; shot for his 
participation in the Baden-Palati­
nate uprising of 1849.—346 
Jansen, Karl (born c. 1830)—German 
democrat, schoolteacher; took part in 
the Elberfeld uprising in May 1849; 
brother of Johann Joseph Jansen. 
—603 
Jaup, Heinrich Karl (1781-1860)— 
German lawyer, liberal; head of the 
Hesse-Darmstadt Government (1848-
50); President of the Pacifist Con­
gress in Frankfurt am Main in 
August 1850.—511 
Jean Paul (pseudonym of Johann Paul 
Friedrich Richter) (1763-1825)— 
German satirical writer.—302 
Jellachich (Jellacic),  Josef,  Count  (1801-
1859)—Austrian general, Ban of Cro­
atia; took part in suppressing the 
1848-49 revolution in Hungary and 
Austria.—596 
Joachim of Floris (c. 1132-1202)—Italian 
abbot, mystic, preached a "second 
coming of Christ"; his teaching was 
condemned by the Catholic Church as 
heretical.—420 
John (Johann) (the Steadfast) (1468-
1532)—Duke of Saxony; from 1525 
Elector of Saxony; one of the persecu­
tors of Münzer; organised the sup­
pression of the peasant uprising in 
Thuringia (1525).—424 
John (Johann) (1782-1859)—Archduke 
of Austria; Imperial Regent of Germa­
ny (June 1848 to December 1849). 
—7,10 
Joinville, François Ferdinand Philippe 
Louis Marie, Prince de (1818-1900)— 
duke of Orleans, son of Louis Phi­
lippe; emigrated to England after the 
February revolution of 1848.—16, 36 
Jones, Ernest Charles (1819-1869)— 
leading figure in the English labour 
movement, proletarian poet and 
journalist, a leader of the Left Chart­
ists, friend of Marx and Engels. 
—514 
Joss, Fritz from Untergrombach (died 
c. 1525)—organiser of secret peasant 
alliances and conspiracies in South 
Germany (1513).—433-35, 440 Jung, Rudolph—merchant, witness at 
the trial of the participants in the 
Elberfeld uprising of May 1849.—603 
K 
Kah-Ge-Ga-Gah-Bowh—see Copway, 
George 
Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804)—German 
philosopher.—114 
Karl Wilhelm Ferdinand (1735-1806)— 
Duke of Brunswick (1780-1806); 
commander-in-chief of the Austro-
Prussian army which fought against 
revolutionary France.— 542 
Kilinski, Karl—Hungarian refugee re­
siding in London (early 1850s).—240 
Kinkel, Johann Gottfried (1815-1882)— 
German poet and journalist, demo­
crat; took part in the Baden-Palati­
nate uprising of 1849; emigrated to 
London, where he became a petty-
bourgeois refugee leader and came 
out against Marx and Engels. —215, 
227-28,  229, 345-47 
Klein,  Jakob—German plasterer; took 
part in the Palatinate uprising of 1849; 
refugee residing in London.—600,612 
Kleiner,  W.—German  refugee residing 
in London.—350, 600, 612 
Klopstock, Friedrich Gottlieb (1724-
1803)—German poet, representative 
of German Enlightenment.—245 
Klose,  G.—German  refugee residing in 
London, member of the Communist 
League, sided with Marx during the 
split in the League.—483 
Knierim—battalion commander in the 
Baden-Palatinate insurgent army 
(1849).—220-22 
Knigge, Adolph Franz Friedrich Ludwig, 
Baron von (1752-1796)—German 
writer.—244 
Knopf von Leubas—see Schmidt, Jörg 
Konrad III von Thiingen (1466-1540)— 
Bishop of Würzburg (1519-40); orga­
nised the suppression of the uprising 
of peasants and urban plebeians in 
Franconia in 1525.—455, 465-66 
Körner, Hermann. Joseph Alois (1805-
1882)—German democrat, teacher of 

=====第748页=====
Name Index 725 
drawing; a leader of the May 1849 
uprising in Elberfeld; emigrated to 
Switzerland, then to the USA.—372 
Kossuth, Lajos (1802-1894)—leader of 
the Hungarian national liberation 
movement; headed bourgeois-demo­
cratic elements during the 1848-
49 revolution; head of the Hungarian 
revolutionary Government; after the 
defeat of the revolution emigrated 
first to Turkey and then to England 
and America.—183, 200, 205, 206, 
214, 552 
Krug, Wilhelm Traugott (1770-1842)— 
German philosopher.—242 
Kübeck, Karl Friedrich, Baron von Kübau 
(1780-1855)—Austrian statesman, Fi­
nance Minister after the March 1848 
revolution.—10 
Kunowski—Prussian major, War Min­
istry official; extreme monarchist. 
—379,383 
Kunze, August—German journalist. 
—242 
Kurz —Swiss officer.—236 
L 
Lacrosse, Bertrand Theobald Joseph, baron 
de (1796-1865)—French politician, 
Orleanist; Minister of Public Works 
during the Second Republic; from 
1850 Bonapartist.—104 
La Fayette, (Lafayette), Marie Joseph Paul 
Ives Roch Gilbert Motier, marquis de 
(1757-1834)—prominent figure in the 
French Revolution, one of the leaders 
of the moderate constitutionalists 
(Feuillants); participated in the July 
revolution of 1830.—543 
Laffitte, Jacques (1767-1844)—French 
banker and liberal politician, headed 
the government in the early period of 
the July monarchy (1830-31).—48 
Lagarde, Barthélémy (1795-1887)— 
French politician, deputy to the Con­
stituent and Legislative Assemblies 
during the Second Republic; adherent 
of the Mountain party.—122 
La Hitte, Jean Ernest Ducos, vicomte de 
(1789-1878)—French general, Bona­
partist, Minister of Foreign Affairs 
(1849-51).—129 Lamartine, Alphonse Marie Louis  de (1790-
1869)—French poet, historian and 
politician; one of the leaders of the 
moderate republicans in the 1840s; 
Minister of Foreign Affairs and virtual 
head of the Provisional Government in 
1848.—53,  58, 65, 68, 303, 359, 362, 
515, 530, 537 
Lamartinxere, Felix de (born c. 1808)— 
publisher of the Bonapartist news­
paper Le Pouvoir.— 39, 140, 520-21 
Lamourette, Antoine Adrien (1742-1794) 
—French bishop, deputy to the Leg­
islative Assembly (1792); executed 
as a counter-revolutionary in 1794. 
— 139,  519 
Lamparter, Gregor (1463-1523)— 
adviser to Duke Ulrich of Württem­
berg.— 437 
La Rocheja(c)quelein, Henri Auguste 
Georges Du Vergier, Marquis de (1805-
1867)—French politician, one of the 
leaders of the Legitimist party; deputy 
to the Constituent Assembly (1848), 
senator during the Second Em­
pire.—54 
Laurentius—see Mészâros, Laurentius 
Law, John (1671-1729)—Scottish econ­
omist and financier, Director-Gen­
eral of Finance in France (1719-20). 
—491 
Leclerc, Alexandre—Paris businessman, 
supported the party of Order and took 
part in suppressing the workers' upris­
ing in June 1848.—32, 135, 516 
Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre Auguste (1807-
1874)—French writer and politician, a 
leader of the petty-bourgeois demo­
crats,  editor of La Réforme; Minister of 
the Interior in the Provisional Govern­
ment in 1848, deputy to the Con­
stituent and Legislative Assemblies 
(leader of the Mountain party); fled to 
England following the events of June 
13, 1849.—53, 61, 64, 65, 71, 73, 81, 
88, 91-93,  98, 99, 101-03, 106, 117, 
129, 136, 323, 359, 364, 516, 528, 537, 
541 
Lehmann, Albert—German worker resi­
dent in London, leading figure in the 
League of the Just and in the London 
German Workers' Educational Socie­
ty; member of the sectarian group of 
25-1124 

=====第749页=====
726 Name Index 
Willich and Schapper in the Commu­
nist League.—625, 629, 633 
Lemoinne, John Marguerite Emile (1815-
1892)—French journalist, corre­
spondent of the Journal des Débats  and 
later its editor-in-chief.—138,519 
Leo, Heinrich (1799-1878)—German his­
torian and writer, extreme monarch­
ist, ideologist of Prussian jun-
kerdom.— 523 
Leoni, Josef—German refugee in Lon­
don.—612-13 
Leopold Karl Friedrich (1790-1852) 
—Grand Duke of Baden (1830-52).— 
162, 175, 179, 180, 181, 184, 215 
Lerminier, Jean Louis Eugene (1803-1857) 
— French conservative lawyer and 
writer, professor of comparative law at 
the Collège de France (1831-39); re­
signed as a result of a campaign of 
protest by the students.—90 
Le Sage, Alain René (1668-1747)— 
French writer.—315 
Liebknecht, Wilhelm (1826-1900)— 
leading figure in the German and inter­
national working-class movement, took 
part in the 1848-49 revolution, mem­
ber of the Communist League, one 
of the founders and leaders of the 
German Social-Democratic Party, 
friend and associate of Marx and 
Engels.— 483 
Limpurg—a family of Franconian 
counts.—455 
Lochner, Georg Wolfgang Karl (1798-
1882)—German philologist.—242 
Locke, John (1632-1704)—English dualist 
philosopher and economist.— 253 
Lorcher—adviser to Duke Ulrich of 
Württemberg. —437 
Loreck —participant in the Baden-Pala­
tinate uprising of 1849, captain.—204, 
211 
Louis IX (Saint) (1214-1270)—King of 
France (1226-70).—13, 110 
Louis XI (1423-1483)—King of France 
(1461-83).—402, 443 
Louis XIII (1601-1643)—King of France 
(1610-43).—253 
Louis X/V(1638-1715)—King of France 
(1643-1715).—119, 252 
Louis XV (1710-1774)—King of France 
(1715-74).—131 Louis XVIII (Louis le Désiré) (1755-
1824)—King of France (1814-15 and 
1815-24).—18, 22 
Louis Bonaparte—see Napoleon III 
Louis Napoleon—see Napoleon III 
Louis Philippe I (1773-1850)—Duke of 
Orléans, King of the French (1830-
48).—18,  19, 20, 22, 23, 34, 35-36, 
48-50,  53, 76, 78, 80, 82, 108, 111, 
114-18,  138, 141, 251, 263, 311, 321, 
357, 363, 519, 521, 541, 568, 624 
Louis Philippe Albert d'Orléans, comte de 
(1838-1894)—Louis Philippe's grand­
son, pretender to the French throne. 
—36,141,521 
Lourdoueix, H. de —French politician, 
Legitimist, defeated in the by-election 
to the Legislative Assembly in the de­
partment of Gard on January 13, 
1850.—22 
Löwenstein, Ludwig and Friedrich, Counts 
von—petty Franconian rulers.—453 
Lucas—member of the Workers' Associ­
ation in Mülheim (Rhineland) in 1849; 
refugee in London.—613 
Ludwig V (1478-1544)—Elector of the 
Palatinate (1508-44); took part in sup­
pressing the knights' uprising of 
1522-23;  one of the organisers of 
reprisals against insurgent peasants in 
Franconia in 1525.—437, 444, 454, 
455, 460, 462, 464, 465, 466 
Lüning, Otto (1818-1868)—German 
physician and writer, a "true socialist" 
in the mid-forties, editor of the Neue 
Deutsche Zeitung, later became a na­
tional-liberal.—387-88 
Luther, Martin (1483-1546) — prominent 
figure of the Reformation, founder of 
Protestantism (Lutheranism) in Ger­
many, ideologist of the German 
burghers.—411,  416-21,  423-27, 429, 
441-42,  446 
M 
Malthus, Thomas Robert (1766-1834) 
—English clergyman and economist, 
advocated a misanthropic theory of 
population.—83 
Manstein, Johann —German soldier who 
took part in storming the arsenal in 

=====第750页=====
Name Index 727 
Prüm; executed in October 
1849.—171 
Mantel, Johann (c. 1468-1530)—German 
theologian, preacher at Stuttgart, fol­
lower of Münzer. —426 
M anteuf fei, Otto Theodor, Baron von 
(1805-1882)—Prussian conservative 
statesman, Minister of the Interior 
(November 1848-November 1850), 
Prime Minister (1850-58).—158, 182, 
212 
Manteuffel, Rudolph von—captain in 
the Baden-Palatinate insurgent army 
(1849);  relative of Otto Theodor Man­
teuffel.— 212 
Marat, Jean Paul (1743-1793)—a Jacobin 
leader during the French Revolu­
tion.—540 
Marche —French worker who in 1848 
demanded from the Provisional Gov­
ernment the introduction of the right 
to work.— 55 
Marie de Saint-Georges, Alexandre Pierre 
Thomas Amable (1795-1870)—French 
lawyer and politician, moderate re­
publican; Minister of Public Works in 
the Provisional Government in 1848; 
later Minister of Justice in the Cavaig-
nac Government.—63, 359, 366, 537 
Marrast, Armand (1801-1852)—French 
writer and politician, a leader of mod­
erate republicans, editor of Le Nation­
al; member of the Provisional Govern­
ment and Mayor of Paris (1848), 
President of the Constituent Assembly 
(1848-49).—23,  53, 65, 72, 77, 78, 91, 
98,99,263,315,319,359,515,537 
Marx, Karl (1818-1883).—6, 41, 50, 66, 
86, 110, 130, 171, 181-84, 186, 241, 
257, 277, 286, 301, 336, 338, 342, 345, 
348, 349, 351-54, 357, 362, 370, 371, 
377-81,  383, 385, 386, 387, 389, 390-
91, 483, 484, 485, 490, 533, 535, 536, 
537, 567, 584, 585, 589, 606, 610, 615, 
618, 620, 623, 625, 628, 629, 636 
Mathieu de la Drôme, Philippe Antoine 
(1808-1865) —French democrat; dep­
uty to the Constituent and Legislative 
Assemblies during the Second Repub­
lic, sympathised with the Mountain 
party.—90 
Matthäus Lang (c. 1468-1540)—Arch­
bishop of Salzburg (from 1519); in­spired the persecution of adherents 
of the Reformation, and reprisals 
against the insurgent peasants and 
townsmen in 1525.—475-77 
Maurer, Friedrich Wilhelm German  (1811-
1885)—German writer, democrat, 
member of the League of Outlaws, 
later of the League of the Just.—242 
Maximilian I (1459-1519) — Holy Roman 
Emperor (1493-1519).—433,437,439, 
448 
Maximilian II (1811-1864) — King of 
Bavaria (1848-64).—8, 151 
Mayerhofer, Rudolph—Deputy Minister of 
War in the Baden Provisional Govern­
ment (  1849),  obstructed radical military 
action.—176,180 
Mazzini, Giuseppe (1805-1872)—a leader 
of the national liberation and demo­
cratic movement in Italy; head of the 
Provisional Government of the Roman 
Republic (1849); an organiser of the 
Central Committee of European 
Democracy in London (1850).—  513-
14, 528, 532, 541 
McCulloch, John Ramsay (1789-1864)— 
Scottish economist who vulgarised 
David Ricardo's theories.—584 
Meininghaus, Heinrich —innkeeper, wit­
ness at the trial of the participants in 
the May 1849 Elberfeld uprising. 
—602 
Meissner, Alfred (1822-1885)—German 
democratic writer; in the mid-forties a 
"true socialist", subsequently a lib­
eral.—242 
Melanchthon, Philipp (1497-1560)— 
German theologian, closest associate 
of Luther, whom he assisted in adapt­
ing Lutheranism to the interests of 
princes; took a hostile attitude to­
wards Münzer's revolutionary ideas. 
—424 
Menzingen, Stephan von (d. 1525)—Ger­
man knight; headed the insurrection 
of Rothenburg petty burghers and 
plebeians in March 1525.—452, 465 
Mersy—commander of the 3rd Division 
in the Baden-Palatinate insurgent 
army; emigrated to the USA, fought 
on the side of the Northerners in the 
American Civil War.—226, 227, 229, 
230, 232 

=====第751页=====
728 Name Index 
Mészâros, Laurentius (d. 1514)—priest of 
Szeged, a leader of the peasant insur­
rection in Hungary in 1514.—438, 
439 
Metternich-Winneburg, Clemens Wenzel 
Lothar, Prince von (1773-1859)— 
Austrian statesman and diplomat, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs (1809-21), 
Chancellor (1821-48); an organiser of 
the Holy Alliance.—10, 624 
Metzler, Georg —a leader of the peasant 
uprising in Odenwald (1525), and 
commander of the Gay Bright Troop; 
belonged to the moderate party. 
—452-54,461,463 
Mieroslawski, Ludwik (1814-1878)— 
prominent figure in the Polish national 
liberation movement; took part in the 
insurrection of  1830-31,  in the prepa­
rations for the uprising of 1846 and 
in the 1848-49 revolution; later, a 
leader of the moderate wing of Polish 
democratic emigrants; sympathised 
with Bonapartism.—152, 179, 184, 
195, 196, 206, 212, 218, 219, 222-23, 
226,230,231 
Mirbach, Otto von (bom c. 1800)—retired 
Prussian artillery officer, democrat, 
commandant of Elberfeld during the 
May 1849 uprising.—602,604 
Mniewski, Theophil (1809-1849)—Polish 
revolutionary, commanded a regiment 
in the Baden-Palatinate uprising of 
1849;  executed in Rastatt in 
1849.—219 
Mohammed (Muhammad, Mahomet) (c. 
570-632)—founder of Islam.—244 
Mole, Louis Mathieu, comte  (1781-
1855)—French statesman, Orleanist, 
Prime Minister (1836-37, 1837-39); 
deputy to the Constituent and Legisla­
tive Assemblies during the Second 
Republic—109 
Molière (real name Jean Baptiste Poquelin) 
(1622-1673)—French dramatist.— 
139,519 
Moll, Joseph (1813-1849) —German 
watchmaker prominent in the Ger­
man and international working-class 
movement; a leader of the League of 
the Just, member of the Central 
Authority of the Communist League; 
President of the Cologne Workers' Association (from July to September 
1848),  member of the Rhenish District 
Committee of Democrats; killed in 
batde during the Baden-Palatinate up­
rising in 1849.—200,201, 225-29,278 
Monk (Monch), George, 1st Duke of Albe­
marle (1608-1670)—English general 
and statesman; originally a royalist, 
he later served in Cromwell's army, 
helped restore the Stuart dynasty in 
1660.—89 
Monnier—member of secret revolu­
tionary societies during the July mon­
archy in France; became secretary-
general of the police prefecture after 
the February 1848 revolution.—313 
Montalembert, Charles Forbes René de 
Tryon, comte de (1810-1870)—French 
politician and writer; deputy to the 
Constituent and Legislative Assem­
blies during the Second Republic, Or­
leanist, leader of the Catholic party, 
supported Louis Bonaparte during 
the coup  d'état  of December 2, 1851, 
but shortly afterwards sided with the 
opposition.— 118,119,136,517 
Mordes, Florian —Minister of the Interior 
in the Baden Provisional Government 
(1849).—176 
Moreau, Jean Victor Marie  (1763-
1813)—French general, fought in the 
wars of the French Republic against 
the coalition of European states; de­
feated the Austrians at Hohenlinden 
(1800).—236 
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus (1756-1791) 
—Austrian composer.—306,531 
Müller, Hans von Bulgenbach (d. 1525) 
—led and then betrayed the Black 
Forest peasants in 1525.—446, 447, 
449,466,467 
Müller, Jakob (born 1823) — German 
lawyer, participant in the Baden-
Palatinate uprising of 1849, civil com­
missary in Kirchheimbolanden, 
emigrated to the USA.—200 
Mundt, Theodor (1808-1861)—German 
writer, member of the Young Ger­
many literary group; professor of 
literature and history at Breslau and 
Berlin.—242 
Münzer, Thomas (c. 1490-1525)—leader 
of the urban plebeians and poor 

=====第752页=====
Name  Index  729 
peasants during the Reformation and 
the Peasant War in Germany, advo­
cated egalitarian Utopian commu­
nism.—404-05, 413-, 415, 418-27, 
432, 442, 446, 448, 450, 461, 469-73, 
475-76 
N 
Napier, Sir William Francis Patrick (1785-
1860)—British general and military 
historian.—544 
Napoleon I Bonaparte (1769-1821)— 
Emperor of the French (1804-14 and 
1815).—17, 18, 22, 25, 80-84, 98, 119, 
122, 124, 142-44, 155, 198, 200, 260, 
286, 347, 523, 524, 542, 544-50, 552, 
553-54, 555-56, 559-60, 563, 564, 
568-69,576 
Napoleon III (Charles Louis Napoleon 
Bonaparte) (1808-1873)—Prince, 
nephew of Napoleon I, President of 
the Second Republic (1848-51), Em­
peror of the French (1852-70).—16, 
20, 22, 25-26, 28, 35, 36, 38, 39,40, 75, 
82-87,  89, 90, 92, 94, 96-99, 101-03, 
110-14, 118-20, 123-25, 127-29, 139-
45, 262, 342, 511, 519-25, 528, 572, 
576-80 
Natzmer, Hermann von (1806-1858)— 
Prussian officer, sentenced to 15 years 
of imprisonment in a fortress for re­
fusal to shoot at the people during the 
storming of the arsenal in Berlin on 
June 14, 1848; escaped in 1849, took 
part in the Baden-Palatinate uprising; 
emigrated to Switzerland, later to Eng­
land; settled in Australia in 1852.— 
196 
Necker, Jacques (1732-1804)—French 
banker and politician, several times 
Director-General of Finance in the 
1770s and 1780s, attempted to carry 
out reforms.—265, 302 
Nerlinger—participant in the Offenburg 
democratic movement (1848) and the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising (1849).— 
233 
Nesselrode, Karl Vasilyevich, Count (1780-
1862)—Russian statesman and dip­
lomat; Foreign Minister (1816-56), 
Chancellor of State from 1845 on­
wards.— 547 Neuhaus—physician from Thuringia; 
commanded a detachment of the 
Baden-Palatinate revolutionary army 
in 1849.—229 
Neumayer, Maximilian Georg Joseph 
(1789-1866)—French general, sup­
ported the party of Order.—144, 
524-25 
Ney, Napoleon Henri Edgard (1812-
1882)—French general, Bonapartist, 
adjutant of President Louis Bona­
parte, deputy to the Legislative As­
sembly of 1850-51.—112 
Nicholas I (1796-1855)—Emperor of 
Russia (1825-55).—8, 258, 259, 262, 
511,528,547,556-57,624 
Noack,  Ludwig (1819-1885)—German 
theologian and philosopher.— 242 
Nostradamus (Michel de Notre-Dame) 
(1503-1566)—French physician and 
astrologer, mystic.—245 
Nothjung, Peter (1821-1866)—German 
tailor, member of the Cologne Work­
ers' Association and of the Communist 
League, one of the accused at the 
Cologne communist trial (1852). 
—376,602 
O 
Oastler, Richard (1789-1861)—English 
politician, Tory philanthropist.—291, 
293, 298 
Obermüller —German journalist, par­
ticipant in the Baden-Palatinate upris­
ing of 1849.—204, 212, 233 
Oborski, Ludwik (1787-1873)—Polish 
colonel, participant in the Polish insur­
rection of  1830-31 ;  emigrant resident 
in London, member of the Fraternal 
Democrats society; commanded a divi­
sion in the Baden-Palatinate insurgent 
army (1849).—226,227,231 
O'Connor,  Feargus Edward (1794-1855) 
—a leader of the Left wing in the 
Chartist movement, editor of the news­
paper The Northern Star; reformist 
after 1848.—377, 514-15 
Orleans, House of— French royal dynasty 
(1830-48).—81,  95, 111-12 
Orleans, Duchess of—see Orleans, Helene 
Louise Elisabeth 

=====第753页=====
730 Name Index 
Orleans, Duke of—see Louis Philippe I 
Orléans, Hélène Louise Elisabeth, Duchesse 
d' (1814-1858)—Princess of Mecklen­
burg, widow of Ferdinand, Louis 
Philippe's elder son.—  36, 111 
Oswald, Eugen (1826-1912)—German 
journalist, democrat, took part in the 
revolutionary movement in Baden 
(1848-49); emigrated to England after 
the defeat of the revolution.— 219 
Oudinot, Nicolas Charles Victor  (1791-
1863)—French general, Orleanist, in 
1849 commanded troops dispatched 
against the Roman Republic.—  93, 94, 
101, 102, 549 
Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso) (4S B.C.-
c. 17 A.D.)—Roman poet.—541 
P 
Pache, Jean Nicolas (1746-1823) 
—prominent figure in the French 
Revolution, Jacobin, War Minister 
(October 1792-January 1793), Mayor 
of Paris (February 1793-Mav 1794).— 
545,563 
Pagnerre, Laurent Antoine (1805-1854) 
—French publisher, republican; dep­
uty to the Constituent Assembly in 
1848.—91 
Palmerston, Henry John Temple, 3rd Vis­
count (1784-1865)—British statesman, 
Foreign Secretary (1830-34,  1835-41, 
1846-51), Home Secretary (1852-55) 
and Prime Minister (1855-58 and 
1359-65); Tory at the beginning of his 
career, from 1830 onwards, Whig. 
— 511,513 
Paris, Count of—see Louis Philippe Albert 
Parmentier—French manufacturer and 
financier.—117 
Paskevich, Ivan Fyodorovich (1782-
1856)—Russian general-field mar­
shal; commander-in-chief of the army 
sent to suppress the Polish insurrec­
tion in the summer of 1831, and of the 
army that took part in suppressing the 
Hungarian revolution in  1849.—  547, 
556 
Passy, Hippolyte Philibert (1793-1880) 
— French economist and politician, 
Orleanist, several times member of 
the government during the July mon­archy; Minister of Finance during the 
Second Republic—111,117 
Peel, Sir Robert (1788-1850)—British 
statesman, moderate Tory, Prime 
Minister (1841-46); repealed the Corn 
Laws (1846).—19,293,496, 511 
Peucker, Eduard von (1791-1876) 
—Prussian general and statesman, 
Minister of War in the so-called Im­
perial Government in Frankfurt (July 
1848-May 1849); took part in quell­
ing the uprising in the Palatinate and 
Baden in 1849.—158, 199,230 
Pfänder, Karl (c. 1818-1876)—German 
artist, prominent figure in the Ger­
man and international working-class 
movement; emigrated to London 
in 1845; member of the German 
Workers' Educational Society in Lon­
don, of the Central Authority of the 
Communist League, and of the Gene­
ral Council of the First International; 
friend and associate of Marx and 
Engels.— 351, 483, 533, 597, 598, 601, 
610, 618-20, 629, 632 
Pfeifer (Pfeiffer), Heinrich (d. 1525) 
— popular preacher, followed Münzer; 
a leader of the uprising in Mühl­
hausen (1525).—469, 473 
Philip I (1479-1533)—Margrave of 
Baden, in 1525 took part in suppress­
ing the peasant uprising in South 
Germany.—438 
Philip I (the Magnanimous) (1504-1567) 
— Landgrave of Hesse; took part 
in suppressing the insurrection of 
knights in 1522-23; organised the 
suppression of the peasant uprising in 
Thuringia in 1525.—444, 467-69, 475 
Pilhes, Victor Apollinaire Ferdinand 
(1817-1879) —French journalist, dem­
ocrat, member of secret revolution­
ary societies during the July monar­
chy, supported the newspaper La Ré­
forme; deputy to the Legislative As­
sembly during the Second Republic.— 
312 
Pitt, William ( 1759-1806) — British states­
man, Tory; Prime Minister (1783-1801 
and 1804-06) .—364 
Pius IX (Giovanni Maria Mastai-Ferretti) 
(1792-1878)—Pope (1846-78).—92, 
112, 302, 303, 512, 513 

=====第754页=====
Name Index 731 
Plato (c. 427-c. 347 B.C.)—Greek philo­
sopher.— 78 
Pradié, Pierre (1816-1892) —French 
lawyer, republican; deputy to the Con­
stituent and Legislative Assemblies 
during the Second Republic; wrote 
pamphlets defending the Republic 
against Louis Napoleon.—263 
Praslin, Charles Laure Hugues Theobald, 
duc de Choiseul (1805-1847)—French 
aristocrat; his trial in 1847 for murder­
ing his wife had political repercus­
sions.—358 
Prassler, Kaspar —leader of insurgent de­
tachments of peasants and miners in 
the bishopric of Salzburg (1525).—475 
Pregizer, Kaspar —cutler in Schorndorf 
(Württemberg), one of the organisers 
of the Poor Konrad society; took part 
in the uprising of peasants and 
townsmen in Württemberg in 1514. 
—436 
Prince of Prussia—see William I 
Proudhon, Pierre Joseph (1809-1865)— 
French writer, economist and sociolo­
gist, a founder of anarchism; deputy 
to the Constituent Assembly in 1848. 
— 134, 387, 486-87, 508, 541, 585, 
588 
Pulszky,  Ferenc  (1814-1897) —Hungarian 
politician, writer and archaeologist, a 
Pole by birth; took part in the 1848-49 
revolution in Hungary; emigrated, 
contributed to the New-York Daily 
Tribunein the 1850s; in 1867 returned 
to Hungary after amnesty and became 
deputy to the Diet (1867-76 and 1884-
97).—240 
R 
Rabmann, Franz (d. 1525)—popular 
preacher, follower of Münzer, took 
part in the uprisings of the Black 
Forest and Klettgau peasants and 
plebeians (1525).—426 
Radetzky (Radetzki),  Josef,  Count of Radetz 
(1766-1858)—Austrian field marshal, 
commanded the Austrian forces in 
Northern Italy from 1831; suppressed 
the Italian national liberation move-
mentin 1848 and 1849.-10,547,548 Radowitz, Joseph Maria von (1797-
1853)—Prussian general, conservative 
statesman; a Right-wing leader in the 
Frankfurt National Assembly in 1848 
and 1849.—10 
Rakow, Heinrich —German officer, took 
part in the struggle for the liberation 
of Schleswig-Holstein (1848) and in 
the Baden-Palatinate uprising (1849); 
commanded the Kaiserslautern Battal­
ion of the Baden insurgent army. 
— 207 
Ramorino, Gerolamo (1792-1849)— 
Italian general, took part in the 
Polish insurrection of  1830-31;  com­
manded the Piedmontesearmy in 1849; 
his tactics led to the victory of the 
Austrian counter-revolutionary forces. 
—548 
Raphael Sanzio (1483-1520) —Italian 
painter of the Renaissance.— 311 
Raquilliet, Felix (1778-1863) —staff gen­
eral in the Polish insurgent army 
(1830-31); emigrated to France; took 
part in the Baden-Palatinate uprising 
of 1849; for a time was acting com­
mander-in-chief of the Palatinate 
armed forces.—195 
Raspail, François Vincent (1794-1878) 
—French naturalist, journalist and 
socialist close to the revolutionary pro­
letariat; took part in the revolutions 
of 1830 and 1848; deputy to the Con­
stituent Assembly.—53, 54, 64, 65, 75, 
81, 88, 359 
Râteau, Jean Pierre Lamotte (1800-1887) 
—French lawyer; deputy to the 
Constituent and Legislative Assem­
blies during the Second Republic, 
Bonapartist.—86, 90 
Raumer, Friedrich Ludwig Georg von 
(1781-1873) —German historian; Im­
perial Ambassador to Paris (1848); 
deputy to the Frankfurt National As­
sembly (Right Centre).—242 
Rausch, Friedrich Wilhelm (born c. 1820) 
—Barmen printer, participant in the 
Elberfeld uprising (May 1849).—603 
Ravez, Auguste Marie Simon (1770-
1849) — French statesman, royalist, 
deputy to the Chambre introuvable 
(1815-September 1816); President of 
the Chamber of Deputies (1819-28); 

=====第755页=====
732 Name Index 
deputy to the Legislative Assembly 
during the Second Republic.—122 
Reichardt, Joseph Martin (1803-1872) 
—German lawyer, democrat; dep­
uty to the Frankfurt National As­
sembly, member of the Palatinate 
revolutionary Provisional Government 
(1849).—195 
Rembrandt van Rijn( 1606-1669)—Dutch 
painter.—311 
Reventlow, Friedrich, Count von (1797-
1874)—German conservative politi­
cian, member of the Schleswig-
Holstein Provisional Government 
(1848).—527 
Ricardo, David (1772-1823)—English 
economist.—334, 530 
Richard von Greifenklau (1467-1531) 
—Elector and archbishop of Trier 
(1511-31), bitter opponent of the 
Reformation; took part in suppress­
ing the knights' uprising in 1522-23 
and the peasant uprising in 1525. 
—444,  466 
Rintoul, Robert Stephen (1787-1858) 
—English journalist, editor-in-chief 
of The Spectator (1828-58).—380, 381, 
384 
Riotte, Karl Nikolaus (born c. 1816) 
—German lawyer, democrat, mem­
ber of the Committee of Public Safety 
during the Elberfeld uprising (May 
1849).—164 
Roberts, William Prowting (1806-1871) 
—English lawyer connected with the 
Chartist and trade union movements.— 
534 
Robespierre, Maximilien François Marie 
Isidore de (1758-1794)—prominent 
figure in the French Revolution, 
leader of the Jacobins, head of the 
revolutionary government  (1793-
94).—22,  77, 165, 540, 611 
Robinson, W. R.—Governor of the Bank 
of England (1847).—493 
Rohrbach, Jäcklein (c. 1498-1525)—one 
of the chiefs of the peasant uprising in 
Franconia (1525); known for his ir­
reconcilability towards the nobili­
ty.—453-57, 460, 461 
Ronge, Johannes (1813-1887)—German 
clergyman, an initiator of the "Ger­
man Catholics" movement; partici­pant in the revolution of 1848-49. 
—241,242,532 
Rothschilds—dynasty of bankers with 
banks in many European countries.— 
51, 263 
Rothschild,  Jacob (James), baron de (1792-
1868)—head of the Rothschild bank­
ing house in Paris.—^50,51,268 
Rouher, Eugène (1814-1884)—French 
politician, Bonapartist, deputy to the 
Constituent and Legislative Assem­
blies during the Second Republic; 
Minister of Justice (1849-51).—137, 
518 
Rudolf II von Scherenberg (c. 1405-
1495)—Bishop of Würzburg (1466-
95); suppressed the peasant uprising 
led by Hans Böheim in 1476—430 
Ruge, Arnold ( 1802-1880)—German rad-
' ical journalist and philosopher, Young 
Hegelian; deputy to the Frankfurt 
National Assembly (Left wing) in 
1848;  a leader of German petty-
boùrgeois refugees in England in the 
1850s; became a national-liberal after 
1866.—182, 183, 486-87, 528, 532, 
535-36 
Rühel (Rühl), Johannes—German lawyer, 
counsellor in Saxony, relative and 
follower of Martin Luther.—419 
Russell, Lord John Russell, 1st Earl (1792-
1878)—British statesman, Whig 
leader, Prime Minister (1846-52 and 
1865-66), Foreign Secretary (1852-53 
and 1859-65).—510 
Ryschka, Martin—Hungarian refugee in 
London.—240 
S 
Sachs, Hans (1494-1576)—German arti­
san, poet and composer of the Refor­
mation, founder of the Meistersinger 
school in Nuremberg.—246 
Sadler, Michael Thomas (1780-1835) 
—English economist and politician, 
philanthropist, sympathised with the 
Tory party.—291,298 
Saint-Just, Antoine Louis Léon de 
Richebourg de (1767-1794)—prom­
inent figure in the French 
Revolution, a Jacobin leader.—545 

=====第756页=====
Name Index 733 
Saint-Simon, Claude Henri de Rouvroy, 
comte de (1760-1825)—French Utopian 
socialist.—110, 306 
Saphir, Moritz Gottlieb (1795-1858)— 
Austrian humoristic poet.—242 
Sauer, Heinrich —a witness at the trial of 
the participants in the Elberfeld upris­
ing of May 1849.—603 
Schappeler, Christoph (1472-1551)— 
German doctor of theology, advo­
cate of the Reformation; in 1524-25 
joined the plebeian opposition in 
Memmingen (Upper Swabia).—426, 
467 
Schapper, Karl (c. 1812-1870)— 
prominent figure in the German 
and international working-class move­
ment, a leader of the League of 
the Just, member of the Central Au­
thority of the Communist League; a 
leader (1848-49) and President (Feb­
ruary-May 1849) of the Cologne 
Workers' Association; after the revolu­
tion, a leader of a sectarian group in 
the Communist League, later member 
of the General Council of the First 
International.—226, 533-34, 537, 625, 
627, 628, 629, 633 
Schärttner (Scherttner), August (1817-
1859)—cooper in Hanau, participant 
in the Baden-Palatinate uprising of 
1849;  refugee in London, member of 
the Communist League; sympathised 
with the sectarian group of Willich and 
Schapper.—621,633 
Schill, Ferdinand von (1776-1809) 
—Prussian officer, commanded a 
guerrilla detachment fighting against 
Napoleon's forces; killed in 1809 
during an attempt to raise a na­
tional liberation uprising.—174 
Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich von 
(1759-1805)—German poet, drama­
tist, historian and philosopher.—241, 
242,248 
Schily, Victor (1810-1875)—German 
lawyer, democrat, participant in the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising (1849); 
emigrated to France; member of the 
First International.—201 
Schimmelpfennig, Alexander (1824-1865) 
—Prussian officer, democrat, partici­
pant in the Baden-Palatinate upris­ing of 1849; emigrant; sympathised 
with the sectarian group of Willich 
and Schapper; fought for the North­
erners in the American Civil War. 
— 196,210-13 
Schlinke, Ludwig —retired Prussian of­
ficer, business clerk, participant in the 
revolutionary events in Breslau (1848), 
general quartermaster in the Baden-
Palatinate insurgent army (1849).— 
235 
Schmidt, Jörg(known as Knopf von Leubas) 
(born c. 1480-1525)—Upper Swabian 
peasant; participant in the Peasant War 
of 1525, aleader of theAllgäu Troop.— 
468 
Schmid,  Ulrich —ironsmith, leader of the 
Baltringen Troop of insurgent Swa^ 
bian peasants in 1525.—449 
Schmitt, Nikolaus (c. 1806-1860)— 
German journalist and lawyer, 
democrat, deputy to the Frank­
furt National Assembly, Minister 
of the Interior in the Palatinate Provi­
sional Government ( 1849).—201 
Schneider, Georg —former captain of 
mercenaries in the service of the 
French; took part in the Bundschuh 
peasant conspiracy and in prepara­
tions for an abortive peasant insur­
rection in Upper Rhineland (1513). 
—434 
Schön, Ulrich (d. 1525)—participant in 
the Peasant War of 1525; a leader of 
the Leipheim Troop.—450, 458 
Schönhals, Karl von (1788-1857)— 
Austrian general and military writer, 
took an active part in suppressing 
the revolution in Italy (1848-49).— 
10,268 
Schramm, Jean Paul Adam,  comte de  (1789-
1884) — French general and politician; 
Minister of War (1850).—144, 524 
Schramm, Konrad (c. 1822-1858)— 
German proletarian revolution­
ary, member of the Communist 
League, refugee in London from 
1849;  manager of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue, 
friend and associate of Marx and 
Engels.— 6, 483, 606, 625, 629 
Schramm, Rudolf (1813-1882)—German 
democratic journalist; deputy to the 

=====第757页=====
734 Name Index 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848; emigrant in England; 
follower of Bismarck in the 1860s. 
— 349,  350, 612 
Schuberth & Co.—Hamburg bookselling 
firm from 1826.—5 
Schurz, Karl (1829-1906)—German 
democrat, participant in the Baden-
Palatinate uprising (1849); emigrated 
to Switzerland; subsequently US 
statesman.—372 
Sébastiani, Horace François Bastien, comte 
(1772-1851)—French marshal, dip­
lomat, Orleanist; Minister of Foreign 
Affairs (1830-32), Ambassador to Lon­
don (1835-40).—69 
Sefeloge, Maximilian (Max) (1820-1859) 
— former Prussian soldier, took part 
in an attempt to assassinate Fred­
erick William IV; died in a lunatic 
asylum.—378, 382, 383, 386 
Ségur d'Aguesseau, Raymond Joseph Paul, 
comte de (1803-1889) —French lawyer 
and politician; sympathised with all 
the ruling parties one after the other; 
represented the party of Order in the 
Legislative Assembly.—129 
Seiler, Anton—German soldier, took part 
in storming the arsenal in Prüm; 
executed in October 1849.—171 
Seiler, Sebastian (c. 1810-c. 1890)—Ger­
man journalist, member of the Brus­
sels Communist Correspondence 
Committee in 1846, member of the 
Communist League, participant in the 
revolution of 1848-49 in Germany. 
—483 
Shaftesbury, Anthony Ashley Cooper, 3rd 
Earl of (1671-1713) —English moral 
philosopher, politician, Whig.— 253 
Shakespeare, William ( 1564-1616) — 
English dramatist and poet.—206, 
230 
Sickingen, Franz von (1481-1523) 
—German knight who joined the 
Reformation, leader of the knights' 
uprising in 1522-23.—417, 442, 
444-45,  481 
Sigel, Franz (1824-1902)—Baden officer, 
democrat, one of the military leaders 
of the Baden-Palatinate uprising in 
1849;  emigrated to Switzerland and 
later to England; lived in the United States from 1852, in the American 
Civil War fought for the North­
erners.—174, 179, 226, 230-37, 372 
Simon, Levi—small tradesman, witness 
at the trial of participants in the 
Elberfeld uprising of May 1849.—603 
Simon, Ludwig (1810-1872) — German 
lawyer, democrat; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848-49; emigrated to Swit­
zerland in 1849.—247, 248, 249, 
250, 486-87 
Singerhans (Singer, Hans)—a leader of 
the Poor Konrad society and of the 
peasant uprising in Württemberg and 
in the mountain regions of Swabia 
(1514).—436 
Sismondi, Jean Charles Leonard Simonde de 
(1773-1842)—Swiss economist, rep­
resentative of economic romanticism. 
— 584 
Smith,  Adam (1723-1790) —Scottish 
economist.—531,  584-85 
Sobrier, Marie Joseph (c. 1825-1854) 
— French democrat, member of se­
cret revolutionary societies during 
the July monarchy; founded in March 
1848 the newspaper La Commune de 
Paris, organ of the Paris prefecture. 
—313 
Solomon—King of Israel and Judah 
(c. 974-c. 937 B.C.).—244 
Soulouque, Faustin (c. 1782-1867)— 
President of the Republic of Haiti; 
proclaimed himself emperor under 
the name of Faustin I in 1849.— 
26, 83, 123, 127 
Spalatin, George (original name Georg 
Burckhardt) (1484-1545)—German 
clergyman, humanist, friend and as­
sociate of Martin Luther.—417 
Spät, Dietrich (d. 1536) — German noble­
man, leader of a detachment in the 
punitive expedition of Truchsess. 
—457,  459, 463 
Starke, Carl—German sergeant, wit­
ness at the trial of the participants in 
the Elberfeld uprising of May 
1849.—603 
Steiniger, August—non-commissioned 
officer, witness at the trial of par­
ticipants in the Elberfeld uprising of 
May 1849.—603 

=====第758页=====
Name Index 735 
Sternberg—see Ungern-Sternberg, Alexan­
der, Baron von 
Sterne, Laurence (1713-1768) — English 
novelist.— 83 
Stirner, Max (real name Johann Caspar 
Schmidt) (1806-1856)—German phi­
losopher, Young Hegelian, an 
ideologist of individualism and 
anarchism.—334, 487, 589 
Stoffel von Freiburg—an organiser of the 
Bundschxih peasant conspiracy in 
Upper Rhineland and the Black Forest 
in 1513.—437 
Stolberg, Bodo, Count von (1467-1538)— 
German state counsellor, abbot of 
the Magdeburg and Halberstadt 
monasteries, adviser to Cardinal 
Albrecht.—420 
Stolberg, Friedrich Leopold, Count zu 
(1750-1819) —German poet.—245 
Storch, Niklas(c. 1500-c. 1536) — Zwickau 
weaver, head of local Anabaptist sect; 
under Münzer's influence preached 
popular insurrection against clerical 
and lay feudal lords.—420 
Strasser, Friedrich —Austrian painter, 
participant in the 1848 revolution in 
Austria, lieutenant-colonel of the 
Baden-Palatinate insurgent army in 
1849.—209 
Strauss, David Friedrich (1808-1874)— 
German philosopher and writer, 
Young Hegelian.— 302 
Strotha, Karl Adolf von (1786-1870) 
—Prussian general, conservative, 
Minister of War (November 1848-
February 1850).—268 
Struve, Gustav von (1805-1870) 
—German journalist, democrat; 
a leader of the Baden republican 
uprisings of 1848 and the Baden-
Palatinate uprising of 1849; a leader of 
the German petty-bourgeois emi­
grants in England; fought in the 
American Civil War on the side of the 
Northerners.—149, 175, 177, 180, 
183, 198, 221, 222, 223,  233,  234, 235, 
350, 352, 373, 612, 617, 619 
Stuarts—royal dynasty in Scotland 
(1371-1714) and England (1603-49 
and 1660-1714).—254 
Sue, Eugene Marie Joseph (1804-1857) 
— French writer, author of sentimen­tal social novels.—31, 32, 38, 124, 
135-37,  516, 517, 518 
Sulz, Rudolf,  Count von—judge of the 
Imperial Court in Rottweil; an organ­
iser of reprisals against insurgent peas­
ants in South Germany during the 
Peasant War of 1525.—467 
Suvorov, Alexander Vasilyevich, Count 
Suvorov-Rymniksky, Prince Italiisky 
( 1729-1800)—Russian general.— 548 
Szâleresi, Ambros—Pest citizen, joined 
the peasant uprising in Hungary in 
1514,  betrayed the insurgents and 
went over to the nobility.—438 
Sznayde, Franz (1790-1850)—participant 
in the Polish insurrection of  1830-31, 
general of the Baden-Palatinate in­
surgent army in 1849.—195, 196, 199, 
200, 205, 209, 218, 219, 221 
T 
Talleyrand-Périgord, Charles Maurice de 
(1754-1838)—French diplomat, Min­
ister of Foreign Affairs (1797-99, 
1799-1807, 1814-15), France's rep­
resentative at the Congress of Vienna 
(1814-15).—347 
Tao Kuang (1782-1850)—Emperor of 
China (1820-50).—266 
Techow, Gustav Adolf (1813-1893)— 
Prussian officer, democrat, chief 
of the general staff of the Pala­
tinate insurgent army; emigrated to 
Switzerland and in 1852 to Aus­
tralia.—195-96, 220, 221 
Teleki, Istvân (d. 1514)—royal chancel­
lor, later Hungarian treasurer, killed 
by insurgents during the peasant up­
rising of 1514.—439 
Teste, Jean Baptiste (1780-1852) — French 
lawyer and statesman, Orleanist, 
Minister of Trade, Justice and Public 
Works during the July monarchy, 
tried for bribery and malpractices.— 
117, 358 
Thiers, Louis Adolphe (1797-1877)— 
French historian and statesman, 
Prime Minister (1836, 1840); deputy 
to the Constituent Assembly (1848) 
and to the Legislative Assembly 
(1848-51); head of the Orleanist 

=====第759页=====
736 Name Indexe 
monarchist party after 1848, hangman 
of the Paris Commune; President of 
the Republic (1871-73).—22, 36, 109, 
114, 124, 136, 139, 255, 517, 519 
Thome—colonel in the Baden army; 
commanded a division in the Baden-
Palatinate insurgent army (1849); ad­
vocated capitulation towards the end 
of the campaign.—226 
Thumb von Neuburg, Konrad (1465-
1525)—councillor of Duke Ulrich of 
Württemberg. — 437 
Thunfeld,  Kunz von—German knight, 
participant in the peasant conspiracy 
of Hans Böheim in Niklashausen 
(bishopric of Würzburg) in 1476. 
—430 
Thunfeld,  Michael von—son of Kunz von 
Thunfeld, with whom he took part in 
the peasant conspiracy of Hans 
BÖheim in Niklashausen in 1476. 
—430 
Thurn und Taxis, Maximilian Karl von 
(1802-1871)—German prince, en­
joyed the hereditary privilege of or­
ganising postal service in several Ger­
man states; owner of the Frankfurter 
Oberpostamts-Zeitung.—10, 11 
Tichen,  G.—see  Tiehsen, Eduard 
Tiehsen (Thiessen, Tichen),  Eduard — 
citizen of Stettin who sent money to 
the Committee of Support for German 
refugees in 1849.—598 
Tiphaine, Jean Laurent (born c. 1805) 
—French democrat, member of 
secret revolutionary societies during 
the July monarchy, supported the 
newspaper La Réforme. —313 
Tooke, Thomas (1774-1858) —English 
economist, adherent of the classical 
school in political economy.—496, 584 
Toussaint-Louverture (L'Ouverture, dit 
Toussaint),  François Dominique  (1743-
1803)— leader of the revolutionary 
movement of Haiti Negroes against 
Spanish and English domination dur­
ing the French Revolution.—83 
Toussenel, Alphonse (1803-1885)— 
French politician and journalist, dis­
ciple of Fourier in 1833, editor-in-
chief of La Paix, a founder of La 
Démocratie pacifique, member of 
the Luxembourg Commission in 
1848.—51 Trélat, Ulysse (1795-1879)—French 
politician, moderate republican; depu­
ty to the Constituent Assembly in 
1848,  Minister of Public Works in 
May-June 1848.—66, 368 
Trestaillons (Trestaillon), Jacques Dupont, 
dit— French Legitimist.—22 
Trocinski, Feliks—participant in the Pol­
ish insurrection of  1830-31,  subse­
quently emigrated; commanded the 
Polish detachment in the Baden-
Palatinate insurgent army (1849). 
—209 
Truchsess von Waldburg, Georg (1488-
1531)—commander of the armed 
forces of the Swabian League, chief 
organiser of the suppression of the 
peasant and urban plebeian uprising 
in 1525.—447-50, 457-60, 462-65, 
467-68,  472 
Turenne, Henri de La Tour d'Auvergne, 
vicomte_de (1611-1675)—French gen­
eral.—556 
Turgot, Anne Robert Jacques, baron de 
l'Aulne  (1727-1781)—French states­
man and economist, physiocrat; Direc­
tor-General of Finance (1774-76).— 
302 
Tyler, Wat (or Walter) (d. 1381)—leader 
of the peasant revolt of 1381 in 
England.—414 
Tzschirner, Samuel ErSmann (c. 1812-
1870)—German lawyer, democrat, ex­
treme Left leader in the Saxonian 
Diet, an organiser of the May 1849 
uprising in Dresden, participant in the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849. 
—201-02 
U 
Ulrich (1487-1550)—Duke of Württem­
berg (from 1498), banished in 1519; 
sought to utilise the peasant move­
ment of 1525 to restore his power; 
regained the Württemberg throne in 
1534.—436-37, 448-50 
Ungern-Sternberg, Alexander, Baron von 
(1806-1868)—German writer who 
idealised medieval aristocracy.—242 
Uttenhoven, von (d. 1849)—Prussian of­
ficer, killed during the Elberfeld up­
rising in May 1849.—160 

=====第760页=====
Name Index 737 
v 
Vasco da Gama (1469-1524)— 
Portuguese navigator, discovered 
the sea route to India round the 
Cape of Good Hope (1497-98).—401 
Vassal—police officer in Paris (second 
half of the 1840s).—324 
Vauban, Sébastien Le Prestre de  (1633-
1707)—French marshal and military 
engineer, criticised France's taxation 
system.—119 
Venedey, Jakob (1805-1871)—German 
radical journalist and politician; depu­
ty to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Left wing) in 1848; a liberal after the 
1848-49 revolution.—258,511 
Véron, Louis Desire ( 1798-1867)—French 
journalist and politician, Orleanist 
until 1848, when he became a 
Bonapartist; owner and publisher of 
Le Constitutionnel (1844-52).—39 
Vespasian (Titus Flavius Vespasianus) (9-
79)—Roman Emperor (69-79).—591 
Vidal, François (1814-1872)—French 
economist, petty-bourgeois socialist, 
secretary of the Luxembourg Commis­
sion (1848), deputy to the Legislative 
Assembly (1850-51).—27, 31, 128, 
129, 135, 344, 516 
Vidil, Jules—French officer, member of 
the committee of the French society of 
Blanquist emigrants in London; as­
sociated with the sectarian group of 
Willich and Schapper.—484, 615 
Vidocq, François Eugène (1775-1857)— 
French secret police agent, pre­
sumed author of Memoirs; his name 
was used to denote a cunning sleuth 
and rogue.—319 
Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro) (70-19 
B.C.) — Roman poet.— 111 
Vivien, Alexandre François Auguste (1799-
1854)—French lawyer and politician, 
Orleanist, Minister of Justice (1840); 
Minister of Public Works in the 
Cavaignac Government (1848).—78 
Vogt, Karl (1817-1895)—German 
naturalist, vulgar materialist, petty-
bourgeois democrat; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848-49; one of the five 
imperial regents (June 1849); emi­grated in 1849; later received subsidies 
from Napoleon III; slandered Marx 
and Engels.— 258, 486-87 
Voltaire, François Marie Arouet (1694-
1778)—French philosopher, writer 
and historian of the Enlighten­
ment.—22, 83, 111, 312, 331 
Voss, Johann Heinrich (1751-1826) 
—German poet and translator.— 
195 
W 
Waldau, Max (real name Richard Georg 
Spiller von Hauenschild) (1825-1855) 
—German writer.—242 
Waldeck, Benedikt Franz Leo (1802-
1870)—German lawyer and radical 
politician; Vice-President of the Prus­
sian National Assembly and a leader 
of its Left wing in 1848; later a 
leader of the Progressist Party.—9, 
258, 345 
Walpole, Sir Robert, 1st Earl of Orford 
(1676-1745)—British Prime Minister 
(1721-42), Whig, the first to form 
cabinets independent of the king and 
relying on the majority in Parliament; 
widely resorted to bribery.—252 
Washington, George (1732-1799)— 
American statesman, commander-
in-chief during the war of the North 
American colonies for their indepen­
dence (1775-83); first President 
of the United States (1789-97).—26 
Weerth, Georg (1822-1856)—German 
poet and writer, member of the Com­
munist League; a founder of pro­
letarian poetry in Germany; an editor 
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in 1848-
49; friend and associate of Marx and 
Engels.— 353 
Wehe, Hans Jakob (d. 1525)—Leipheim 
clergyman, follower of Münzer; a 
leader of the Leipheim peasant troop 
in 1525.—426, 450, 453, 458 
Weigand von Redwitz—Bishop of Bam­
berg (1522-56), an organiser of the 
suppression of the peasant insurrec­
tion in Franconia (1525).—452, 465 
Weiss, Guido —German physician, par­
ticipant in the Baden-Palatinate up-

=====第761页=====
738 Name Index 
rising (1849), ex-civil commissary in 
Zweibrücken .—210 
Weitling, Wilhelm Christian (1808-
1871)—German tailor, one of the 
early leaders of the working-class 
movement in Germany, a theoreti­
cian of Utopian egalitarian com­
munism.—485 
Weitmoser, Erasmus—German artisan, 
leader of a troop of Salzburg miners 
and peasants during the Peasant War 
of 1525.—475 
Weiden, Franz Ludwig, Baron von (1782-
1853)—Austrian Master of Ord­
nance; took part in the campaign 
against the national liberation move­
ment in Italy in 1848; commandant of 
Vienna after the suppression of the 
October 1848 uprising (until April 
1849);  commander-in-chief of the 
Austrian troops fighting against the 
Hungarian revolution (April and 
May 1849).—547 
Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of 
(1769-1852) —British general and 
statesman, Tory, Prime Minister 
(1828-30), Foreign Secretary (De­
cember 1834-April 1835).—512, 546 
Welsers—big German merchants and 
usurers in the 15th and 16th centuries, 
creditors of many European mon-
archs.—448 
Werner, Johann Peter—German lawyer, 
deputy to the Frankfurt National As­
sembly (Left Centre) in 1848.—158 
Wieland, Christoph Martin (1733-1813) 
—German writer of the Enlighten­
ment period.—488 
Wildenbruch, Ludwig von (1803-1874) 
—Prussian diplomat, envoy to Cop­
enhagen in 1848.—394 
Wilhelm von Honstein (c. 1470-
1541) — Bishop of Strassburg (1506-
41); in 1525 took part in quelling the 
peasant insurrection in the arch­
bishopric of Mainz.—466 
William I (1797-1888) —Prince of Prus­
sia, King of Prussia (1861-88), German 
Emperor (1871-88).—181, 208, 214, 
346-47,  379,383,624 
William I, Friedrich Karl (1781-1864) 
—King of Württemberg (1816-64). 
— 8 William III (1650-1702)—Prince of 
Orange, Stadtholder of the Nether­
lands (1672-1702), King of England 
(1689-1702).—252, 253 
Willich, August (1810-1878) —Prussian 
officer; resigned from the army on 
account of his political convictions, 
member of the Communist League, 
participant in the Baden-Palatinate 
uprising of 1849, a leader of the 
sectarian group which split away from 
the Communist League in 1850.— 
170, 186, 196-98, 202-06, 209-15, 
218-22,  224-31,  233, 234-36, 346, 
350-51,  378, 379, 381, 384, 390, 533, 
534, 537, 601, 610, 615, 618-19, 620, 
625, 629 
Windischgrätz, Alfred Candidus Ferdinand, 
Prince (1787-1862)—Austrian field 
marshal; commanded the troops 
which crushed the uprisings in Prague 
and Vienna in 1848; led the Austrian 
army against the Hungarian revolu­
tion in 1848-49.—547 
Winkelried, Arnold von (d. 1386)—semi-
legendary hero of the Swiss war of 
liberation against the Habsburgs; 
legend has it that he secured the 
victory over the Austrian Duke 
Leopold in the battle at Sempach at 
the price of his life.—532 
Wiseman, Nicholas Patrick Stephen (1802-
1865)—English Catholic clergyman, 
appointed Archbishop of Westminster 
and Cardinal in 1850.—512-13 
Wohlmeiner, Johann Gottfried (born c. 
1826) — architect, born in Cologne, 
participant in the Elberfeld uprising 
(May 1849).—603-04 
Wolf(f),  Ferdinand (1812-1895)—Ger­
man journalist, member of the Com­
munist League, an editor of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung; emigrat­
ed from Germany after the defeat 
of the revolution; took the side of 
Marx when the Communist League 
split in  1850.—81,  86, 353, 483 
Wolff,  Wilhelm (Lupus) (1809-1864) 
— German teacher, proletarian rev­
olutionary, leading figure in the 
Communist League, an editor of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung in 1848 and 

=====第762页=====
Name Index 739 
1849;  friend and associate of Marx 
and Engels.— 41, 353, 373 
Wrangel, Friedrich Heinrich Ernst, Count 
von (1784-1877)—Prussian general; 
took part in the counter-revolutionary 
coup d'état in Berlin and in dispersing 
the Prussian National Assembly in 
November 1848.—596 
Wright, Thomas Barber (mid- 19th cent.)— 
English economist of the Birmin­
gham school known as the "little 
shilling men". He and his fellow-
thinker Harlow wrote under the 
pseudonym of Gemini.— 588 
Wycliffe (Wyclif), John (c. 1324-1384) 
— English religious reformer, cham­
pion of the interests of the towns­
people and the knights; fought for 
an English Church independent of 
Rome.—413-14 
Z 
Zâpolya, Janos (Johann) (1487-1540)— 
Transylvanian voivode, suppressed 
the 1514 peasant uprising in Hun-
Amphitryon (Gr. Myth.) — King of Tiryns. 
His name is used to mean a generous 
host.—76 
Antaeus (Gr. Myth.) — a giant of Libya, 
invincible in wrestling so long as he 
touched his mother the earth; Her­
cules held him off the ground and 
throttled him.—104 
Atta Troll—a bear, title figure in a 
satirical poem by Heine; image of the 
philistine dabbler in politics, primitive 
in his arguments, intolerant of jokes 
and wit.—182-83, 536 
Bacchus—see Dionysus 
Bartholomew, Saint—one of Christ's 
twelve apostles.— 77, 130 
Birch,  Harvey—main character in James 
Fenimore Cooper's novel The Spy, a gary; King of Hungary (1526-
40).—439,  440 
Zell, Friedrich Josef (1814-1881)—Trier 
lawyer, deputy to the Frankfurt Na­
tional Assembly (Left Centre).—158 
Zimmermann, Wilhelm (1807-1878)— 
German historian, democrat, took 
part in the 1848-49 revolution, dep­
uty to the Frankfurt National As­
sembly (Left wing).—417-19, 423, 
424, 425, 426, 447, 450 
Zinn,  Christian—German democrat, 
Kaiserslautern journalist, captain in 
the Palatinate insurgent army 
(1849).—206, 230 
Zitz, Franz Heinrich (1803-1877)— 
German lawyer, democrat; deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Left wing) in 1848, took part in the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising in 1849; 
emigrated to the USA.—149, 196, 
198, 201, 224-25 
Zychlinski—participant in the May upris­
ing in Dresden and the Baden-
Palatinate uprising in 1849.— 215, 
217, 229 
patriot whose sense of civic duty makes 
him become a spy.— 312-14 
Christ, Jesus (Bib.)—421, 422, 426 
Damocles—according to a Greek legend, 
a courtier of the Syracusian tyrant 
Dionysius (4th cent. B.C.).—123 
Daniel—prophet of the Old Testa­
ment.—421 
David—according to biblical legend, 
slew the Philistine giant Goliath; later 
King of Judah.—80 
Dionysus (Bacchus) (Gr. and Rom. 
Myth.) — god of wine and fer­
tility.—188 
Don Quixote—title character in Miguel 
Cervantes' novel.—174, 512 INDEX OF LITERARY AND MYTHOLOGICAL NAMES 

=====第763页=====
740 Name Index 
Eckart —according to medieval German 
legends, a devoted servant and 
trustworthy guardian.—241 
Elijah—prophet of the Old Testament. 
—421 
Ezekiel—prophet of the Old Testa­
ment.—421 
Falstaff,  Sir John—a character in Shake­
speare's tragedy King Henry IVand his 
comedy The Merry Wives of Windsor; a 
sly fat braggart and jester.—206 
Gil Bias—title character in Alain René 
Le Sage's novel Histoire de Gil Blas de 
Santillane.—315 
Gordius—according to legend a tiller of 
the land who became king of Phrygia 
and tied an intricate knot. An oracle 
declared that he who should untie it 
should be master of Asia; Alexander 
the Great, unable to untie the knot, cut 
it with his sword.—143, 523 
Jacques le bonhomme {Jack the Simple­
ton)—ironical name given to the 
French peasant.—61 
Janus—an ancient Roman deity rep­
resented with a double-faced head. 
— 101 
Joseph (Bib.)—son of Jacob, sold by his 
brothers as a slave in Egypt where he 
became the Pharaoh's favourite be­
cause of his wisdom and beauty.— 111 
Josiah—a king of Judah in the Old 
Testament.—421 
Leporello—a character from Mozart's 
opera Don Giovanni. Don Giovanni's 
servant.—531 
Luke, Saint—alleged author of one of 
the Gospels.—421 
Macaire, Robert—typical villain a 
character created by the French actor 
Lemaître and immortalised in Honoré 
Daumier's caricatures.—50, 358 Mary—figure in the New Testament, the 
mother of Christ.—428, 429, 433 
Meister, Wilhelm —main character in 
Goethe's novel Wilhelm Meisters Lehr­
jahre. —246 
Menelaus (Gr. Myth.)—King of Sparta; 
took part in the Trojan War.—195 
Midas (Gr. Myth.)—a King of Phrygia 
who turned to gold everything he 
touched; insulted by him, Apollo 
changed his ears into ass's ears.—83 
Moloch—the Sun-God in Carthage and 
Phoenicia, whose worship was accom­
panied by human sacrifices.—243 
Moses—Hebrew legislator in the Old 
Testament.—117, 421 
Nemesis (Gr. Myth.)—goddess of re­
tributive justice.—100 
Orlando (or Roland) Furioso—title 
character in Lodovico Ariosto's epic 
poem.—62, 86 
Orpheus (Gr. Myth.)—Thracian poet and 
musician able to charm stones and 
tame wild beasts with his  lyre.—  99 
Pangloss, Doctor—a character from 
Candide, a philosophical story by 
Voltaire.—331 
Pecksniff—a character from Charles 
Dickens' novel Martin Chuzzlewit, a 
bigot and hypocrite.—302 
Pentephri (Potiphar) (Bib.)—an official of 
the Egyptian Pharaoh. He bought 
Joseph, whom his wife tried to seduce, 
from Ismail merchants.— 111 
Peter—one of Christ's twelve apos­
tles.—302 
Pistol—a character in Shakespeare's 
tragedies King Henry IV and King 
Henry V and in his comedy The Merry 
Wives of Windsor, a vain boaster and 
liar.—206, 230 
Rhadamanthus (Gr. Myth.)—son of Zeus 
and Europa, brother of Minos, King of 

=====第764页=====
Name Index 741 
Crete. For his exemplary wisdom and 
justice he was made, after death, one 
of the three judges in the lower 
world.—309 
Rodomonte—a character from Lodovico 
Ariosto's epic poem L'Orlando furioso, 
a braggart.—62 Samson—Old Testament hero famous 
for his extraordinary strength and 
courage.—104 
Sancho Panza—a character in Miguel 
Cervantes' Don Quixote.—246 
Saul (Bib.)—first king of Israel.—80 

=====第765页=====
742 
INDEX OF QUOTED 
AND MENTIONED LITERATURE 
WORKS BY KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
Marx, Karl 
The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 (this volume) 
— Die Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich 1848 bis 1850 (published in 1848 under 
the title "1848 bis 1849"). In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische 
Revue No. 1, January 1850; No. 2, February 1850; No. 3, March 1850; No. 
5-6, May to October  1850.—41,  327, 342, 351-69, 387, 507, 519 
The June Revolution (present edition, Vol. 7) 
— Die Junirevolution. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung'No. 29, June 29,  1848.—  66-68 
The Poverty of  Philosophy.  Answer to the "Philosophy of Poverty" by M. Proudhon (present 
edition, Vol. 6) 
— Misere de la philosophic Réponse à la philosophie de la misère de 
M. Proudhon, Paris, Bruxelles, 1847.—387, 585 
Engels, Frederick 
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution (this volume) 
— Die deutsche Reichsverfassungskampagne. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 1, January 1850; No. 2, February 1850; No. 3, 
March  1850.—41,  353, 388 
The Revolutionary Uprising in the Palatinate and Baden (present edition, Vol. 9) 
— Die revolutionäre Erhebung in der Pfalz und in Baden. In: Der Bote für Stadt 
und Land.  Pfälzisches Volksblatt No. 110, June 3, 1849.—192 
Marx, Karl and Engels, Frederick 
Address of the Central Authority to the League, March 1850 (this volume) 
— Ansprache der Zentralbehörde an den Bund vom März 1850. In: Enthüllungen 
über den Kommunisten-Prozess zu Köln von Karl Marx. Neuer Abdr. mit Einl. von 
Friedrich Engels, und Dokumenten, Hottingen-Zürich  [1885].—  371,  626 
Demands of the Communist Party in Germany (present edition, Vol. 7) 
— Forderungen der Kommunistischen Partei in Deutschland, gedruckt als 
Flugblatt, Köln, 1848.—336 

=====第766页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 743 
The German Ideology. Critique of Modern German Philosophy According to Its Representa­
tives Feuerbach,  B. Bauer and Stirner, and of German Socialism According  to Its Various 
Prophets (present edition, Vol. 5) 
— Die deutsche Ideologic Kritik der neuesten deutschen Philosophie in ihren 
Repräsentanten Feuerbach, B- Bauer und Stirner, und des deutschen 
Sozialismus in seinen verschiedenen Propheten. — 588 
The Great Men of the Exile (present edition, Vol. 11) 
— Die grossen Männer des Exils. — 535 
[A Letter to the Prussian Ambassador in London, Baron Bunsen.] May 30th, 1850 
(this volume).—382 
Manifesto of the Communist Party (present edition, Vol. 6) 
— Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei, London,  1848.—  277,  387, 626 
Prussian Spies in London (this volume). In: The Spectator No. 1146, June 15,1850.— 390 
Review [January-February 1850] (this volume) 
— Revue [Januar/Februar 1850]. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische 
Revue No. 2, February 1850.—338, 504 
Review, May to October [1850] (this volume) 
— Revue, Mai bis Oktober [1850]. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch­
ökonomische Revue No. 5-6, May to October 1850.—132, 135, 583 
Reviews. Guiiot, "Pourquoi la révolution d'Angleterre  a-t-elle  réussi?  Discours sur l'histoire de 
la révolution d'Angleterre" , Paris, 1850 (this volume) 
— Rezensionen. Guizot, "Pourquoi la révolution d'Angleterre a-t-elle réussi? 
Discours sur l'histoire de la révolution d'Angleterre", Paris, 1850. In: Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 2, February 1850.— 301 
Reviews. "Le socialisme et l'impôt", par Emile de Girardin, Paris, 1850 (this volume) 
— Rezensionen. "Le socialisme et l'impôt", par Emile de Girardin, Paris, 1850. 
In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 4, April 1850.— 
486, 488 
WORKS BY DIFFERENT AUTHORS 
Ariosto, L. L'Orlando furioso. —62, 86 
Arndt, E. M. Des Teutschen Vaterland. Gedicht. In: Lieder für Teutsche im Jahr der 
Freiheit 1813 von E. M. Arndt, Leipzig, 1813.—258 
Ashley, A. [Proposal of March 14, 1850, to restore the fallen Ten Hours' Bill by 
means of an authoritative interpretation.] In: The Economist No. 342, March 16, 
1850.—298 
Athenaeus. Deipnosophistai. Ex Recensioae Guilielmo Dindorfii, Lipside, 1827.—105 
Baraguay d'Hilliers, A. [ Answer from the floor in the Legislative Assembly on June 
27, 1849.] In: Le Moniteur universel No. 179, June 28, 1849.—109 
— [Speech in the Constituent Assembly on July 7, 1849.] In: Le Moniteur 
universel No. 189, July 8, 1849.—109 
Barrot, O. [Speech in the Constituent Assembly on January 12, 1849.] In: Le Moniteur 
universel No. 13. January 13, 1849, and also in: Neue Rheinische Zeitung  ~Ho.  195, 
January 14, 1849.—86, 89 

=====第767页=====
744 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— [Proposal made in the Constituent Assembly on January 17, 1849, to withdraw 
the May prisoners from the Court of Assizes with its jury and hand them over 
-to the High Court.] In: Le Moniteur universel No. 18, January 18, 1849.—89 
[Bastiat, F. et P.-J. Proudhon.] Gratuité du crédit. Discussion entre M. Fr. Bastiat et 
M.Proudhon, Paris, 1850.—134, 408-09 
Batrachomyomachia, die blutige und mutige Schlacht der Mäuse und Frösche, mit Fleiss 
beschrieben, lustig und lieblich zu lesen von LH.  Wolterstorf,  Hamburg, 1784.—258 
Becker, J.Ph. und Essellen, Ch. Geschichte der süddeutschen Mai-Revolution des Jahres 
1849,  Genf,  1849.—233 
Berryer, P.A. [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on October 24, 1849.] In: Le 
Moniteur universel No. 298, October 25, 1849.—113 
Bible 
The Old Testament 
The Fifth Book of Moses. Deuteronomy.—421, 423 
The Proverbs.—244 
The Song of Solomon.—244 
The New Testament 
Luke.—421 
Blanc, L. To the Editor of  the Times. London, March 3. In: The TimesNo.  20741,  March 
5, 1851.—540-41 
Blanqui, L. A. Toste envoyé par le citoyen L. A. Blanqui à la commission près  les réfugiés de 
Londres pour le banquet anniversaire du 24 février. In: La PatrieNo. 58, February 27, 
1851.—540-41 
— Trinkspruch, gesandt durch den Bürger L. A. Blanqui an die Kommission 
der Flüchtlinge zu London für die Jahresfeier des 24. Februar 1851. 
Veröffendicht durch die Freunde der Gleichheit, Bern, 1851.—537-38 
Blind, K.  Oesterreichische  und  preussische  Parteien in Baden. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 1, January 1850, London, Hamburg and New 
York, 1850.—354 
[Blomfield, Ch.J.] Reply of the Bishop of London to the Memorial from the Westminster 
Clergy, October 28, 1850. In: The TimesNo. 20632, October 29, 1850.—513 
BoisguiUebert [P. Le Pesant]. Le détail de la France. In: Eugène Daire, Économistes 
financiers du  XVIII e siècle, Paris, 1843.—119 
— Dissertation sur la nature des  richesses,  de l'argent et des tributs ou l'on découvre la 
fausse idée qui règne dans le monde à l'égard de ces trois articles. In: Eugène Daire, 
Économistes financiers du XVIIIe  siècle,  Paris, 1843.—119 
— Factum de la France. In: Eugène Daire, Economistes financiers du XVIIIe siècle, 
Paris,  1843.—119 
Bonaparte, N. J. Ch. P. [Motion put forward in the Legislative Assembly on October 1, 
1849,  to recall the expelled royal families and amnesty the June insurgents.] 
In: Le Moniteur universel No. 279, October 6, 1849.—112-13 
Borme fils. Le Rideau est levé!!! Grande lanterne magique des pâtissiers politiques des 24 
février, 15 mai et 24 juin 1848,  dédiée  aux paysans,  aux ouvriers  laborieux  et aux  honnêtes 
gens par M. Borme fils, ex-accusé du 15 mai. [Paris, 1850.] (Prospectus.) —37 
Brentano, L.P. Die Lage und das Verhalten der Mitglieder der Ministerien während der 
Revolution vom 13.5 bis 25.6, 1849 [1849].—190 

=====第768页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 745 
Carlier, P. Proclamation du préfet de police 10 novembre. In: Le Moniteur universel No. 
315, November 11, 1849.—124 
Carlyle, Th. Chartism, London, 1840.—301 
— The French Revolution: A History, Vols. 1-3, London, 1837.—301 
— On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the Heroic in History, London,  1841.—  302 
— Latter-Day Pamphlets, London, 1850.—301-02 
No. I: The Present Time.—301-10 
No. II: Model Prisons.—301, 310 
— Oliver Cromwell's Letters and  Speeches,  Vols. 1-2, London,  1845.—  301 
— Past and Present, London, 1843.—301 
Caussidière, M. Mémoires de Caussidière, T. 1-2, Paris,  1849.—  313-14 
Cervantes Saavedra, M. de. Vida y Hechos del ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la 
Mancha.— 174, 246, 512 
Chenu, A. Les Conspirateurs. Les sociétés secrètes. La préfecture de police sous 
Caussidière. Les corps-francs, Paris, 1850.—311-25 
Cooper, J.F. The Spy.—312-14 
Dairnvaell, G. Histoire édifiante et curieuse de Rothschild Ier, Roi des juifs, par Satan, 
Paris,  1846.—51 
— Rothschild Ier, ses valets et son peuple, Paris,  1846.—  51 
Daumer, G. Fr. Die Religion des neuen Weltalters. Versuch einer combinatorisch-
aphoristischen Grundlegung, Bd. 1-3, Hamburg, 1850.—241-46 
— Der Feuer- und Molochdienst der alten Hebräer als urväterlicher, legaler, orthodoxer 
Cultus der Nation, historisch-kritisch nachgewiesen durch G. Fr. Daumer, 
Braunschweig, 1842.—243 
— Die Geheimnisse des christlichen Alterthums, Bd. 1-2, Hamburg,  1847.—  243 
— Hafis, Hamburg, 1846.—244 
— Mahomed und sein Werk. Eine Sammlung orientalischer Gedichte, Hamburg, 
1848.—244 
Dickens, Ch. Martin Chuzzlewit. —302 
Disraeli, B. [Speech in the Lower House on August 30, 1848.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. CI, London, 1848.—495 
Doctrine de Saint-Simon. Exposition. Première année, 1829. Seconde édition, Paris, 
1830.—110 
Duprat, P. [Interpellation made in the Legislative Assembly on February 16, 1850, 
concerning the new military system.] In: Le Moniteur universel No. 48, February 
17, 1850.—25 
Eccarius, J. G. Die Schneiderei in London oder der Kampf des grossen und des kleinen 
Capitals. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 5-6, May to 
October 1850, London, Hamburg and New York, 1850.—485 
Estancelin, L. Ch. A. [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on June 19, 1849.] 
In: Le Moniteur universel No. 171, June 20, 1849.—109 
Evans, D. M. The Commercial Crisis 1847-1848, London, 1848.—491-96 
Faucher, L. [Submission of a Bill in the Constituent Assembly on January 26, 1849, on 
the right of association.] In: Le Moniteur universelNo. 27, January27, 1849.—88-90 

=====第769页=====
746 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Fould, A. [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on November 14, 1849.] In: Le Moniteur 
universelNo. 319, November 15, 1849.—117, 118 
Fourier, Ch. La fausse industrie morcelée, répugnante, mensongère et l'antidote, l'industrie 
naturelle, combinée, attrayante, véridique, donnant quadruple produit, T. 1-2, Paris, 
1835-36.—322 
— Théorie  des quatre mouvements  et des destinées  générales.  In: Oeuvres  complètes,  2e éd., 
T. 1, Paris, 1841.—322 
— Théorie de l'unité universelle. In: Oeuvres complètes, 2 e éd., T. 2-5, Paris, 
1841-45,  T. 4.-322 
— Traité de l'association domestique-agricole, Paris, Londres, 1822.—322 
— Des trois unités  externes.  In: La Phalange. Revue de la science  sociale,  XIV e année, 
Ire série, T. 1, Paris, 1845.—322 
Girardin.É. de. Les 52. XIII.  Le socialisme et l'impôt, Paris, 1849.—326-37 
— [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on July 8, 1850.] In: Compte rendu des 
séances de l'Assemblée nationale législative, T. 9, Paris, 1850.—137, 518 
Goethe, J. W. von. Wilhelm Meisters  Lehrjahre. — 246 
Gourgaud, G. [Motion made in the Legislative Assembly on October 15, 1849, to have 
an equestrian statue decreed to the Duke of Orleans in the Place du Carrousel.] In: 
La Voix du peuple No. 16, October 16, 1849.—108-09 
Grey, G. [Circular on the Ten Hours' Bill issued on August 5, 1848.] In: Report of  the 
Inspectors of Factories for the Half-Year Ending  S 1st October 1848, London, 
1849.—274, 297-98 
Guizot, F.-P.-G. Pourquoi la révolution d'Angleterre a-t-elle réussi? Discours sur l'histoire de 
la révolution d'Angleterre, Paris,  1850.—  251-56,  301 
Hautpoul, A. H. [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on February 16, 1850.] In: Le 
Moniteur universel No. 48, February 17, 1850.—26, 32, 128 
Heine, H. Atta Troll. Ein Sommernachtstraum.— 182-83, 536 
Heinzen.K. Lehren der Revolution. In: Deutsche Londoner Zeitung Nos. 241 and 242, 
November 9 and 16, 1849.—3 
— Der Mord.  In: Die Evolution No. 4, January 26, 1849.—183 
Herwegh, G. Aus den Bergen. In: Herwegh, G. Gedichte eines Lebendigen. Neue 
wohlfeile Ausg.,Th. 2, Zürich, 1848.—112 
Hodde, L. de la. La naissance de la République en février 1848, Paris, 1850.— 311-25 
Homers Ilias, übers, von Johann Heinrich Voss, Th. 1-2. Reutlingen, im Comptoir d. 
deutschen Classiker, 1819.—195, 258 
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus). De Arte Poetica. —105 
Hugo, V. Les Burgraves. —136 
— [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on October 19, 1849.] In: Le Moniteur 
universel No. 293, October 20, 1849.—112 
— [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on May 21, 1850.] In: Le Moniteur universel 
No. 142, May 22, 1850.—33, 136, 516 

=====第770页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 747 
Kant, I. Der Rechtslehre Zweiter Theil. Das öffentliche Recht. In: Immanuel Kant's 
sämmtliche Werke, hrsg. von Karl Rosenkranz und Friedr. Wilh. Schubert, Bd. 1-12, 
Leipzig, 1838-40, Th. 9.—114 
Kinkel, G. Verteidigungsrede  des Dr. G. Kinkel vor  dem preussischen  Kriegsgericht zu Rastatt 
am 4. August 1849. In: A bend-Post  Nos. 78 and 79, April 6 and 7, IfcbO, and also in: 
Strodtmann, A. Gottfried Kinkel. Wahrheit ohne Dichtung. Bd. 2, Hamburg, 
1851.—345-47 
Klopstock, Fr. G. Dem Allgegenwärtigen. —245 
Knigge, A. Ueber den Umgang mit Menschen, Hannover,  1804.—  244 
Die Krähwinkler Landwehr (a German song popular during the liberation war of 
1813-15).—548 
Lacrosse, B. T. [Motion brought forward in the Legislative Assembly on June 12, 
1849,  to proceed to the discussion of the bill of impeachment.] In: Le Moniteur 
universel No. 164, June 13, 1849.—104 
Lamartine, A. [Speech in the Chamber of Deputies on February 24, 1848.] 
In: Le Moniteur universel No. 56, February 25, 1848.—53, 58, 359-60, 362 
La Rochejaquelein, H. [Speech in the Chamber of Deputies on February 24, 1848.] 
In: Le Moniteur universel No. 56, February 25, 1848.—54-55 
Ledru-Rollin, A. [Interpellation made in the Constituent Assembly on January 8, 
1849,  concerning the ministerial council's decision on the intervention against the 
Roman Republic] In: Le Moniteur universel No. 9, January 9,  1849.—  93 
— [Proposition put forward in the Constituent Assembly on January 27, 1849, to 
impeach the Ministry for violation of the Constitution.] In: Le Moniteur uni­
versel No. 28, January 28, 1849.—88 
— [Speech in the Constituent Assembly on April 21, 1849.] In: Le Moniteur 
universel No. 112, April 22,  1849.—61,  364 
— [Bill of impeachment of May 11, 1849, against the President and the Ministry.] 
In: Le Moniteur universel No. 132, May 12, 1849.—92, 93, 99, 102 
— [Bill of impeachment against the President and the Ministry brought in in 
the Legislative Assembly on June 11, 1849.] In: Le Moniteur universel No. 
163, June 12, 1849.—99, 101-04, 106 
Leo,  H. Die Hegelingen. Actenstücke und Belege zu der s. g. Denunciation der ewigen 
Wahrheit, Hallet 1838.—532 
Le Sage, A. R. Histoire de Gil Blas de Santillane. —315 
Lüning, O. Neue Rheinische Zeitung,  politisch-ökonomische  Revue von Karl Marx. In: Neue 
Deutsche Zeitung No. 148, June 22, 1850.—387-88 
Luther, M. Eyn Brieff an die Fürsten zu Sachsen von dem auffrurischen  geyst,  Wittemberg, 
1524.—425 
— [Brief an Johannes Briessmann] vom 4. Februar 1525.—426 
— [Brief an J. Rühel. 30. Mai 1525].—419 
— An den Christlichen Adel deutscher Nation von des Christlichen Standes besserung, 
Vuittemberg [1520].—417 
— Epitoma responsionis ad Martinum Luther  [1520].—  416 
— Ermanunge zum fride auff die zwelff artikel der Bawrschafft ynn Schwaben, 
Wittemberg, 1525.—418 

=====第771页=====
748 - Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— [Schreiben an Spalatin] vom 16. Januar 1521.—417 
— Ein Sendbrief von dem harten Büchlein wider die Bauern [1525].—419 
— Wyder die mördische unnd reubischenn Rottenn der Paurenn, Wittemberg, 
1525.—419 
Mazzini, G. [Manifesto of September 8, 1850.] In: L'Evénement, October 23, 1850, 
morning edition (in the article: "Comité national Italien"). — 513-14 
[Mieroslawski, L.] Rapports du General Mieroslawski sur la campagne de Bade, Berne, 
1849.—218 
— Berichte des Generals Mieroslawski über den Feldzug in Baden, Bern,  1849.—  218 
Molière, J. B. Le Médecin malgré lui. —139, 519 
Montalembert, Ch. [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on December 13, 1849, in 
support of the restoration of the wine tax.] In: Le Moniteur universel No. 348, 
December 14, 1849.—118-19 
— [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on May 22, 1850.] In: Compte rendu des 
séances de l'Assemblée nationale législative, T. 8, Paris, 1850.—136-37, 517 
Mozart, W. A. Don Giovanni. Opera in two acts. Libretto by Lorenzo da Ponte. —531 
— Die -Zauberflöte. Eine Grosse Oper in zwei Aufzügen. Von Emmanuel 
Schikaneder. Die Musik ist von Herrn Wolf gang Amade Mozart, Wien, 1791. 
—306 
Müntzer, Th. Ankündigung mit eigner Hand  geschrieben,  und in Prag 1521 angeschlagen 
wider die Papisten. In: G. T. Strobel, Leben, Schriften und Lehren Thomä Müntzers, des 
Urhebers des Bauernaufruhrs in Thüringen, Nürnberg und  Altdorf,  1795.—420 
— Aussgetrückte emplössung des falschen Glaubens der ungetrewen weit / durchs 
gezeügnus des Evangelions Luce /  vorgetragen  der elenden erbermlichen  Christenheyt  / 
zur innerung jres irsals..., Mülhausen MDXXIIII. —424-25 
— [Brief an Melanchthon vom 27. März 1522.] In: G. T. Strobel, Leben, Schriften und 
Lehren Thomä Müntzers, des  Urhebers des  Bauernaufruhrs in Thüringen, Nürnberg 
und Altdorf,  1795.—424 
— Die Fürstenpredigt. Ausslegung des andern vnterschyds Danielis dess propheten 
gepredigt auffm  schloss  zu Alstet vor den tetigen thewren Herzcogen vnd  Vorstehern  zu 
Sachssen durch Thomä Müntzer diener des wordt gottes,  Alstedt MDXXIIII. —421, 
423 
— Hochverursachte Schutzrede vnd antwwort / wider  das Gaistlosse  Sanfft  lebende  fleysch 
zu Wittenberg / welches  mit verkärter  weysse  / durch den Diepstal der heiligen schrift die 
erbermdliche Christenheit / also gätz jämmerlichen besudelt hat. Thomas Müntzer 
Alstedter..., Anno MDXXIIII.— 423, 426 
[Napoleon.].  Note sur la position  actuelle  de l'armée en Espagne. Bayonne,  ce 21 juillet 1808. 
In: Napier, W. F. P., History of the War in  the Peninsula and in  the South of  France,  from 
the Year 1807 to the Year 1814, Vol. I, London, 1832.—544 
Ovid. Tristia.—541 
Palmerston, H.J.T. [Speech in the Lower House on June 25, 1850.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates. Third series, Vol. CXII, London,  1850.—  511 
Passy, H. Ph. Projet de loi portant création d'un impôt de 1p. 0/0 sur le revenu. 9 août 1849. 
In: Le Moniteur universel No. 222, August 10, 1849.—  111,  117 
Plato.  Politico, X, Book 8.-78 

=====第772页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 749 
Proudhon, P. J. Système des contradictions  économiques,  ou Philosophie de la  misère,  T. 1-2, 
Paris,  1846.—585 
Râteau, J. P. L. [Motion on the dissolution of the Constituent Assembly.] In: Le 
Moniteur universel No. 10, January 10, 1849.—86, 90 
Rouher, E. [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on July 8, 1850.] In: Compte rendu des 
séances de l'Assemblée nationale législative, T. 9, Paris, 1850.—137, 518 
Ruge, A. London, 13. Jan. In: Bremer Tages-ChronikNo. 474, January 17,  1851.—  535 
Schiller, Fr. von. Das Lied von der Glocke.— 242 
Schleswig-Holstein meerumschlungen (a song of fighters for liberation of Schleswig-
Holstein from Danish rule).—149 
Ségur d'Aguesseau, R. [Remark made in the Legislative Assembly on March 16, 1850.] 
In: Le Moniteur universel No. 76, March 17, 1850, and also in: La Voix du peuple 
No. 167 (supplement), March 18, 1850.—129 
Shakespeare, W. King Henry IV.—206 
— King Henry V.— 206 
— The Merry Wives of Windsor.—206 
Simon, L. [Speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on April 11, 1849.] In: Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung No. 271 (second edition), April 13, 1849.—247 
— Ein Wort des Rechts für alle Reichsverfassungskämpfer an die deutschen Geschwor-
nen, Frankfurt am Main, 1849.—247-50 
Sismondi, J. C. L. Simonde de. Nouveaux principes d'économie politique ou de la  richesse 
dans ses rapports avec la population. Seconde édition, T. IV, Paris, 1827.—584 
Smith, A. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Vols. 1-2, 
London, 1776.—584 
Sterne, L. The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, Vol. 1, London, 
1793.—83 
Stirner,M. [J.C.Schmidt.] Der Einzige und sein Eigenthum, Leipzig, 1845.—487-89, 
588 
Stolberg, F. L. An die Natur. —245 
Strotha, K. A. [Speech in the Second Chamber of the Prussian National Assembly 
on February 12, 1850, concerning the war budget for 1850.] In: Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 39, February 17, 1850.—268 
Struve, G. Abschiedsbrief Struve's Havre, 7. Oktober 1849. In: Deutsche Londoner Zeitung 
No. 238 (supplement), October 26, 1849.—177 
— Geschichte der drei Volkserhebungen in Baden, Bern, 1849.—221-23, 234 
— Die Grundrechte des deutschen Volkes, Birsfelden bei Basel, 1848.—177 
Struve, G. und Heinzen, K. Plan zur Revolutionirung und Republikanisirung Deutschlands 
(pamphlet).—183 
Sue, E. Les mystères de Paris, T. 1-14, Bruxelles, 1843.—124 
Thiers, A. [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on July 24, 1849.] In: Le Moniteur 
universelNo. 206, July 25, 1849.—114, 139, 519 

=====第773页=====
750 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on October 13, 1849, concerning credits 
for the costs of the Rome expedition.] In: Le Moniteur universel No. 287, 
October 14, 1849.—112 
— [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on May 24, 1850.] In: Compte rendu des 
séances de l'Assemblée nationale législative, T. 8, Paris, 1850.—136, 517 
Tooke, Th. An Inquiry into the Currency Principle, the Connection of Currency with Prices, 
and the Expediency of a Separation of Issue from Banking, 2nd ed., London, 
1844.—584 
— A History of Prices,  and of the State of  the Circulation, from 1839 to 1847 Inclusive, 
London, 1848.—492-93, 496 
Toussenel, A. Les juifs, rois de  l'époque.  Histoire de la féodalité financière, T. 1-2, Paris, 
1847.—51 
Trélat, U. [Speech in the Constituent Assembly on June 20, 1848.] In: Le Moniteur 
universel No. 173, June 21, 1848.—66, 368 
Vauban [S. le Prestre de]. Projet d'une dîme royale. In: Eugène Daire, Economistes 
financiers du  XVIII e siècle,  Paris, 1843.—119 
Vidal, F. De la répartition des  richesses  ou de la justice distributive en économie  sociale,  Paris, 
1846.—128 
Virgil.  Aeneid,  Book IL—111 
Voltaire, F.-M. A. Candide.— 331 
— La Henriade. —111 
Wenn die Fürsten ihre Söldner schar  en... (a song of the German volunteers during the 
revolution of 1848-49).—203 
Wieland, Ch. M. Oberon.—488 
[Wolff,  F.] Paris, 18. Dezember. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 174, December 21, 
1848.—81 
— Paris, 7. Jan. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 191, January 10,  1849.—  86 
Zimmermann, W. Allgemeine Geschichte des grossen Bauernkrieges, Th. 1-3, Stuttgart, 
1841-43 
Th. L— 416-17, 428, 430 
Th. 2.—420-21, 423-24, 426, 447-48, 450-54, 456-57 
Th. 3.—419, 475 
Zitz, F. [Speech at a meeting in Frankfurt am Main on September 17, 1848.] In: Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung No. 107 (supplement), September 20, 1848: Frankfurt, 18. 
Sept.— 224-25 
DOCUMENTS 
Accounts of the Committee of Support for German Refugees in London (this volume) 
— Rechnungsablage des Ausschusses zur Unterstützung  deutscher  Flüchtlinge in London. 
In: Westdeutsche Zeitung No. 173, December 12, 1849.—350 
An Act for the Abolition of Slavery Throughout the British Colonies; for Promoting the 
Industry of  the Manumitted Slaves; and for Compensating the  Persons  Hitherto Entitled to 

=====第774页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 751 
the Services of Such Slaves, August 28, 1833. In: The Statutes of  the United Kingdom  of 
Great Britain and Ireland, 3 & 4 William IV. 1833. London, 1833.—501 
An Act for the Amendment and Better Administration of the Law Relating to the Poor in 
England and Wales (1834). In: The Annual Register, of  a View of  the History, Politics, 
and Literature, of the Year 1834, London,  1835.—  294 
An Act for Further Amending the Laws Relating to the Customs, July 30, 1842. In: The 
Statutes of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, 5 & 6 Victoria. 1842. 
London, 1842.—512 
An Act for Further Continuing, Until the Fifth Day of July One Thousand Eight Hundred  and 
Nineteen, an Act of the Forty-Fourth Year of His Present Majesty, to Continue the 
Restriction, Contained in Several Acts of His Present Majesty, on Payments of Cash by 
Bank of England, May 28, 1818. In: The Statutes of the United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Ireland, 58 George III. 1818. London, 1818.—512 
An Act for Improving the Police in and near the Metropolis, June 19, 1829. In: The Statutes 
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, 10 George IV. 1829. London, 
1829.—512 
An Act for the Relief of His Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects, April 13, 1829. In: The 
Statutes of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, 10 George IV. 1829. 
London, 1829.—512 
An Act to Alter Certain Duties of  Customs,  June 26, 1846. In: The Statutes of the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, 1846. London, 1846.—263, 293, 296, 307, 
340, 359, 512, 515 
An Act  to Amend Certain Acts of  the Parliament of Ireland Relative  to the  Election of Members 
to Serve in Parliament, and to Regulate the Qualification of  Persons  Entitled  to Vote at the 
Election of Knights of  the Shire in Ireland, April 13, 1829. In: The Statutes of  the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, 10 George IV. 1829. London,  1829.—  512 
An Act to Amend the Laws for the Importation of  Corn,  April 29, 1842. In: The Statutes of 
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, 5 & 6 Victoria. 1842. London, 
1842.—512 
An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Customs, July 9, 1842. In: The Statutes of the 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, 5 & 6 Victoria. 1842, London, 
1842.—512 
An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Importation of Corn, June 26, 1846. In: The 
Statutes of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, 1846. London, 
1846.—263,  293, 296, 307, 340, 358-59, 512, 515 
An Act to Authorise for One Year, and to the End of  the Then Next Session of Parliament, the 
Removal of Aliens from the Realm, June 9, 1848. In: The Statutes of Great Britain and 
Ireland, London, 1848.—378-80, 312, 391 
An Act to Limit the Hours of Labour of Young Persons and Females in Factories (1847). 
In: The Annual Register, or a View of the History and Politics of the Year 1847, 
London, 1848.—272-76, 288, 291-93, 296-300 
An Act to Regulate the Issue of Bank Notes, and for Giving to the Governor and Company of 
the Bank of England Certain Privileges for a Limited Period, July 19, 1844. In: The 
Statutes of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, 7 & 8 Victoria. 1844. 
London, 1844.—496, 512 

=====第775页=====
752 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
An Act to Regulate  the Labour of Children and Young  Persons  in the Mills and  Factories  of the 
United Kingdom (1833). In: The Annual Register, or a View of  the History, Politics, and 
Literature, of the Year 1833, London, 1834.—291 
Allgemeines Landrecht für die Preussischen Staaten, Th. 1-2, Berlin, 1794.—156 
Arrête relatif à la création de 24 bataillons de garde nationale mobile, 25-29 février 1848. 
In: Collection complète des lois, décrets, ordonnances, règlemens et avis du Conseil 
d'État.... Par J.B.Duvergier, T. 48, Paris, 1848.—62 
Association Démocratique des Amis de la Constitution. In: Le Peuple No. 206, June 13, 
1849.—105 
Aux électeurs républicains démocrates socialistes. In: La Réforme No. 27, January 28, 
1849.—88,  97 
De Barthélémy. La conspiration légitimiste avouée 30 août 1850. In: Le Peuple de 1850 
No. 24, September 22, 1850.—140-41, 522 
Bonaparte, L. N. [Decree transferring General Neumayer to Nan tes J Elysée-National, 
le 29 octobre  1850. In: Le Moniteur universelNo. 303, October 30, 1850.—144, 525 
— Lettre  adressée  par le président de la République au lieutenant-colonel Edgard Ney, son 
officier d'ordonnance à Rome [18 août 1849]. In: Le Moniteur universel No. 250, 
September 7, 1849.—112 
— [Letter to General Oudinot.] Elysée-National, 8 mai 1849. In: Le Moniteur 
universel No. 130, May 10, 1849.—94 
— Message du Président de la République française à L'Assemblée législative. In: Le 
Moniteur universel No. 305, November 1, 1849.—113, 123 
— [Speech at a banquet in Dijon on June 1, 1851.] In: Le Moniteur universel 
Nos.  154 and 155, June 3 and 4, 1851.—579-80 
Bundesverfassung der Schweizerischen Eidgenossenschaft, vom 12. September 1848, 
St. Gallen, 1848.—16, 261 
Changarnier, N. Rapport du général Changarnier, commandant en chef  les gardes  nationales 
de la Seine et  les troupes de la l re division militaire, au ministre de la  guerre,  Paris, le 16 
juin 1849. In: Le Moniteur universel No. 171, June 20, 1849.—99 
Charte constitutionnelle  décrétée  par les Chambres,  et acceptée  par S. M. Louis-Philippe Ier, le 9 
août 1830. In: Charte constitutionnelle  octroyée  par S. M. Louis  XVIII;  mise en regard 
avec la charte constitutionnelle décrétée par les Chambres et acceptée par S. M. Louis-
Philippe Ier, Angers, Lagier, 1830.—578 
Code  Napoléon, Paris, Leipzig, 1808.—155 
Code pénal, ou code des délits et des peines, Cologne,  1810.—  322 
Compte-rendu de la Montagne au Peuple. In: Le Peuple de 1850 No. 6, August 11, 
1850.—138,  519 
Constitutio criminalis Carolina.—409 
Constitution de 1848, Paris, 1848.—26, 36-37, 77-80,90-91, 101-02, 105,  110-11,  124, 
137, 140, 522-23, 567-80 
[Decision of the Palatinate Government on a forced loan.] In: Amts- und Intelligenzblatt 
der provisorischen Regierung der Rheinpfalz No. 12, June 11, 1849.—189 

=====第776页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 753 
Déclaration du gouvernement provisoire relative aux ouvriers, 25-29 février 1848. 
In: Collection  complète  des lois,  décrets,  ordonnances,  règlemens et  avis du Conseil d'État.... 
Par J.B.Duvergier, T. 48, Paris, 1848.—55, 360 
Déclaration de la Montagne au Peuple Français. In: Le Peuple No. 206, June 13, 
1849.—105 
Décret. Die Abgabe der Waffen des zweiten Aufgebots der Volkswehr an das erste betreffend, 
27. Mai 1849. In: Amts-und Intelligenzblatt  der provisorischen  Regierung  der Rheinpfalz 
No. 6, May 27, 1849.—193 
Décret, die Einführung der neuen Gemeinde-Ordnung betr., 26. Mai 1849. In: Amts- und 
Intelligenzblatt der  provisorischen  Regierung der Rheinpfalz No. 6, May 27, 1849.— 190 
Décret portant réunion de la Banque  de France  et des banques de  Rouen,  de Lyon, du Havre, de 
Lille, de Toulouse, d'Orléans, de Marseille, 27 avril- 1 mai 1848. In: Collection  complète 
des lois, décrets, ordonnances, règlemens et avis du Conseil d'Etat.... Par J. B. Duvergier, 
T. 48, Paris, 1848.—133-34, 508-09 
Décret qui déclare monnaie légale les billets de la Banque de France, 15-16 mars 1848. 
In: Collection complète des lois, décrets, ordonnances, règlemens et avis du Conseil 
d'État.... Par J.B.Duvergier, T. 48, Paris, 1848.—133, 508 
Décret qui établit une imposition extraordinaire de 45 centimes par franc sur les quatre 
contributions directes, 16-17 mars 1848. In: Collection complète des lois, décrets, 
ordonnances, règlemens et avis du Conseil d'Etat.... Par J.B.Duvergier, T. 48, Paris, 
1848.—21,  61, 123, 364, 537 
Décret qui fixe la durée de la journée de travail et abolit le marchandage, 2-4 mars 1848. 
In: Collection  complète  des lois,  décrets,  ordonnances,  règlemens  et avis du Conseil d'État.... 
Par J.B.Duvergier, T. 48, Paris, 1848.—73 
Décret relatif aux cautionnements des journaux et écrits périodiques, 9-12 août 1848. 
In: Collection  complète  des lois,  décrets,  ordonnances,  règlemens et  avis du Conseil d'État.... 
Par J.B.Duvergier, T. 48, Paris, 1848.—74, 568 
Décret relatif à la composition du jury, 7 août 1848. In: Le Moniteur universel No. 224, 
August 11, 1848.—73 
Décret sur les clubs, 28 juillet-2 août 1848. In: Collection complète les lois, décrets, 
ordonnances, règlemens et avis du Conseil d'État.... Par J.B.Duvergier, T. 48, Paris, 
1848.—74, 569 
Décret sur l'établissement immédiat d'ateliers nationaux, 26-29 février 1848. In: Collection 
complète des lois, décrets, ordonnances, règlemens et avis du Conseil d'État.... Par 
J.B.Duvergier, T. 48, Paris, 1848.—63, 366 
Décret sur le jury, 7-12 août 1848. In: Collection complète des lois, décrets, ordonnances, 
règlemens  et avis du Conseil d'État.... Par J. B. Duvergier, T. 48, Paris, 1848.—73, 576 
Décret sur la transportation, dans les possessions françaises  d'outremer,  des individus qui  seront 
reconnus avoir pris part à l'insurrection des 23 juin et jours suivants, 27 juin-5 juillet 
1848. In: Collection complète des lois, décrets, ordonnances, règlemens et avis du Conseil 
d'État.... Par J.B.Duvergier, T. 48, Paris, 1848.—82, 568 
Friedrich Wilhelm IV. Allerhöchste Botschaft. In: Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger No. 10, 
January 10, 1850 (see also Neue Preussische Zeitung No. 9, January 11, 
1850).—12-13,  257-58 

=====第777页=====
754 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— [Armeebefehl an die preussischen Truppen in Baden vom 28. Juli 1849.] 
In: Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger No. 215, August 8,  1849.—  207 
— [New-Year message "To My Army", January 1, 1849.] In: Preussischer 
Staats-Anzeiger No. 3, January 3, 1849.—207 
— [Reply to a deputation of the Frankfurt National Assembly.] April 3, 1849. 
In: Königlich  privilegierte  Berlinische Zeitung von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen No. 
80, April 4, 1849.—527 
— [Oath to the Prussian Constitution on February 6, 1850.] In: Preussischer 
Staats-Anzeiger No. 37, February 7, 1850 (see also Neue Preussische Zeitung 
No. 31, February 7, 1850).—14, 267 
— Thronrede am 11. April 1847. In: Der Erste  Vereinigte Landtag in Berlin 1847, Th. 
I.Berlin, 1847.—14,209 
Gesetz, die Errichtung einer provisorischen Regierung mit diktatorischer Gewalt betreffend. 
In: Karlsruher Zeitung. Organ der provisorischen Regierung No. 34, June 21, 
1849.—184 
Hautpoul, A.H. [Circular to the gendarmerie.] In: Le Moniteur universel No. 346, 
December 12, 1849.—22, 123, 261 
Loi électorale, 15-18 mars 1849. In: Collection complète des lois, décrets, ordonnances, 
règlemens et avis du Conseil d'Etat.... Par J. B. Duvergier, T. 49, Paris,  1849.—  571 
Loi portant prorogation de la loi du 22 juin 1849 sur les clubs et autres réunions publiques, 
6-12 juin 1850. In: Collection  complète  des lois,  décrets,  ordonnances,  règlemens et  avis du 
Conseil d'État.... Par J. B. Duvergier, T. 50, Paris, 1850.—569 
Loi qui  abaisse  à deux  cents  francs la moindre coupure des billets de banque, 10-15 juin 1847. 
In: Collection  complète  des lois,  décrets,  ordonnances,  règlemens et  avis du Conseil d'Etat.... 
Par J.B. Duvergier, T. 47, Paris, 1847.—133, 508 
Loi qui fait cesser le cours forcé des billets de la banque de France, 6-13 août 1850. In: 
Collection  complète des  lois,  décrets,  ordonnances,  règlemens et  avis du Conseil d'Etat.... Par 
J.B.Duvergier, T. 50, Paris, 1850.—133-34, 508 
Loi qui modifie les art. 414, 415 et 416 du Code pénal, 27 novembre- 1 décembre 1849. 
In: Collection  complète  des lois,  décrets,  ordonnances,  règlemens et  avis du Conseil d'État.... 
Par J.B. Duvergier, T. 49, Paris, 1849.—569 
Loi qui modifie la loi électorale du 15 mars 1849, 31 mai-3 juin 1850. In: Collection 
complète des lois, décrets, ordonnances, règlemens et avis du Conseil d'État.... Par 
J. B. Duvergier, T. 50, Paris, 1850.—34-35, 136-43, 517-19, 524, 571-72, 578 
Loi qui ouvre, sur l'exercice 1850, un crédit extraordinaire pour frais de la présidence de la 
République, 24-28 juin 1850. In: Collection complète des lois, décrets, ordonnances, 
règlemens et avis du Conseil d'Etat.... Par J. B. Duvergier, T. 50, Paris, 1850.— 38, 
139-40, 520 
Loi relative à la circulation des billets de la banque de France, 22-24 décembre 1849. 
In: Collection  complète  des lois,  décrets,  ordonnances,  règlemens  et avis du Conseil d'État.... 
Par J. B. Duvergier, T. 49, Paris, 1849.—133-34, 508 
Loi relative à  la fixation générale du budget  des recettes et des dépenses de  l'exercice  1849. Titre 
Premier. Art. 3, 19 mai 1849. In: Le Moniteur universel No. 142, May 22, 1849.—18, 
19, 94, 117 

=====第778页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 755 
Loi relative à l'impôt du sel, 28 décembre 1848. In: Le Moniteur universel No. 365, 
December 30, 1848.—19, 84, 94 
Loi relative aux instituteurs communaux, 11-15 janvier 1850. In: Collection  complète des  lois, 
décrets, ordonnances, règlemens et avis du Conseil d'État.... Par J. B. Duvergier, T. 50, 
Paris,  1850.—22, 123, 261 
Loi relative à la transportation des insurgés de juin en Algérie, 24 janvier 1850. In: Le 
Moniteur universel No. 30, January 30, 1850.—23, 124, 261-62 
Loi sur les attroupements, 7 juin 1848. In: Le Moniteur universel No. 161, June 9, 
1848.—67 
Loi sur les boissons, 20-21 décembre 1849. In: Collection complète des lois, décrets, 
ordonnances, règlemens et avis du Conseil d'Etat.... Par J. B. Duvergier, T. 49, Paris, 
1849.—22, 118-19, 123, 261 
Loi sur le cautionnement des journaux et le timbre des écrits périodiques et non périodiques, 
16-23 juillet 1850. In: Collection  complète  des lois,  décrets,  ordonnances,  règlemens et  avis 
du Conseil d'État... Par J. B. Duvergier, T. 50, Paris, 1850.—38-39, 137-38, 518, 
520, 569 
Loi sur les clubs, 19-22 juin 1849. In: Collection complète des lois, décrets, ordonnances, 
règlemens et avis du Conseil d'État.... Par J. B. Duvergier, T. 49, Paris, 1849.—107, 
569 
Loi sur l'enseignement, 15-27 mars 1850. In: Collection complète des lois, décrets, 
ordonnances, règlemens et avis du Conseil d'État... Par J. B. Duvergier, T. 50, Paris, 
1850.—22, 123-24, 129, 261, 570 
Loi sur l'état de siège, 9-11 août 1849. In: Collection  complète  des lois,  décrets,  ordonnances, 
règlemens et avis du Conseil d'Etat... Par J. B. Duvergier, T. 49, Paris, 1849.—107, 
568 
Loi sur la police des  théâtres,  30 juillet-2 août 1850. In: Collection  complète  des lois, décrets, 
ordonnances, règlemens et avis du Conseil d'Etat... Par J. B. Duvergier, T. 50, Paris, 
1850.—569 
Loi sur la presse, 27-29 juillet 1849. In: Collection complète des lois,  décrets,  ordonnances, 
règlemens et avis du Conseil d'État... Par J.B. Duvergier, T. 49, Paris, 1849.—107, 
569 
The People's  Charter; Being the Outline of an Act to Provide for the Just Representation of the 
People of  Great  Britain in the Commons' House of Parliament. Embracing  the Principles  of 
Universal Suffrage, No Property Qualification, Annual Parliaments, Equal Representa­
tion, Payment of  Members,  and Vote  by Ballot.  Prepared by  a Committee of Twelve  Persons, 
Six Members of Parliament and Six Members of the London Working Men's Association, 
and Addressed to the People of the United Kingdom, London, 1838.—273, 514, 578 
Au Peuple! In: Le Peuple de 1850 No. 7, August 14, 1850.—138, 519 
Au peuple français. In: La Démocratie pacifique Nos. 161 and 162 (morning and evening 
editions), June 13, 1849.—105 
Aux Peuples! Organisation de la démocratie. Londres, 22 juillet 1850. In: Le Proscrit 
No. 2, August 6, 1850.—373, 529-32 
Pius Papa IX. A ses bien-aimés  sujets.  (Motu proprio, 12  septembre  1849). In: Le Moniteur 
universel No. 271, September 28, 1849.—Ill 

=====第779页=====
756 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Projet de constitution présenté à l'Assemblée nationale. In: Le Moniteur universel No. 172, 
June 20, 1848.—77-78, 567 
Projet de loi relatif à une augmentation des frais de représentation de M. le président de la 
République. In: Le Moniteur universelNo. 156, June 5, 1850.—35-36, 140, 520-21 
Projet de loi relatif au chemin de fer de Paris à Avignon, 8 août 1849. In: Le Moniteur 
universel No. 221, August 9, 1849.—118 
Projet de loi relatif au timbre et au cautionnement  des journaux et  écrits  périodiques,  21 mars, 
1850. In: Le Moniteur universel No. 81, March 22, 1850.—28, 30 
Projet de loi sur les clubs et réunions publiques, 21 mars 1850. In: Le Moniteur universel 
No. 81, March 22, 1850.—29, 30 
Projet de loi sur la nomination des maires et adjoints, 1 mars 1850. In: Le Moniteur universel 
No. 61, March 2, 1850.—123 
Quatrième Bulletin de l'armée du Rhin et du Neckar. Quartier  général de  Heidelberg, 22 juin 
1849. In: Rapports du général Mieroslawski sur la campagne de Bade, Berne, 
1849.—218-19 
Report, Together with Minutes of Evidence, and Accounts, from the Select Committee 
Appointed to Inquire into the Cause of the High Price of Gold Bullion. Ordered by the 
House of Commons to Be Printed 8 June 1810, London, 1810.—584 
Résolution relative aux affaires d'Italie, 8 mai 1849. In: Le Moniteur universel 
No. 130, May 10, 1849.—102-03 
Rules of the Communist League (present edition, Vol. 6) 
— Statuten des Bundes der Kommunisten. —626-27, 629 
Second Bulletin de l'armée du Rhin et du Neckar, 13 juin 1849. Quartier général de 
Mannheim. In: Rapports du général Mieroslawski sur la campagne de Bade, Berne, 
1849.—206-07 
Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der  deutschen  konstituirenden Nationalver­
sammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, 1848-49.—250 
Sznayde, Fr.  Tagesbefehle  (Nos. I-IV, May 29 and 30, 1849; Nos. V-VIII, June 2, 1849; 
Nos.  IX-XIV, June 8, 1849). In: Amts- und Intelligenzblatt der provisorischen 
Regierung der Rheinpfalz Nos. 8, 10 and 11, May 31, June 4 and 11, 1849.—195 
Universal Society of Revolutionary Communists (this volume) 
— Société universelle des communistes révolutionnaires. —484 
Verfassung des deutschen Reiches vom 28. März 1849. In: Verhandlungen der deutschen 
verfassunggebenden Reichsversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Bd. 4, Frankfurt am 
Main, 1849.—101, 149-53, 157-59, 165, 169-70, 177-78, 199,225,237-38,247-50, 
279, 346, 377, 596, 602 
Verfassungsurkunde für den preussischen Staat. Vom 5. Dezember 1848. In: Gesetz-
Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten. 1848, Berlin, 1848.—12, 257 
Verfassungsurkunde für den preussischen Staat. Vom 31. Januar 1850. In: Preussischer 
Staats-Anzeiger No. 32, February 2, 1850.—14, 257, 267 

=====第780页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 757 
Verordnung über die Ausführung der Wahl der Abgeordneten zur zweiten Kammer. Vom 30. 
Mai 1849. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen  Preussischen  Staaten. 1849, Berlin, 
1849.—12 
Verordnung über die Verhütung eines die gesetzliche Freiheit und Ordnung gefährdenden 
Missbrauchs des Versammlungs- und Vereinigungs rechtes. Vom 11. März 1850. 
In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten. 1850, Berlin, 
1850.—14-15 " 
Verordnung zur Ergänzung der Verordnung über die  Presse  vom 30. Juni 1849. Vom 5. Juni 
1850. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten. 1850, Berlin, 
1850.—14-15,  379, 383 
Vertrag zwischen dem Landesausschuss von Baden und der provisorischen Regierung von 
Rheinpfalz vom 17. und 18. Mai 1849. In: Karlsruher Zeitung. Organ des 
Landesausschusses No. 15, May 31, 1849.—184 
Wildenbruch [Louis]. Note an die danische Regierung. Vom 8. April 1848. 
In: Stenographische- Berichte über die Verhandlungen der zur Vereinbarung der 
preussischen Staats-Verfassung berufenen Versammlung, Bd. I, Berlin, 1848.—394 
ANONYMOUS ARTICLES AND REPORTS 
PUBLISHED IN PERIODIC EDITIONS 
Abend-Post. Demokratische Zeitung No. 86, April 14, 1850: "Stettin, 11. April."— 349 
L'Assemblée nationale No. 23, January 25, 1850: [Leading article.]—262 
Der Bote für Stadt und  Land.  Pfälzisches Volksblatt No. 118, June 14, 1849: "An die 
Forstleute der Pfalz." —194 
The Economist No. 366, August 31, 1850: "Spirit of the Trade Circulars."—508 
— No. 369, September 21, 1850: "Slavery in the United States. To the Editor of 
The Economist"—501 
— No. 371, October 5, 1850: "The Bank of France. Inconvertible Notes Not 
Depreciated."  —133,  508 
— No. 372, October 12, 1850: "Trade and Navigation Returns. Eight 
Months.—January 5 to September 5."—497-98 
— No. 373, October 19, 1850: "Commercial Epitome."—498 
The Globe and Traveller No. 15318, October 26, 1850: [Report on the Papal Bull and 
Mazzini's manifesto.]—513 
The Illustrated London News No. 412, February 9, 1850: "Tree of Liberty, on the 
Boulevard St. Martin, at Paris."—24 
Journal  des Débats  politiques  et littéraires,  August 28, 1848: "France. Paris, 27 août." —73 
Kölnische Zeitung No. 103, May 1, 1849: "An alle Gemeinden der Rheinpro­
vinz." —158 
— No. 104 (second edition), May 2, 1849: "Bekanntmachung."— 158 
— No. 105 (special supplement), May 3, 1849: "An alle Gemeinde-Verordneten 
der Rheinprovinz." —158 
26-1124 

=====第781页=====
758 Index of Quoted and Mentioned literature 
— No. 109, May 8, 1849: "Frankfurt, 5. Mai." —150-51 
— No. 110 (second edition), May 9, 1849: "Köln, 8. Mai."  —158 
— No. 129, May 31,1849: "Köln, 30. Mai."—193 
— No. 140 (supplement), June 13, 1849: "Deutsche National-Versammlung. 
Stuttgart, 8. Juni." —249 
Le Moniteur universel No. 174, June 22, 1848: "Partie non officielle." —67 
— No. 217, August 4,1848: "Rapport de la commission d'enquête. "—74 
— No. 81, March 22, 1849: "Assemblée Nationale. Séance du mercredi 21 mars: 
Reprise de la discussion du projet de loi sur les clubs." —90-91 
— No. 107, April 17, 1849: "Assemblée Nationale. Séance du lundi 16 avril: 
Communication du gouvernement." —93 
— No. 123, May 3, 1849: "Assemblée Nationale. Séance du mercredi 2 mai: 
Discussion du projet de loi relatif à la célébration de la fête du 4 mai 
1849."—94 
— No. 132, May 12, 1849: "Assemblée Nationale. Séance du vendredi 11 mai: 
Proposition de mise en accusation du président de la République et des 
ministres."— 94, 99, 103 
— No. 163, June 12, 1849: "Assemblée Nationale. Séance du lundi 11 juin: 
Interpellations sur les affaires étrangères." —103 
— No. 164, June 13, 1849: "Assemblée Nationale Législative. Séance du mardi 12 
juin: Rapport sur l'urgence relativement à la proposition de mise en accusation 
du président de la République et des ministres." —99, 104-05 
— No. 188, July 7, 1849: "Assemblée Nationale Législative. Séance du vendredi 6 
juillet: Discussion du projet de règlement."  —107,  571 
— No. 13, January 13, 1850: "Assemblée Nationale Législative. Séance du samedi 
12 janvier: Proposition." —263 
— No. 20, January 20, 1850: "Assemblée Nationale Législative. Séance du samedi 
19 janvier: Proposition." —263 
— No. 22, January 22, 1850: "Assemblée Nationale Législative. Séance du lundi 
21 janvier: Discussion du projet de loi relatif à la transportation des insurgés 
de juin en Algérie." — 23 
— No. 142, May 22, 1850: "Assemblée Nationale Législative. Séance du mardi 21 
mai:  Discussion sur le projet de loi tendant à modifier la loi électorale du 15 
mars  1849."  —136, 516-17 
— No. 143, May 23, 1850: "Assemblée Nationale Législative. Séance du mercredi 
22 mai: Suite de la discussion du projet de loi tendant à modifier la loi 
électorale." —136, 517 
— No. 152, June 1, 1850: "Assemblée Nationale Législative. Séance du vendredi 
31 mai: Suite de la délibération sur le projet de loi concernant la modification 
de la loi électorale." —137, 517 
— No. 197, July 16, 1850: "Assemblée Nationale Législative. Séance du lundi 
15 juillet: (Motion d'ordre.)"— 39,140,520 
— No. 200, July 19, 1850: "Assemblée Nationale Législative. Séance du jeudi 18 
juillet: Affaire du journal Le Pouvoir." —39, 140, 520 
Neue Preussische Zeitung Nos. 278-82, November 29-December 4, 1849: [Trial of 
Waldeck in the Prussian National Assembly.]—258, 345 
— No. 116, May 24, 1850: "London, 20. Mai."—385 
— No. 117,May25,1850: "DerKönigsmord."-370, 383,386 
— No. 117: "London, den  21. Mai"—385 

=====第782页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 759 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 209, January 31, 1849: "Anklageakt gegen das 
Ministerium. "—88 
— No. 210, February 1, 1849: "*Paris, 29. Januar."— 89 
The Northern Star No. 669, August 17, 1850: "The National Charter Association." — 
512 
La Patrie. Journal du Commerce No. 65, March 6, 1850: "Elections de la Seine Union 
électorale."—342 
— No. 67, March 8, 1850: "Bulletin financier."—342-43 
— Nô. 69, March 10, 1850: "Bulletin financier."—343 ' 
— No. 71, March 12, 1850: "Département de la Seine. Arrondissement de sceaux: 
Vincennes, Montreuil et St. Mandé. Election, 6 heures."— 344 
— No. 74, March 15, 1850: [Report on elections to the Legislative Assem­
bly.]—344 
Le Pouvoir No. 195, July 15, 1850: "Paris, 14 juillet. Affaiblissement graduel de 
l'Assemblée nationale." —39, 140, 520 
— No. 199, July 19, 1850: "Paris, 18 juillet." — 140, 520 
Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. 18, London, 1850: "The Tree of Liberty in 
France."— 338 
The Red Republican No. 9, August 17, 1850: "The Peel Monument."—512 
La Réforme No. 160, June 13, 1849: [Proclamation of the Mountain.]—105 
Schweizerische National-Zeitung No. 44, February 21, 1850: "Ein Invasionspro­
jekt."— 268-69 
The Spectator No. 1146, June 15, 1850: [Comment of the editors to the statement 
"Prussian Spies in London" by Karl Marx and Frederick Engels.] —390-91 
The Times No.  20341,  November 23, 1849: "Revolutionary tactics. To the Editor of 
The Times."—3, 4 
— No. 20390, January 19, 1850: "Mr. Cobden and the Russian Loan."—12, 511 
— No. 20436, March 14, 1850: [Leader.]—338 
— No. 20497, May 24, 1850: "Police."—352 
— No. 20619, October 14, 1850: "London, Monday, October 14, 1850."—512-13 
— No. 20624, October 19, 1850: "London, Saturday, October 19, 1850."—512-
13 
— No. 20626, October 22, 1850: "London/Tuesday, October 22, 1850."—512-13 
— No. 20634, October 31, 1850: "The French Republic."—513 
La Voix du peuple No. 137, February 15, 1850: [On the aim of the Holy Alliance to 
partition France.]—16 
— No. 166, March 17, 1850: [Criticism of the Mountain party.]—129-30 
— No. 167, March 18, 1850: [Quoting of passages from La Patrie directed against 
the Mountain party.]—129-30 
-w. 
Weser-Zeitung No. 2037, June 22, 1850: "Grossbritannien. London, 19. Juni."— 390 

=====第783页=====
760 
INDEX OF PERIODICALS 
Abend-Post. Demokratische Zeitung —a democratic newspaper published in Berlin from 
January to July 1850.—345, 349 
Allgemeine Zeitung —a German conservative daily founded in 1798. From 1810 to 
1882 it was published in Augsburg.—242 
L'Assemblée nationale —a monarchist (Legitimist) daily published in Paris from 1848 to 
1857.—38,  138, 262, 385, 519 
Bamberger Zeitung —a German liberal daily published in Bamberg from 1848 to 
1865.—242 
Bayerische Landbötin —a farming newspaper published in Munich from 1830 to 1848, 
when its title was changed to Isar-Zeitung.—242 
Blätter für  literarische  Unterhaltung —a literary and political journal founded in Weimar 
in 1818; appeared under this title in Leipzig from 1826 to 1898.—242 
Der Bote für Stadt und  Land.  Pfälzisches Volksblatt —a democratic newspaper, the 
official gazette of the Palatinate revolutionary Provisional Government during the 
uprising of May-June 1849; was published in Kaiserslautern. —192, 194 
Bremer Tages-Chronik. Organ der Demokratie —see Tages-Chronik 
Le Charivari—a republican satirical newspaper published in Paris from 1832 to 
1934.—26, 312-13 
Le Constitutionnel —a daily published in Paris from 1815 to 1817 and from 1819 to 
1870;  in the 1840s it spoke for the moderate Orleanists, during the 1848 
revolution for the monarchist bourgeoisie (the Thiers party), and after the 1851 
coup d'état for the Bonapartists.—  38, 138, 519 
Correspondent von und für Deutschland —a German liberal daily published in 
Nuremberg from 1806 to 1890.—241, 242 
Débats —see Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires 
The Democratic Review of British and Foreign  Politics,  History and Literature—a Chartist 
monthly published by George Julian Harney in London from June 1849 to 

=====第784页=====
Index of Periodicals 761 
September 1850; Engels contributed to it in 1850.—7, 10, 14, 16, 17, 21, 24, 27, 28, 
30, 33-34, 38, 276, 362, 365, 369, 394 
La Démocratie pacifique —a Fourierist daily edited by Victor Considérant; appeared in 
Paris from 1843 to 1851.—104 
Demokratische Zeitung. Abendblatt der Wächter an der Ostsee —a Berlin democratic 
newspaper founded in 1849; from January 1850 it was published under the title 
Abend-Post. Demokratische Zeitung.— 597, 601 
Deutsche Londoner Zeitung. Blätter für Politik, Literatur und Kunst —a literary and 
political weekly published by German refugees in London from April 1845 to 
February 1851. It was edited by the petty-bourgeois democrat Ludwig Bamberger 
and supported financially by the deposed Duke of Brunswick. Ferdinand 
Freiligrath was a member of the editorial board from 1847 to 1851. It carried a 
number of works by Marx and Engels.— 3, 597, 601, 618, 623, 631-32 
Deutsche Schnellpost für europäische Zustände, öffentliches und sociales Leben Deutsch­
lands —organ of the German moderate democratic émigrés in the USA published 
in New York twice a week from 1843 to 1851. Karl Heinzen was its editor in 1848 
and 1851.—348, 601 
Deutscher Zuschauer —a German radical weekly published by the petty-bourgeois 
democrat Gustav Struve from December 1846 to April 1848 in Mannheim and 
from July to September 1848 in Basle.—176 
Dresdner Journal und Anzeiger —a daily newspaper published in Dresden from 1848 to 
1904,  initially of a liberal trend; from October 1, 1848, the official organ of the 
Saxon Government; was taken over by the state on April 1, 1849.—630, 633 
The Economist. Weekly Commercial Times, Bankers' Gazette, and Railway Monitor: a 
Political, Literary, and General Newspaper—a weekly published in London since 
1843.—498,  501, 507 
Die Evolution. Ein politisches Wochenblatt —a democratic weekly of German refugees in 
Switzerland edited by Johann Philipp Becker; was published in Biel (Berne canton) 
in 1848 and 1849.—183 
Fliegende Blätter —a satirical weekly published in Munich from 1845.—187 
Frankfurter Journal—a daily newspaper published in Frankfurt am Main approximate­
ly from 1655 up to 1903; followed a liberal line in the 1840s.—193 
Der Freischütz —a literary and artistic newspaper published in Hamburg from 1825 to 
1878.—623 
La Gazette de France—a Paris royalist daily published under this title from 1762 to 
1792 and from 1797 to 1848.—54 
The Globe—see The Globe and Traveller 
The Globe and Traveller—a London daily published from 1803 to 1921; until 1866, 
organ of the Whigs, later of the Conservatives.—  385,  513 
Die Hornisse —a German democratic satirical newspaper published by H.Heise and 
G.Kellner in Cassel from 1848 to 1850.—610-11, 620 
The Illustrated London News—a weekly published from  1842.—  24 

=====第785页=====
762 Index of Periodicals 
Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires —a Paris daily published from 1789, organ of 
the government during the July monarchy; took a monarchist stand during the 
1848 revolution.—38, 73, 138, 519 
Karlsruher Zeitung —a daily newspaper published from 1757, official gazette of the 
Grand Duchy of Baden, organ of the Brentano Government in 1849.—183-84, 
193 
Kölnische Zeitung —a Cologne daily published from 1802 to 1945, organ of the liberal 
bourgeoisie; took an anti-revolutionary stand and attacked the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung in 1848-49.—151, 158, 193 
Landbötin —see Bayerische Landbötin 
Le Moniteur du Soir —a Paris daily published from 1837; supported the July 
monarchy; from 1848 organ of the Bonapartists.—344 
Le Moniteur universel —a daily newspaper published in Paris from 1789 to 1901; 
official organ of the government (1799-1814, 1816-68).—26, 57, 67, 69, 94, 108, 
112, 114, 144, 343, 368, 525, 567 
Le Napoléon —a weekly published in Paris from January 6 to May 19, 1850, the 
mouthpiece of Louis Bonaparte.—124 
Le National—a Paris daily published from 1830 to 1851, organ of the moderate 
republicans in the 1840s.—20, 23, 27, 53, 58, 65, 72, 76-79, 81-84,  88-91,  95, 
98-99,  105, 107, 110, 126, 128, 140, 322-23, 367, 521 
Neue Deutsche Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie —a democratic daily published from 1848 
to 1850, initially in Darmstadt (until April 1, 1849) and then in Frankfurt am Main; 
edited by Otto Liining and, from October 1, 1849, also by Joseph Weydemeyer.— 
351, 387-88, 597, 601, 618, 620 
Neue Oder-Zeitung —a Breslau (Wroclaw) democratic daily published from 1849 to 
1855;  Marx was its London correspondent in 1855.—282 
Neue Preussische Zeitung —a conservative daily published in Berlin from June 1848, 
organ of the Prussian junkers and court circles; also known as the Kreuz-Zeitung 
because its title included a cross with the device "Forward with God for King and 
Fatherland".—370, 383, 385-86 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie —a daily newspaper edited by Marx, 
organ of the revolutionary proletarian democrats during the German revolution of 
1848-49; was published in Cologne from June 1, 1848, to May 19, 1849 (with an 
interval from September 27 to October 12, 1848).—5-6, 41, 66, 68-69, 81, 86, 88, 
132, 156, 171, 181, 187, 192, 202, 247, 348, 353, 379, 384, 386, 388, 535-36, 547, 
597, 602-03, 605 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue —a journal published by Marx and 
Engels from December 1849 to November 1850, theoretical organ of the 
Communist League.—5-6,41,50,58, 100, 111, 138, 148-49, 151-52, 154, 167, 175, 
185, 195, 241, 246, 250, 256, 270,  300-01,  310, 325, 337-38, 341-42, 344, 347-48, 
354, 387, 398, 485-86, 504, 519, 531-32, 605-06 
New-Yorker Schnellpost —see Deutsche Schnellpost 
New-Yorker Staatszeitung —a German democratic daily published in New York from 
1834;  later an organ of the US Democratic Party.— 601 

=====第786页=====
Index of Periodicals 763 
Norddeutsche Freie Presse —a German newspaper published in Altona from 1849 to 
1851;  prior to 1849 it appeared under the title Schleswig-Holsteinische 
Zeitung.— 598, 601, 618, 621, 623 
The Northern Star—central organ of the Chartists, a weekly published from 1837 to 
1852,  first in Leeds and later in London; was founded and edited by Feargus 
O'Connor; George Julian Harney was a member of the editorial board. Engels 
contributed to The Northern Star from 1843 to 1850.—3-4, 379, 514, 599, 601, 624, 
637 
Notes to the People—a Chartist weekly edited by Ernest Jones and published in London 
in 1851 and 1852; Marx and Engels supported it and contributed a number of 
articles.—573,  580 
Nürnberger Bote —see Nürnberger Courier 
Nürnberger Courier—a daily newspaper published in Nuremberg from 1842 to 1862 as 
a continuation of the Friedens- und Kriegs-Courier, founded in 1673.—242 
La Patrie. Journal du commerce,  de l'agriculture, de l'industrie, de la littérature,  des sciences  et 
des arts —a daily published in Paris from 1841; in 1850 it spoke for the party of 
Order (the counter-revolutionary monarchist bourgeoisie) and later took a 
Bonapartist stand.—94, 130, 342-44, 541 
Le Peuple. Journal de la République démocratique et sociale —a social-reformist newspaper 
published in Paris from 1848 to 1850; from April 1848 it appeared under the title 
Le Représentant du  Peuple;  from September 1848 to June 13, 1849, under the title Le 
Peuple; from October 1, 1849, to May 14, 1850, under the title La Voix du peuple, 
and from June 15 to October 13, 1850, under the title Le Peuple de 1850. Its editor 
was Proudhon.—105, 130, 138 
Le Pouvoir —a Bonapartist daily founded in Paris in 1849; published under this title in 
1850 and 1851.—38-39, 140, 520 
La Presse —a daily newspaper published in Paris from 1836; opposed the July 
monarchy in the 1840s; in 1848 and 1849 it was moderate republican, later 
Bonapartist.—110, 126, 627 
Preussischer  Staats-Anzeiger —a newspaper published in Berlin from 1819, semi-official 
organ of the Prussian Government until April 1848; changed its title several 
times.—207, 257 
Le Proscrit. Journal de la République universelle —a monthly published in Paris in 1850, 
organ of the Central Committee of European Democracy. Only two issues 
appeared. In late October 1850 it was turned into a weekly which was published 
under the title La Voix du Proscrit in Saint-Amand (France) till September 
1851.—528 
Punch, or the London Charivari—a comic weekly paper of a liberal trend, founded in 
1841.—338 
The Red Republican—a Chartist weekly published by George Julian Harney in London 
from June to November  1850.—  512 
Die Reform. Organ der demokratischen Partei —a newspaper published by Arnold Ruge 
and H. B. Oppenheim and edited by Eduard Meyen, organ of the petty-bourgeois 
democrats; appeared in Leipzig and Berlin from April 1848, and in Berlin from 
the summer or 1848 to the early 1850s.—182 

=====第787页=====
764 Index of Periodicals 
La Réforme —a daily newspaper published in Paris from 1843 to 1850, organ of the 
republican democrats and petty-bourgeois socialists.—71, 88, 105, 312-14, 316, 
320, 322 
La République —a daily newspaper published in Paris from February 1848 to 
December 1851, organ of the radical republicans.—37 
Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe —a daily newspaper founded on 
January 1, 1842, as the organ of the Rhenish bourgeois opposition. It was 
published in Cologne till March 31, 1843. From October 15, 1842, to March 17, 
1843,  it was edited by Marx and assumed a strongly pronounced revolutionary-
democratic complexion, which led to its suppression. Engels was one of its 
contributors.— 386 
Schnellpost —see Deutsche Schnellpost 
Schweizerische National-Zeitung—a liberal daily published in Basle from 1842 to 
1858.—268,  601 
Le Siècle —a daily published in Paris from 1836 to 1939. In the 1840s it was an organ 
of the opposition, demanding electoral and other reforms.—23, 110, 126, 140, 
263, 521 
The Spectator—a weekly published in London since 1828, originally liberal, later 
conservative.—380, 384, 390-91 
Staatszeitung —see New-Yorker Staatszeitung 
The Sun—a liberal daily published in London from 1798 to 1876.—378-79 
Tages-Chronik—a democratic paper published in Bremen from 1849 to 1851. It was 
edited by R. Dulon. From January 1851 it appeared under the title Bremer 
Tages-Chronik. Organ der Demokratie. Arnold Rüge contributed to it in 1851.—391, 
535-36 
The Times—a daily newspaper published in London since 1785.—3-4, 12, 37, 338, 
352, 510, 513, 540-41 
La Voix du peuple —see Le Peuple 
Weser-Zeitung —a liberal daily published in Bremen from 1844 to 1930.—390-91 
Westdeutsche Zeitung —a democratic paper published by Hermann Becker in Cologne 
from May 25, 1849, to July 21, 1850.—6, 597, 601, 604, 609-10, 618, 620 

=====第788页=====
765 
SUBJECT INDEX 
A 
Agricultural workers—  280,  284-85, 375, 
502, 503 
Agriculture—120, 121, 255, 284-85, 335, 
401, 502-03 
A Ibigenses— 413-14 
Anabaptists—  420,  425, 452 
Anarchism, anarchists—334, 486-87 
Anarchy (political)—131, 142, 486, 522 
Ancient Rome—244 
Ancient  world,  antiquity—244, 265, 512, 
590 
Antagonism—47, 69, 86, 95, 125, 441-43 
— of interests—58, 116 
— of classes—47, 57, 387 
— between proletariat and bour­
geoisie—86, 177, 308 
— elimination of as a result of com­
munist transformation of socie­
ty—307-08,  387 
Appropriation 
— of means of production—78 
Arbitrariness (in antagonistic class socie-
ty)_567-68,  569-70, 577 
Aristocracy—  48, 294, 331, 342, 512 
— and bourgeoisie—273, 294 
— financial—48-52, 60, 95, 114-15, 
118, 331, 342 
— and working class—294 
Aristocracy, English—115, 254-55, 293, 
296, 443, 512 
Aristocracy, German—see Nobility, Ger­
man 
Aristocracy, Hungarian—438-40 
Armaments, weapons—400, 403, 556 Arming of the people—284-85 
Army 
— and economy—11-12, 550-54 
— as a tool of reaction for suppressing 
revolutionary movements—118, 
130, 580 
— under feudalism—407, 551-52 
— under capitalism—548-50 
— and proletariat—554, 555 
— and peasantry—551, 554, 555 
— and bourgeois, bourgeois-demo­
cratic revolution—172, 550, 553, 
554 
— and proletarian revolution, trans­
formation of armed forces after 
victory of proletariat—376, 550, 
553-56,  560, 561-63 
— revolutionary—560-63 
— national, regular, irregular army, 
militia—206, 548, 552, 560 
— personnel—180-81, 544, 547, 549-
51, 554-56, 561, 562 
— Austrian—11-12, 15, 173, 268, 
547-49,  551, 552-53, 557, 559 
— Belgian—557 
— Danish—375-76, 557 
— Dutch—557 
— English—549, 551 
— French—25, 32, 34, 58, 62, 65, 76, 
81, 98, 103, 104, 106, 118, 124, 
128, 130, 137, 143-44, 341, 517, 
523, 543, 544-46, 549-52, 555, 556, 
559-61,  579, 580 
— German—173-74, 178, 180, 192, 
551, 557 
— Hungarian—552-53 

=====第789页=====
766 Subject Index 
— of Italian states—553, 558 
— Polish—507, 508-09 
— Prussian—15, 159-60, 161, 166, 
167, 173, 208, 267, 376, 547-54, 
557, 558 
— Russian—15, 268, 548, 549, 551, 
552, 556-57 
— Spanish—400 
Asceticism—  421-23,  428-29 
See also Plebeians, plebs 
Association, communist—78, 281, 285 
See also Communism (social forma­
tion) 
Australia—  501,  502, 504, 505, 506 
Austria—11-12, 259, 268, 552 
— during 1848-49 revolution—248, 
259, 481-82 
— finances—11-12, 14-15, 259 
— political system—11, 115, 248, 
259, 526 
— and Germany—7-9, 526 
— and Hungary—8, 369 
— and Italian states—76, 369, 513-14 
— and Poland—8, 50, 369 
— and Prussia—500, 507, 525-28, 
583 
— and Russia—8, 527, 528 
— and Slavs—259 
— and Western powers (Britain and 
France)—15,75-76,93,513-14,542 
See also Army, Austrian; Bourgeoisie, 
Austrian; Revolution of 1848-49 in 
Austria 
Austro-Italian war of 1848-49—16, 93, 
547-49,  552-53 
See also Revolution of 1848-49 in Au­
stria; Revolution of 1848-49 in Italian 
states 
B 
Bank,  bankers—  49-50,  60-61,  114, 134, 
252, 292, 363, 494-96, 508, 586 
See also Bank legislation; Bank of Eng­
land;  Bank of France; Credit 
Bank of  England—  252,  494-95 
Bank of France—  60-61,  133-34, 508-09 
Bank legislation—134, 495-96, 508-09, 
512 
Bank-notes—  60, 133, 587, 590 
Bankruptcy—  49, 52, 59, 60, 495-96 
Barricades, barricade fighting—see Upris­
ing, armed Basis and superstructure—95, 127, 246, 
387 
Belgium—  374,  393, 394, 401, 434, 492 
Blanquism, Blanquists 
— as representatives of pre-Marxian 
revolutionary communism—97, 
127, 319-20, 322, 537, 615 
— their voluntaristic attitude—35, 
316 
— Société des saisons (Society of the 
Seasons), mutiny of 1839—48, 
312, 315, 316, 320 
— and Communist League—377, 
484, 614-15 
— during 1848 revolution in France 
—27,  88, 97, 127, 128, 323, 576 
— in 1850s—27, 377, 484,  537-41, 
613-15 
See also Conspiracy; Voluntarism 
Blocs and agreements in the revolutionary 
struggle of the proletariat—  280-87',  298, 
373-74, 376-77 
Bohemia, Czechs—414, 415 
See also Hussite movement 
Bonapartism—  80-81,  521, 579-80 
See also Revolution of 1848 in 
France 
Bourgeoisie—  56, 69-70, 156, 310, 360, 
501-02,  577-78, 585, 590 
— feudalism — 360 
— industrial—56-57, 275, 288-99, 
310, 360 
— financial—48,  50-51,  56-57, 116, 
151, 264, 294, 297 
— factions of, struggle between 
them—49-50, 95, 115-17, 140, 
151, 273, 291-94 
— and state power—49, 50, 151, 275, 
310, 333, 487 
— as a hindrance to historical de­
velopment—500 
— class struggle with proletariat—see 
Class struggle 
— and peasantry—69, 122, 156, 280; 
284 
— its theoreticians and ideolog­
ists—48,  72, 96 
— and religion —  254,  296 
See also Bonapartism; Class, classes; 
Democracy, bourgeois; Petty bourgeoisie; 
Revolution, bourgeois, bourgeois-demo­
cratic; Society, bourgeois; State, bourgeois 
Bourgeoisie, Austrian—115, 577 

=====第790页=====
Subject Index 767 
Bourgeoisie, English—116, 254-55, 293, 
296, 511-12 
— in 16th-18th centuries, alliance 
with bourgeoisified nobility—115, 
252, 254-55 
— and aristocracy—293, 296 
— industrial—254-55, 292-96, 298, 
501-02,  510, 512, 583 
— financial—114-15, 252, 294, 512 
— Free Trade—116, 271, 296, 510, 
582 
— factions of and struggle between 
them—116, 273, 291-94 
See also Corn Laws; English bourgeois 
revolution of 17th century 
Bourgeoisie, French—56-57, 150, 151, 577 
— financial aristocracy (as the big 
bourgeoisie)—47-52, 53-54, 56-59, 
60, 95, 107, 114-18, 125-26, 133, 
252, 263, 294, 342, 508, 525 
— during the French revolution of 
1789-94—550 
— in first half of 19th century (before 
1848-49 revolution)—48-53, 54-
55, 56-57, 95, 116-17, 263, 316 
Bourgeoisie, German—7, 13, 151, 156, 
170, 172, 236, 267, 278-79, 280, 410, 
482 
See also Burghers, German; Revolution 
of 1848-49 in Germany 
Bourgeoisie, Prussian—12, 13, 156, 157, 
257, 258, 267, 488, 577, 583 
Bourgeois political economy—272, 274 
Budget (state)—49,  60-61,  115-17, 259 
Bundschuh (peasant conspiracies in Ger­
many in 15th-16th centuries)—431-
36, 438, 440, 441 
Bureaucracy—151,  152, 172, 182, 188, 
208, 237, 333, 481, 488, 504, 552 
See also Officials 
Burghers—  405,  407, 408, 409, 410, 413, 
414, 416-17, 427, 433, 437, 441, 453, 
461, 465, 469, 480, 481, 482, 527 
Burghers, German—149, 405-10, 413, 
427, 429, 480, 481, 482, 527 
C 
California—132, 265, 502, 504-07 
Canals—  265,  504-06 
Capital—  78, 273, 300, 308 
Carinthia— 439-40, 475, 476 Carniola— 439-40, 475, 476 
Catholicism—124, 254, 416-17, 421, 512 
See also Jesuits; Papacy 
Causality, cause and effect— 115, 121, 135, 
142, 253, 254, 417, 480, 481, 482, 
490-91,  510, 549, 550, 564 
Cavalry—403,  549 
Central Bureau of United German Emigra­
tion—  373,  619-20 
Central Committee of European Democra­
cy (1850s)—373, 528-32, 536, 537, 
541 
Centralisation of capital—49-50 
Chartism—  289,  301, 377, 514-16 
Child labour—  274,  288-91 
Chiliasm—  415,  420 
China—  268,  275, 339, 400 
Christianity—  244,  412-18, 422 
Church—155, 403-05, 412-15, 422 
— burgher and plebeian opposition to 
feudal church—412-27 
— Anglican—511, 512, 513 
— Catholic—513 
— expropriation of—415, 416, 479 
See also Clergy; Papacy 
Civilisation—  80, 265-67, 289, 501, 
551-54 
Civil society—248 
Civil war between proletariat and 
bourgeoisie—  68-69,  70, 142, 522 
See also June insurrection of Paris pro­
letariat in 1848 
Class, classes—  56, 254, 292, 585, 586, 
590 
— as product of economic rela­
tions—62, 126, 170, 176, 243, 272 
— and industrial revolution —  255, 
290, 291 
— and production—96, 127, 470 
— class relations—57, 62, 77, 170, 
251, 263 
— class interests—53, 57-58, 68, 80, 
95, 116-17, 141,286,290,316,318, 
412, 468, 479, 527 
— class antagonisms, contradictions— 
47, 58, 127, 255, 281, 288, 299, 
306, 333, 387, 415, 470, 486, 553, 
589, 591 
— in feudal society—402-10, 412-13, 
415, 428 
— in bourgeois society—65, 67, 156, 
255 
— class distinctions between pro-

=====第791页=====
768 Subject Index 
letariat and bourgeoisie—57-58, 
67, 69, 86, 95, 116-17, 156, 176-77, 
255, 288, 299, 307, 481, 486, 
529-30 
— ruling classes in antagonistic 
societies—49, 54-57, 68, 70, 76-79, 
95-96,  116, 131, 141, 151, 156,237, 
263, 272, 273-76, 278, 281, 307, 
310, 425, 428, 451, 470, 486, 487, 
522 
— intermediate, transitional—110, 
124 
— exploiter, propertied, upper—58, 
65, 68, 122, 243, 283, 294, 307, 
331, 340 
— conservative, reactionary—172, 
190, 274, 292-93, 297 
— middle classes, strata, and estates 
in bourgeois society—64-65, 69, 
78, 99, 108, 125-26, 151, 329 
— lower, exploited, propertyless, op­
pressed—67-68, 122, 243, 307, 
310, 333, 530-31 
— revolutionary—56, 57, 82, 87, 96-
99, 125, 127, 190, 225, 237, 277, 
297, 429 
— proletariat's coming to power— 
237, 276, 280, 286, 300, 387 
— and the state—66, 253, 331, 486 
— and religion—254, 272, 412, 513 
— abolition of classes and class dis­
tinctions in communist society— 
127, 280, 299, 333, 387, 486, 
553-54 
See also Aristocracy; Bourgeoisie; 
Craftsmen, handicrafts; Nobility; Peasan­
try; Petty bourgeoisie; Working class 
Class struggle—  56, 67-68, 127, 243, 412, 
470,  529-30 
— in feudal society—412, 428-29, 
432-33,  481 
— and religious struggle as reflection 
of class struggle in Middle Ages— 
412, 428 
— between proletariat and bour­
geoisie—56-57, 64, 67-68, 169-
70, 243, 387, 428-29, 529-30, 634 
— as political struggle—412 
— and revolution—56, 67, 178, 390, 
412,  529-30 
— classes and class struggle during 
transition period from capitalism 
to socialism—127, 553, 614 See also Chartism; Revolution, proleta­
rian,  socialist; Working-class movement 
Clergy—102, 118, 272, 274, 404-05, 407, 
479 
— place of in social hierarchy of 
feudal society— 118, 272, 274,404, 
409, 451, 478, 480 
— as representative of ideology of 
feudalism—155, 272, 402-05, 412-
14, 415 
— lesser—405, 441 
— in bourgeois society—118, 274 
— and lay education—22-23, 262, 
404, 412 
See also Church; Papacy 
Communism (social formation), communist 
transformation of  society 
— prospects of proletarian revolution 
and building communism—70, 
116-17 
— material prerequisites for commu­
nist transformation of society—56-
57, 266, 299, 429, 500 
— international character of com­
munist transformation of socie­
ty—56,  70, 116-17, 281, 553 
— transition period from capitalism 
to communism (socialism)—127, 
275, 281, 298-99, 300, 331, 553, 
614 
— abolition of private ownership of 
means of production—78, 281, 
331, 422, 553 
— production—268, 501-02, 553-54 
— labour—299, 553, 554 
— social relations, social system 
— 127,  281, 298, 387, 422 
— elimination of class distinctions, 
classless society—127, 281, 297, 
331, 385,420,484, 551-52 
— communist transformation of soci­
ety and the state—57-58, 281-87, 
302, 333, 422, 486 
— social consciousness—127, 387 
See also Dictatorship of the proletariat; 
Revolution, proletarian, socialist 
Communism, scientific—127, 277, 387 
Communism, Utopian, of Münzer —409, 
413, 414, 422, 423, 432, 461 
Communist League 
— fundamental principles, docu­
ments—127, 277, 281-86, 387, 
626, 627 

=====第792页=====
Subject Index 769 
— tactical principles—280-86, 374-
77, 469-70 
— organisational principles, Rules— 
277, 372, 374-76, 626, 627, 634-37 
— during 1848-49 revolution—224-
26, 277-78, 371 
— after defeat of 1848-49 révolu- . 
tion—277-86, 349-52, 371-77,483-
85, 535-37,  596-601,  608-23, 
630-37 
— struggle against Willich-Schapper 
sectarian group—483, 484, 535-
36, 625-29, 633 
— and workers' educational so­
cieties—376, 483, 535-36 
— and petty-bourgeois democra­
cy—3-4,  277-86, 345-47, 372-74 
— its communities—277-78, 371, 
374, 375, 376-77, 626, 633 
Communist party—see Party, proletarian 
Community 
— village or peasant—409, 451, 478, 
480 
— urban—406-07 
— and the state—177, 280, 285 
— disintegration of under capital­
ism—285 
— in Ireland—569 
— in Scotland—567-69 
— in Switzerland—177, 286 
Consciousness—  69-70,  127, 244, 275, 
387, 487 
Conspiracy—  314-21,  322 
See also Blanquism, Blanquists 
Constitution, bourgeois—77, 78, 85-86, 
101, 130, 141, 157, 237, 257, 522, 526, 
567-80 
See also Democracy, bourgeois; Parlia­
ment; State 
Contradiction—  58, 68, 85, 238, 248, 255, 
288, 292, 306, 322, 330, 333, 553 
— between productive forces and 
production relations—135, 510 
— class—58, 238, 255, 281, 288, 298, 
306, 333, 415, 470, 486, 554 
— between labour and capital—300 
— contradictory theories, views—79, 
514-15,  577-78 
— elimination of social contradictions 
as a result of communist transfor­
mation of society—281, 298, 300, 
553-54 
Corn Laws, repeal of—  34, 52,-264, 273, 274, 275, 293, 296, 307, 340, 502, 
510-12,  515 
Corvée— 120, 403-04, 409, 451 
Counter-revolution—70, 89, 101, 107-08, 
110, 132, 151, 239, 279 
Courts, judiciary system—274, 409 
— feudal—404, 409, 412, 447, 448, 
451 
— in bourgeois society—74, 79, 156, 
258, 274-75, 317, 577 
— military—347, 568, 569 
Craftsmen, handicrafts—293, 400, 408, 
429, 466, 485, 584 
Credit—  49, 59, 60-62, 74, 363, 364, 365, 
503 
See also Banks, bankers; Bank of Eng­
land;  Bank of France 
Crusades—439 
Cult of  heroes,  of genius—  245,  246, 302, 
306-08 
Cult of nature—244-45 
D 
Danish-Prussian war of 1848-50—395-94, 
507, 511, 526-27 
Day labourers—407, 408 
See_also Farm-labourers 
Democracy (political and state sys­
tem)—280, 442-43, 580 
Democracy, bourgeois 
— as form of dictatorship of 
bourgeoisie—280, 282-83 
— illusory character of bourgeois-
democratic order—78-79, 567-79 
— as political trend—285, 577-78 
Democracy, petty-bourgeois (movement) 
—81-82,  98-104, 163-64, 169, 190, 
225, 279-87, 372, 373 
Demography—see Population 
Denmark— 392-94 
See also Schleswig-Holstein question 
Despotism, military; dictatorship, milit­
ary—8, 10, 11, 25, 76, 107, 124, 
154-55 
See also Bonapartism 
Development—  68, 97, 288, 299, 306,413, 
553 
— of productive forces—135, 263-66, 
292, 295, 299, 429, 509-10, 554 
— social—156, 297-99, 553 
— and class struggle—69, 288 

=====第793页=====
770 Subject Index 
Dictatorship, bourgeois—  67, 77, 122, 123, 
125, 131, 577-78 
Dictatorship of the proletariat 
— historical necessity and tasks 
of—69,  237, 275-76, 281, 293, 298, 
300, 387 
— as the state in transition period 
from capitalism to socialism—127, 
614 
— state centralisation of indus­
try—281,  300 
— role and significance of proleta­
rian party—634 
— and abolition of classes-—127, 281, 
387 
— and peasantry—122, 284-85 
— use of the term "dictatorship of the 
proletariat"—69, 122, 127, 387, 
614 
See also Communism (social forma­
tion);  Party, proletarian; Revolution, pro­
letarian, socialist; Working class 
Dictatorship, revolutionary-democratic— 
122, 283, 286 
See also Jacobin dictatorship, Jacobins 
Division of labour—120, 316, 404, 591 
E 
Economic crises—135, 234, 264-65, 275, 
294, 299, 490, 500, 509, 584, 586, 589 
— overproduction as basic phenome­
non of—264-65, 275, 338-39, 490-
91, 493-94, 501-02, 584, 585 
— in industry and other branches 
of economy—52, 58-60, 263-64, 
296-97,  338, 340, 341, 492-93,495, 
497-98,  585, 587 
— forecasting of—263-65, 275, 296-
97, 340, 501 
— periodical character of (industrial 
cycles)—134, 275, 294, 296-97, 
299, 497, 501 
— prosperity as phase of cycle—134, 
135, 263-64, 272, 296, 297, 299, 
490-91,  497, 499, 500, 502, 503, 
507-10 
— depression—134, 339, 490, 509 
— and condition of working 
people—134, 273, 275-76, 296, 
297, 509 
— and prospects of revolution —  52, 59, 134-35, 264, 265, 275, 299, 
340-41,  497, 503, 510 
— crisis of 1846-47^52-53, 263-64, 
491-97 
Economic laws—  295-96,  305-08, 502 
Education—  307,  404, 412 
Electoral  system  (in bourgeois state)—294, 
577 
Emancipation—549-50, 553-54 
Emancipation of working class—57, 276, 
298, 360, 363, 553 
— as workers' own task—275 
— and petty bourgeoisie, peasantry 
—27-28 
— and struggle for national indepen­
dence in Europe—369 
See also Revolution, proletarian, socialist 
Emigration—  378-79,  385-86, 392, 533, 
596-97,  598 
— bourgeois-democraçic, petty-bour­
geois—372-74, 528-32 
— proletarian—378, 386, 485, 597-
601, 608-10, 617-19 
— German—15-16, 196-97, 226, 240, 
260, 349-53, 370, 372-74, 376-79, 
381-86,  390-91,  504, 506, 520-22, 
533-34, 596-601, 608-10, 612-13, 
616-23,  631-33, 637 
— Hungarian—240, 376, 385 
— Italian—385 
England—116, 251-56, 272-73, 293-94, 
297-98 
— population—298 
— Irish immigration—309 
— Wars of the Roses—443 
— in 16th century, Reformation— 
254 
— in 17th century—252, 273-74 
— coup  d'état  of 1688 (Glorious Rev­
olution)—252-54 
— in 18th century—253, 291-92 
— industrial revolution—254, 292-94 
— as leading capitalist country of 19th 
century, its industrial monopoly in 
world market—56, 116, 134, 254, 
255, 265, 293-94, 295, 509 
— in first half of 19th century (before 
1848)—292, 491-92, 500 
— in 1848—58, 263, 338-39, 496 
— after 1849, industrial and commer­
cial boom—263, 264, 272-73, 296, 
299, 338, 339, 401, 497, 498-503, 
507-09 

=====第794页=====
Subject Index 771 
— industry—253, 254, 263, 272-73, 
288, 291, 293, 297, 335, 339, 492, 
498-501 
— finances—252 
— transport—273, 295, 491, 492, 
494, 496-97, 498 
— towns—443, 503 
— landownership, agriculture—254, 
335, 443, 493, 502-03 
— trade—134, 264, 295, 296, 340, 
509 
— economic crises—52, 132, 134, 
135, 264, 295, 296, 338-40, 359, 
491-94, 496, 509 
— classes, class struggle—255, 273, 
274-75,  412 
— social and political system—251-
56, 272-73, 274-75, 292, 293, 295-
96, 379, 382, 511-12, 572 
— Parliament—252-53, 255, 510 
— legislation—34, 63, 264, 272-300, 
310 
— electoral system—255, 292-95, 
298, 310, 340 
— ruling classes' political par­
ties—125,  292, 340, 510, 512 
— bourgeois-democratic movements 
in England—116, 251, 264, 273. 
291-92,  293-97, 298, 511-12, 
612 
— revolutionary movements and 
prospects of revolution—255, 264, 
299 
— science, literature—302, 513-14 
— religion, church—254,414, 512-13 
— colonial policy—265, 266, 295, 
491, 505-07, 512-13 
— foreign policy—56, 76, 252, 259-
60, 379, 382 
— and Austria and other European 
states—76, 252, 260, 340, 394, 
511, 514 
— and USA—501-02 
— and Central Europe—394 
See also Aristocracy, English; Army, 
English; Bourgeoisie, English; Char­
tism;  Corn Laws; Labour movement in 
England;  Petty bourgeoisie, English; 
Tories; Whigs; Working class in Eng­
land 
English bourgeois revolution of 17th cen­
tury—  252-55,  429 
English philosophy—252 Epoch—  99, 301-02, 306, 411, 478, 517, 
542, 549, 551 
Equality 
— as demand of masses in Middle 
Ages—413-15, 422, 428-29, 438-
39, 471 
— as demand of bourgeoisie—567 
— bourgeois—589 
— as understood by Utopian socialists 
and Utopian communists—422-23 
— as interpreted by Christian reli­
gion—413-15,  471 
Estates, social—118-19, 431, 444, 586, 
588-89,  591 
— in feudal society and under preser­
vation of feudal survivals—151, 
402-05,  409-12, 431, 437, 441 
— burghers—149 
— nobility—406, 442, 443-44 
— knights—403, 479 
— clergy—402-05, 413, 479 
— princes,—480 
— peasantry—461 
— judiciary—404 
— assembly of estates, representation 
of estates—402, 431, 527 
— tiers état (third estate)—76 
— and bourgeois revolution—101 
Europe—  237,  358-59, 360, 363, 393, 
394, 482, 554 
— prospects of revolution during 
reaction (after 1848-49)—16, 70, 
116-17,  134, 252, 279, 340, 369, 
377 
See also Revolution of 1848-49 in 
Europe 
Exploitation—272 
— pre-capitalist forms—272, 292 
— usurious—57, 122, 361 
— capitalist—57, 121-22, 272, 288-
89, 293, 295-96, 361 
— of labour-power by capital—271-
72, 273-74, 276-93 
— of female and child labour—288, 
291 
— of peasants—57, 121-22 
— of petty bourgeoisie—57 
— attempts at justification of by ide­
ologists of propertied classes— 
272 
See also Child labour; Female labour; 
Ten Hours'  Bill;  Wage labour; Women's 
question; Working day 

=====第795页=====
772 Subject Index 
F 
Family and marriage—106, 118, 130, 567 
Farm labourers—375 
See also Agriculture; Agricultural work­
ers; Day labourers 
Female labour—245, 274, 288-91 
Feudalism 
— agriculture as key branch of pro­
duction—401 
— division of labour, handicrafts, 
trade—265,  266, 400, 401, 403, 
404,  408, 429, 465 
— taxation—330-31 
— feudal hierarchy, feudal privileges 
—402-03,  407, 419, 443 
— military system, feudatory sys­
tem—402-03,  404, 551-52 
— legal system, lawyers—403-04, 
406,  409-10, 412 
— classes, class struggle—402-10, 
412-13,  415, 428, 481 
— feudal lords, nobility, aristocracy, 
knights—403,  404, 443 
— bourgeoisie—406-07 
— origin of proletariat—408, 409, 
422,  461 
— vagrancy and laws of 13th-16th 
centuries—407-08, 433, 478 
— science, education, invention— 
400,  412 
— ideology, world outlook—404 
— religion, church, clergy—403-06, 
412,  414, 512-13 
— origin of capitalist relations, decay 
and collapse of feudalism—120, 
155, 284-85, 407, 408, 414, 419, 
461, 471 
— survivals of feudalism—173-74, 
280, 307, 550, 551 
See also Burghers; Estates, social; 
Guilds; Middle Ages; Peasantry; 
Plebeians, plebs; Serfdom;  Society,  feudal; 
Town,  medieval; Village 
Flagellants—414 
Foreign trade—  259,  265, 268, 401, 
504-05 
See also Trade, commerce; World mar­
ket 
Fragmentation of  land,  parcellation—120, 
121, 155, 254, 262, 335, 336,  503,  514, 
551 
— small-plot peasants—550,551,552 France—18-19, 54-55, 120, 544, 553, 
554,  ,555,  563 
— formation of French nation, na­
tional character—133, 329, 410, 
507, 508, 561 
— economy—50, 52, 59-60, 115, 116-
17, 118-22, 125, 132-34, 254-55, 
329, 492, 507-09 
— taxation—17-18, 117-19, 121-23, 
133, 262, 327-29, 509 
— social and political system—443 
— state apparatus—115-16 
— classes, class relations—116-17, 
412 
— in Middle Ages (up to 17th cen­
tury)—130, 328, 402, 413, 443 
— in 17th-18th centuries—118-19, 
252, 253, 254 
— French Revolution of 18th century 
—see French revolution of 1789-94 
— during Thermidorian reaction and 
Directory—22-23, 122 
— during Consulate and First Em­
pire—52,  118-19, 155, 329 
— during Restoration (1815-30)—22-
23, 61, 95, 114-15, 118-19, 122, 
124, 128-29, 263, 316 
— July revolution of 1830—54, 55, 
68-69,  294, 316, 578 
— July monarchy (1830-48)—49-52, 
54-55,  57-58, 60, 66, 95, 108, 
114-15,117-18,124,131,251,252, 
253, 294, 354-59, 360, 364 
— economic development in 1830-
48—49,  50,  52-53,  56-57, 59, 60, 
357-58,  492, 496-97, 508 
— internal policy of July monar­
chy—50-53,  320-21 
— Chamber of Deputies—48-50 
— bourgeois liberals (dynastic oppos­
ition)—48,  53, 116 
— bourgeois republicans (National 
party)—53,  72, 76, 95, 316 
— petty-bourgeois democrats (Ré­
forme party)—53, 316, 320, 322 
— republicans, their insurrections in 
1830s—48,  315-17, 320 
— political crisis of 1846-47—51-53, 
321-22 
— foreign policy of July monar­
chy—51-52 
— and other European  states—51, 
52, 155, 156, 252, 546-47 

=====第796页=====
Subject Index 773 
See also Bourgeoisie, French; June insur­
rection of Paris proletariat in 1848; Petty 
bourgeoisie, French; Revolution of 1848 
in France. Second Republic; Socialism, 
socialists in France; Uprisings of Lyons 
weavers in 1831 and 1834; Working  class 
in France; Working-class movement in 
France 
Franconia—426, 452, 468, 471,472,473, 
475 
Fraternal Democrats—637 
Freedom, its illusory nature in bourgeois 
society—333,  530, 567-70, 572, 577-
78, 591 
— right of assembly and associa­
tion—90-91,  569, 577-78 
— use of bourgeois-democratic free­
doms by working class and 
masses—79, 275-76, 298 
Freedom of trade—116, 271-73, 295-96, 
298, 307 
See also Corn Laws; Manchester  school 
Freemasons— 306 
French revolution of 1789-94—68-69, 
253-54, 285, 327-29, 412, 549-50 
— abolition of feudal landownership 
and feudal obligations—61, 120, 
439-40 
— and bourgeoisie—68-69, 549-50 
— role of masses—555 
— and peasantry—21-22, 61, 364, 
549-50 
— and embryonic proletariat—554 
— revolutionary wars—542, 543, 
544-47,  549-50, 555, 556, 560-61 
— Convention—94, 103, 285, 542, 
544-47 
— counter-revolutionary mutinies, 
Vendée— 130-31,  543, 544, 563 
— terror—22, 105 
— and counter-revolutionary Europe­
an powers—155-56, 242, 254-55, 
479, 542 
See also Girondists; Jacobin dictatorship, 
Jacobins 
G 
Genoa—265 
German Confederation (1815-66)—393, 
527, 557 — Federal Diet—7, 258, 525-26 
Germanic tribes—244, 443 
- German philosophy—  248,  422, 487-89 
See also Hegel, Hegelianism 
German Workers' Society in Brussels—374 
German Workers' Educational Society in 
London (1840-1918)—42, 226, 370, 
374, 483, 533-36, 598-602, 610, 618, 
623, 626, 630, 633 
German Workers' Society in Paris (1840s 
and 1850s)—631 
Germany—  242,  243, 246, 392, 394, 395, 
410, 411, 478, 480, 487-88 
— in Middle Ages—399-482 
— and French revolution of 1789-94 
and Napoleonic wars—155, 156, 
242, 412, 479 
— survivals of feudalism—155, 285, 
551 
— oppositional movement in early 
19th century—150, 157 
— fragmentation of country and task 
of its unification—8, 258-59, 347, 
395, 401-02, 411, 432, 442, 455, 
461, 480-82, 528 
— industry—155-56, 170, 176, 246, 
400, 401, 403, 411, 479, 480, 507 
— handicrafts—248, 400, 406, 485 
— guilds—155, 406-07 
— transport—155-56, 401 
— agriculture and agricultural rela­
tions—155,  401, 479 
— finance, taxation—13, 402-04, 
405-06,  409, 414 
— trade—155-56, 176, 339-40, 400-
02,406,411,479,480,507 
— estates, classes—402 
— princes—7, 402-03, 404-05, 409, 
410,  414, 415-19, 421, 435,441-45, 
447, 449, 478-82, 526 
— bureaucracy—151, 152, 172, 182, 
187, 188, 237, 280, 406, 409, 48T 
— clergy—155, 402-07, 409, 410, 
415,  417, 419, 442, 478-80 
— craftsmen—177, 280, 403, 407, 
408,  481, 485 
— intelligentsia—224 
— philistinism—175, 179, 187, 188, 
192, 242, 243, 246, 417 
— political system—285, 419, 481 
— legislation, court—7, 13, 409, 
450-51 

=====第797页=====
774 Subject Index 
— bourgeois liberalism of 1840s—13, 
152, 157, 159, 278, 279, 407, 415, 
416,  418, 488, 489, 525, 596 
— democrats, democratic move­
ment—8,  149-50, 225, 258, 279-
86, 345, 372, 408, 486-87, 536, 595, 
605 
— prospects and character of revolu­
tion in Germany in 1850s—8, 13, 
16, 279, 302, 394, 482, 553-54 
— religion and church—155, 405, 
412-19,  422, 441, 478, 479 
— education—404 
— press, press legislation, reactionary 
censorship—7, 388, 487-89 
— literature—177, 246, 302, 441, 489 
— and Austria—7-8, 10 
— and Denmark—393-94 
— and England—340 
— and Prussia—7-8, 10, 16, 526 
— and Russia—259, 260 
— and Switzerland—177, 268-69 
See also Bourgeoisie, German; Peasants, 
German; Petty bourgeoisie, German; 
Prussia; Revolution of 1848-49 in 
Germany; Working class in Germany; 
Working-class movement in Germany 
Girondists— 544 
Gold,  discovery of in Australia and Cali­
fornia—265,  504-05 
Gotha Party (Germany, 1849)—525, 526 
Government securities—49, 60 
Greece—511 
Guilds—155,  400, 406-08, 465-66, 
550 
H 
Hanseatic League—400 
Hegel, Hegelianism—248, 267, 302, 422, 
487-89,  530 
Heresy, heretics—  413-16,  418-20, 423-
24 
See also Albigenses; Anabaptists; 
Flagellants; Lollards; Taborites; Wal-
denses 
Hesse—  469,  471-73 
Hesse-Cassel—  507,  526-28 
Historiography 
— as expression of ideology of ruling 
classes—307, 471 
— idealistic background of before 
Marx—251,  255-56, 306, 411 — bourgeois, in 19th century—253-
58, 285, 301, 310, 428, 471 
— petty-bourgeois (democratic and 
socialist)—221,  247-50 
History—126, 255, 271, 306, 311, 399, 
413, 485, 489 
Holy Alliance—14, 15, 16, 28, 369, 392, 
394 
Holy Roman Empire of the German nation 
(962-1806)- 7, 155, 402, 405, 406, 
415, 442, 481 
Hungary—8, 394, 433, 438-39, 482 
— national liberation war of 1848-
49—97,  101, 152, 162, 190, 196, 
200, 547-48 
See also Peasant war in Hungary under 
leadership of Dôzsa (1514); Revolu­
tion of 1848-49 in Hungary 
Huns—244 
Hussite movement—413-15, 420, 428 
See also Taborites 
I 
Ideas—127, 387, 411, 427, 470, 489 
Ideology (as an idealistic conception of 
reality)—411 
Imm igration— 5 04 
Industrial exhibition of 1851 in Lon­
don—  499-500 
Industrial revolution—293 
Industry, capitalist—288-89, 295, 404, 
408,  490-91 
— and social progress—238, 299, 
300, 485,  500-01,  554 
— and exploitation of female and 
child labour—288-89 
— and science—245 
— and trade—116-17, 264, 265, 
295 
— and agriculture—254-55 
— and taxes—330, 331, 335 
— and classes, class struggle—237-38, 
299-300 
— and political supremacy of bour­
geoisie — 293-94 
— development of as a material pre­
requisite of communist transfor­
mation of society—266, 299-300 
500-01,  554 
Inquisition—109 
Instruments of production—121, 273, 554 

=====第798页=====
Subject Index 775 
Insurance—  329,  330 
Ireland—  292,  327, 492, 512 
Italy—  254,  265, 316, 394, 401, 413, 514, 
547 
See also Austro-Italian war of 1848-49; 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Italian states 
J 
Jacobin dictatorship, Jacobins—57-58, 81-
82, 103, 156, 275, 285, 545 
Jesuits—118, 124, 128 
July monarchy—see France, July 
monarchy 
July revolution in France—see  France,  July 
Revolution of 1830 
June insurrection of Paris proletariat in 
1848—25, 34, 57, 67-70, 71, 93, 
98-100, 106, 149, 237, 356, 362, 368-
69, 390 
— causes of—66-70, 87, 104, 368 
— heroism of working class—67 
— and petty bourgeoisie, petty-
bourgeois democrats—27, 57, 68, 
69, 71, 74-76, 98, 106, 322-23, 366 
— and peasantry—57, 69, 368 
— role of National and Mobile 
Guards in suppression of—67-68, 
76, 97 
— establishment of military dictator­
ship of Cavaignac, bourgeois repri­
sals against insurgents—68, 71, 
108, 261-62, 368, 568, 578 
— its defeat and strengthening of 
European counter-revolution—70, 
368, 369 
— and proletarian press—68-69 
Jurisprudence, lawyers—272, 296, 404, 
412 See also Chartism; Luddism 
Labour productivity—553-56 
Labour time under communism—299-300 
Land,  as instrument of production 
— 120-21 
Landed property—120-21, 191, 254, 264, 
284, 294, 327, 335-36, 443, 461, 503, 
515 
Law—122, 125, 136, 156, 280, 328, 
404-05,  517 
— and communist transformation of 
society—57-58 
See also Jurisprudence, lawyers; Legisla­
tion 
Legislation—  86, 107, 155, 274, 322, 409, 
569 
See also Law; Napoleonic code 
Liberalism—  73, 83, 159, 278-79, 407, 
595 
Literature— 299-300, 310, 489 
— folklore—149, 203 
— American—312 
— Ancient Greek—258 
— English—206, 300 
— French—135, 137, 138-39, 203 
— German—242, 245-46, 301, 302, 
441 
— Italian—413 
— Spanish—63 
Loans (state)—11, 15, 49-50 
Lollards—414 
Lombardy—93,  514 
London—  265,  294, 401, 506 
Luddism—292 
Lumpenproletariat —51, 62, 165, 168, 
317, 358, 365, 407-08 
Lutheranism— 411-20, 423-27, 441-42, 
446 
See also Protestantism; Reformation 
K 
Knights—  246,  402-04, 438, 442 
Knights' insurrections of 1522-23 in Ger­
many—  442-45,  481 
Labour aristocracy—295-96, 513-14 
Labour movement in England—288, 292, 
293, 294, 298 M 
Man,  individual, person—99, 148-49, 
245, 305-06, 333, 469-70, 486, 523-24, 
562 
Manchester school—271 
See also Bourgeoisie, English, Free 
Trade 
Market—  295,  503-04 
See also Foreign  trade;  Trade, commerce; 
World market 

=====第799页=====
776 Subject Index 
Mazzinism, Mazzinists—513-14, 529, 532 
Means of communication—266, 411, 504-
07, 553 
See also Railways 
Mexico—132, 260, 507 
Middle Ages—412-13 
See also Feudalism 
Military art, military science—154, 403, 
543, 545, 550-56 
See also Army 
Monarchy—  65-67,  114, 443 
— absolute—77, 237, 248, 253, 267, 
279, 412, 419, 443, 481, 512, 552 
— constitutional (bourgeois)—54, 57, 
65, 66-67, 70, 114, 131, 251-56, 
269, 413, 443 
— based on social estates—253, 443 
— and religion—412 
Monasteries, monks—405, 407, 413 
See also Church; Clergy 
Monetary system—587, 588, 589 
Money as means of circulation—11-12, 
584, 586, 587, 590 
— metal (gold, silver)—11, 587, 590 
Mortgage (in bourgeois society)—57, 
120-22,  158, 502 
— and working-class party pro­
gramme—97, 190 
See also Usurious capital 
Mühlhausen—  424,  469-73, 480 
Mysticism—see Religion, mysticism, re­
ligious 
N 
Napoleonic code (Code Napoleon)—155 
Napoleonic wars— 260, 545, 547, 548, 
550, 555, 560 
Nation—  51, 237, 356, 394, 406, 411, 
480,  500, 561, 626 
National debt—  49, 60, 115, 116, 252, 
286, 526 
Needs—  69, 255, 266, 401, 403-05, 410, 
414, 442 
— of bourgeoisie—255 
— of proletariat—69 
— and revolution—69, 266 
— under communism — 266 
Netherlands—  394,  400, 492, 499, 506 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung— 5, 68, 156, 171, 
181, 187, 202, 351, 388, 605 See also Revolution of 1848-49 in Ger­
many 
New York—  265,  506 
Nineteenth century—501 
Nobility—125, 155, 414, 442-43 
See also Aristocracy; Feudalism; Nobility 
(in different countries) 
Nobility, German—151, 152, 155, 172, 
237, 404, 410 
— in Middle Ages, knights—401-06, 
409, 410, 433, 442-45, 479, 480 
— and Reformation—415-17, 431, 
434, 437-38, 441-45, 447,  448,451, 
452,  454-55, 461-62, 478-81 
— in 1850s—7 
— and bourgeoisie—237 
— and peasantry—443-44, 445 
See also Revolution of 1848-49 in 
Germany 
Nobility, Italian—548 
Nobility, Polish—443, 444 
O 
Officials—118-19, 409, 575-76 
See also Bureaucracy 
P 
Pacific Ocean—  265,  266r 499, 504, 505 
Panama—265 
Pantheism—305, 421 
Papacy—  92, 405, 413, 480, 513-14 
Paris—  24, 52-53,  316, 359, 564 
Parliament (in the bourgeois state)—118, 
123 
See also England 
Party, political—  53, 97-99, 163, 263, 372, 
427, 441-42, 469-70, 525, 530 
— party point of view—530 
Party, proletarian—  279,  280, 320, 345-46, 
354, 371, 394 
— vanguard role of—227, 280, 416 
— necessity of organising proletariat 
into independent political party— 
282 
— as necessary condition for victory 
of proletarian revolution—634 
— programme demand of socialisa­
tion of means of production—78 
— tactics—280-86 

=====第800页=====
Subject Index 777 
— and masses—374-76 
— and petty-bourgeois democracy 
—280-83,  286, 374 
— party discipline—635 
— propaganda, agitation—634 
— party point of view—530 
See also Communist League 
Patriotic War of i8/?(Russia)  —260,  546, 
550-51 
Peasantry 
— in feudal society—409-10, 414, 
478, 488 
— and usury—57, 121, 122, 282 
— in bourgeois-democratic revolu­
tion—57,  61, 80, 96, 119, 123, 150, 
262, 284, 482, 515 
— under capitalism—122 
— sluggishness of—134, 245, 263, 
509 
— and bourgeoisie—69, 122, 156, 
280, 284 
— and working class and working-
class movement; as ally of pro­
letariat—29-30, 57, 69, 96, 122, 
125, 285, 361 
— and proletarian revolution and 
proletarian state—57, 122, 285 
Peasants, French—  49, 52, 54, 78, 80, 
118-23,  125, 134, 263, 264, 286, 335,. 
509, 551 
— during French revolution of 
1789-94—80, 120, 155, 284, 550 
— and 1848 revolution — see Revolu­
tion of 1848 in France. Second 
Republic 
Peasants, German—13, 177, 190, 280, 
409-10, 429, 478-79 
— in Middle Ages—401,402-06, 408-
10, 414-19,425,427,429,431,441, 
446, 447, 459, 461-62, 465, 466, 
469, 478, 479,  480-81,  482 
— serf peasants and bondsmen 
—402-04, 409, 410, 415, 478 
— liberation from serf bondage 
—282,  444, 446-47, 451, 461 
— agricultural workers, farm-
labourers—280, 375 
— and nobility—403-04, 443-44, 447, 
449, 454 
— and bourgeoisie—280, 437, 481 
— and working-class party—375-76 
— peasant movements—410, 415, 
428-29,  430-38, 439-40, 441 See also Peasant War in Germany in 
1524-25 
Peasants, Swiss—127-28, 129, 221 
Peasant War in Germany in 1524-
25—399,  405-08, 409-10, 411-19, 425-
28, 431, 439-40, 441, 442,444-45, 446, 
448, 451-52, 459, 461, 468,  469-71, 
478-82 
— causes of—402,403,404,405,406, 
409-10, 428, 468, 475 
— peasants' demands, Twelve Arti­
cles—446, 447, 448, 450, 451, 461, 
475 
— radical wing of peasant-plebeian 
movement—405, 407, 408, 409, 
410,411,413,414,415,416,417, 
418, 419, 420, 421, 422, 424, 425, 
427, 432, 441, 451, 461, 465-66, 
468 
— and burghers, Heilbronn pro­
gramme—406, 407, 408, 411, 413, 
414, 415, 416, 417, 418, 419, 420, 
421, 424, 425, 426, 427, 441, 460, 
461, 465, 471, 479 
— in Swabia and Franconia—426, 
432, 440, 446-68, 469, 471, 472, 
473, 475 
— in Thuringia—408, 418, 421, 423, 
425, 426, 452, 469, 471, 473, 475 
— in Alpine lands of Austria—475-77 
— repressive terror—419, 425, 448, 
453, 460, 462, 463, 464, 465, 469, 
472, 474, 476 
— causes of failure, consequences, 
lessons—399, 401, 410, 413, 429, 
435, 447, 450, 454, 455, 458, 459-
60,461,462,465,466,476,478-82 
Peasant war in Hungary under leader­
ship of Dôzsa—  433, 437-40, 482 
Petty bourgeoisie—150, 177, 361 
— in feudal society—246 
— in bourgeois society—28,  30-31, 
57, 79, 126, 361 
— and bourgeoisie—151 
— in bourgeois-democratic revolu­
tion—119-20,  150-51,  164-66, 178, 
280-87,  408 
— and peasantry—150-51, 176, 280, 
284 
— and working class, working-class 
socialist movement—27,  30-31,  56, 
69, 71, 96, 103, 125,  150-51,  176, 
287, 361 

=====第801页=====
778 Subject Index 
— as proletariat's ally —  30-31,  57, 69, 
96, 125,  150-51,  281, 282 
— and proletarian revolution—27-
28, 30-31,  57 
— world outlook—30-31, 126, 177, 
292 
See also Democracy, petty-bourgeois 
Petty bourgeoisie, English—150, 151, 292, 
514 
Petty bourgeoisie, French—49, 51, 100, 
103-07,  110, 116, 117,  120-21,  124, 
135-37,  144, 150, 151, 263, 279, 316, 
507, 516-17, 525 
Petty bourgeoisie, German—149-50, 156, 
176-79,  237, 246, 277, 279-87, 408, 
410, 481, 527-28 
Philanthropy—  78, 272, 298, 415, 419 
Philistinism—  246,  429, 529 
Philosophy—  267,  272, 412, 413 
See also English philosophy; German 
philosophy; Hegel, Hegelianism 
Pietism, pietists— 165 
Plebeians, plebs (in Middle Ages)—266, 
399, 405, 407-08, 414-18, 422, 426-27, 
432-33,  434, 435, 441, 457, 478, 480 
— as predecessors of proletar­
iat—408,  415, 422 
— plebeian asceticism—428-29 
See also Asceticism; Pre-proletariat 
Poland,  Polish question—8, 15, 58, 196, 
394, 442, 443 
Political struggle—5, 150, 412, 470, 634 
Poor Konrad (peasant alliance in Ger­
many in 16th century)—431, 433, 
436-38,  440 
Poor Laws—  294,  310 
See also Workhouses 
Population—401,  554-55 
Portugal—  254,  270 
Preconditions—305-08 
— of proletarian revolution—553 
Pre-proletariat—  408,  409, 414-15, 422, 
461, 470-71 
See also Plebeians, plebs 
Press, the—5, 137, 518 
— reactionary laws on; censorship 
of—14,  39-40, 107, 136-38, 517, 
518-19,  568-69, 571 
— freedom of—14, 57, 125, 569, 577 
— bourgeois  — 503 
— democratic—150 
— proletarian — see Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung Principles—577-78 
Private property—137, 285, 517 
— transformation of feudal property 
into bourgeois—56-57 
— feudal—284 
— bourgeois (capitalist) —  57, 96, 118, 
330-31,  414-15, 531-32, 567 
— abolition of as condition for eman­
cipation of proletariat—78, 92, 
130, 281, 286, 300, 331, 387, 422, 
553 
— and theories of bourgeois and 
petty-bourgeois economists—286, 
330, 331, 336, 415, 422, 531-32 
Production—49, 96, 115, 118, 127, 266, 
273, 553, 555 
— and social intercourse—96, 266, 
470,  475 
— and social relations, social sys­
tem—96,  127, 363 
— and classes—96, 127, 470 
— and the state — 49 
— and military science  — 552-55 
— and social consciousness—470 
— spiritual production—118 
— and social revolution—266, 363, 
509-10 
— under communism—266, 501 
See also Instruments of production; Pro­
duction relations; Productive forces 
Production relations—59, 470, 510 
— and classes, class struggle—127, 
387 
— and the state, political rela­
tions—127, 387 
— and forms of social conscious­
ness—127, 387 
— contradictions between them and 
productive forces as basis of pro­
letarian revolution—135, 510 
— in bourgeois society—55-56, 59, 
78, 127, 387, 510 
— and proletariat, communist trans­
formation of society—56, 59, 127, 
387, 510 
See also Basis and superstructure 
Productive forces—135, 264-66, 286, 292, 
295, 299, 429, 510, 554 
— and classes—281, 292 
— under feudalism—479 
— under capitalism—135, 255, 264-
65, 286, 292, 295, 299,429,  500-01, 
510 

=====第802页=====
Subject Index 779 
— contradictions between them and 
production relations under capi­
talism—135,  295, 299, 510 
— contradictions between them and 
production relations as basis of 
proletarian revolution—135, 510 
— development of as material pre­
condition of communist transfor­
mation of society—266, 299, 429, 
500 
— under communism—266,281,286 
Progress—  292-93,  297, 300, 404, 418, 
461, 482, 485 
Proletariat—see Working class 
Property—  56, 78, 336, 422, 517 
See also Private property 
Protectionism—  57, 116, 252, 295-96 
Protestantism—253-55, 415-20, 441-42 
See also Church; Lutheranism; Refor­
mation 
Proudhonism—  487,  508, 541, 585, 588 
Prussia 
— and French revolution of 1789-
94__155 ( 156 
— 1815-early 1848—277 
— in 1850—7-9, 12-13, 14-16, 267-
68, 583 
— industry—526 
— railways—15, 155 
— finances, budget, taxation—14-15, 
259, 267-68, 526 
— trade—155 
— agriculture and agrarian rela­
tions—155-56 
— political system and constitution 
— 14, 237-38, 248, 267-68, 526 
— bureaucracy—12, 208-09, 237, 
488, 552 
— nobility, aristocracy—12, 583 
— law, legal procedure—9, 12-13, 
157, 257 
— foreign policy—7-9, 268, 269-70, 
369, 382, 527 
— and Austria—499-500, 507, 525-
28, 583 
— and England—252 
— and France—16, 252, 268 
— and Germany—7-9, 10, 16, 526-27 
— and Poland—51 
— and Russia—3, 8, 528 
See also Army, Prussian; Danish-
Prussian war of 1848-5&; Germany; 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Germany; Working-class movement in Germany 
Prussian-Swiss conflict over Neuchâtel —15-
16, 260, 261 
Q 
Quantity and quality—592 
R 
Radicalism, radicals—330 
Railways—  50, 155, 338, 491, 506, 554, 
558 
Reform—  80, 261, 298, 330, 331, 513-16 
— and revolution, permanent revolu­
tion—285-86 
Reformation—  254,  412, 413, 481, 482 
See also Lutheranism; Protestantism 
Reformation in Germany—411-27, 441-
46, 469-72, 475, 476, 478-83 
Reformers, bourgeois and petty-bour­
geois—  101,  110, 126, 310, 419, 424 
Religion—  94, 98, 118, 130, 244, 272, 
412-14, 417, 421-22, 512-13 
— in slave-owning society—244 
— in feudal society—411-15, 512 
— in bourgeois society—94, 98, 118, 
253-54 
— and science, philosophy—412 
— mysticism, religious—413, 414-15, 
420,  441 
— history and significance of criti­
cism of—421-22 
— deification of nature—245, 246 
See also Sects, religious 
Rent of land—120, 409, 443, 586, 589 
Republican movement—70, 71, 74-75, 78, 
79, 107, 110, 315, 316 
Republic, bourgeois—  56-57,  67-68, 69, 71, 
74-75,  79-81,  87-89, 91, 97-98, 101-03, 
111, 114-15, 123, 131, 139, 177-78, 
253-54, 261-62, 413, 503, 519 
— parliamentary—103, 106, 110, 
113-14, 122, 123, 129-31 
— federative—177, 279, 285, 482 
— and class struggle—66-68, 69, 516 
— and working class, working-class 
movement—56-58, 65, 66, 67, 69, 
131, 252, 285-86, 313 
— and peasantry—82-83, 121-23 
— and universal suffrage—56, 57, 
67-68 

=====第803页=====
780 Subject Index 
See also Democracy, bourgeois; France; 
Revolution of 1848 in France. Second 
Republic; Switzerland 
Republic, social,  social-democratic  (demand 
for)—109, 122, 579 
Reserve and insurance fund—62, 134, 
494-96,  508-09 
Revolution—  56, 135, 314, 529 
— as driving force of historical prog­
ress—122 
— prerequisites, causes of—135, 251, 
253-54, 471, 482, 509-10 
— and economic crises—135, 275, 
299, 509-10 
— and class struggle—127, 178, 388, 
412,  492, 529-30 
— and role of masses—69, 410, 418 
— and the state—125, 172, 279-80, 
283-86 
— criticism of voluntaristic views on 
revolution—314, 317-19, 372-74, 
470,  530-31 
Revolution, bourgeois, bourgeois-democrat­
ic— 254 
— limitedness of—68-69, 278-79, 
284-85,  286 
— attitude towards old state appara­
tus—192-93 
— bourgeoisie's inclination towards 
compromise—236-37, 278-79 
— and problem of property—178-79 
— motive forces, role of masses—69 
— and working class—55-57, 66, 67, 
81, 99, 225-26, 277-78, 281-86, 
298, 419 
— question of workers' representa­
tion in government—470 
— tasks of proletarian party—277-78, 
280-86 
— as step towards proletarian revo­
lution—57, 117, 238, 281, 282-83, 
286, 298 
— necessity of revolutionary methods 
of struggle to bring it to comple­
tion—283-84 
— and agrarian question—61, 80, 96, 
118-20, 481 
— and petty bourgeoisie—69, 100, 
150-51,  164-66, 178, 179, 279-86, 
408, 481-82 
— religious form of—252 
See also Bourgeoisie; English bourgeois 
revolution of 17th century; French revolu­tion of 1789-94; Revolution of 1848-49 
in Europe 
Revolution, permanent—117, 127, 237-38, 
281-86,  298, 614 
— workers' political clubs as organs of 
revolutionary power—282, 284 
Revolution, proletarian, socialist—103-04, 
116-17,  127, 135, 266, 273, 274-76, 
299,  320-21,  510 
— prerequisites for—56-57, 135, 
255, 275-76, 299-300, 429, 470, 
509-10 
— proletarian party as condition of 
victory—634 
— necessity of workers' political and 
theoretical preparation for revolu­
tion—485 
— transformation of proletariat into 
ruling class, establishment of dicta­
torship of proletariat—274-76, 
293, 298, 300,  320-21,  387, 553-54, 
634 
— as highest form of proletarian 
class struggle with bourgeoisie— 
529-30 
— as culmination of permanent revo­
lution—237-38, 281, 283, 614 
— simultaneous accomplishment in a 
number of countries—56, 69-70, 
117, 286, 553-54 
— peaceful and violent methods of 
accomplishment—487 
— fundamental difference from 
bourgeois revolution—69, 276 
— and universal suffrage—517 
— abolition of private ownership of 
means of production—300, 387, 
553 
— solution of national question—70, 
266, 561 
— and peasantry and agricultural 
proletariat—57, 122, 285 
— and petty bourgeoisie—27,  30-31, 
57 
— necessity of winning over army 
to proletarian revolution—551 
See also Class struggle; Dictatorship of 
the proletariat; Party, proletarian 
Revolution, social 
— as bourgeois revolution—253-54 
— as form of transition from capi­
talism to socialism—69-70, 78, 255, 
266, 273, 275-76 

=====第804页=====
Subject Index 781 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Austria—58,70, 
151-52 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Europe—132, 
237, 482, 497 
— democratic illusions—243-44, 
531-32 
— and bourgeoisie—69-70, 237 
— and petty bourgeoisie—529 
— and national movement—70 
— role of in European events—64, 
70-71,  91-92, 94, 369 
— and England—263-64, 497-98, 
509-10 
— and Russia—70 
— and possibility of European 
war—70-71 
— counter-revolution—94, 97, 101, 
110, 132; 369, 547 
— causes of defeat—132, 135, 637 
— results  of—5,  244, 275, 503 
Revolution of 1848 in France. Second 
Republic—  47, 53-62, 64, 65-73, 76-77, 
79-80,  81, 83-84, 85-88, 91, 92, 94-97, 
98-101,  105-07, 109-10, 112-15, 122, 
125, 129-30, 138-39 
— preconditions and causes of, revo­
lutionary situation in 1847-
48—48-53,  132 
— periods in development of revolu­
tion—105-07, 109-10, 112, 129-30 
— decline of revolution—47 
— February revolution of 1848—20, 
47, 52-58, 60-63, 66-69, 71, 87-89, 
91, 108-09, 116-18, 127, 128-29, 
136, 149, 251, 263, 294, 311, 314-
15, 322-24, 338, 354, 359, 360,361, 
362-64, 412 
— Provisional Government—21, 27, 
53-55,  57-66, 71, 73, 106,  319-21, 
360, 365 
— Luxembourg Commission—55, 
56, 57, 58, 63, 360 
— intensification of class struggle in 
March and April 1848—64-65, 71, 
73 
— Executive Commission, its anti-
working-class policy—63-64, 66, 
68, 71, 72, 87, 106 
— National ateliers (workshops)—63-
64, 67-68, 87 
— events of May 15, 1848—67, 73, 
77, 88, 97, 323, 575-77 
— after-effects of June insurrection, prospects of further develop­
ment—41,  70, 71-74, 77-78, 122, 
131, 144, 263, 279, 334-35, 362, 
368, 369, 486-88, 525, 577-80 
— absence of conditions for victorious 
proletarian revolution—56-57, 68-
70, 116-17, 135 
— National (Constituent) Assem­
bly—18,  20, 23, 26, 30, 33, 35, 40, 
65-67,  71-78, 79-94, 97-99, 101-03, 
107-14, 117-18, 119, 123, 124,127, 
128, 129, 139, 140, 144, 364, 367, 
520, 525, 567, 568, 571, 572, 578, 
579, 580 
— Constitution of 1848—77-80, 84-
85, 89-91,  94, 101-02, 103, 105-09, 
110, 130, 136, 141-42, 522, 567-79 
— preservation of old state appara­
tus—57,  78, 83, 116, 118 
— election of Louis Bonaparte as 
President—79-80, 84-85, 89, 95, 
96, 111-14, 123-25, 127-28, 572 
— Legislative Assembly (from May 
28, 1849), struggle of parties 
in it—18, 19, 79, 94, 96, 99, 
101-05,  106-13, 118, 119, 122-25, 
127, 129, 136, 137, 139-42, 143, 
144, 262, 263,  516-21,  524, 525, 
568-72 
— clashes of Legislative Assembly 
with government—82-87, 91-93, 
98, 99, 111, 114, 118, 123, 127-29, 
137, 139-40, 143-44, 262 
— economic development—49-53, 
58-61,  114-18, 119-22, 132-35 
— financial policy, finances, taxa­
tion—17-20, 22, 39, 58-62, 73-
76, 84-85, 111-12,  114-21,  133, 
329, 363-64, 365, 508 
— industry—116-17, 132, 134, 137, 
507, 509, 517 
— agriculture and agrarian rela­
tions—20, 116, 327, 335 
— trade—19, 132-34, 137, 507-09, 
517 
— joint-stock companies, banks— 
125, 132-34, 507, 508 
— Stock Exchange, stock-exchange 
speculation—19, 114, 115, 342-44 
— usury—21, 122, 509 
— military legislation—25, 576 
— and army—25, 30, 32, 34, 35, 58, 
62, 65, 76, 77, 81, 98, 103-07, 118, 

=====第805页=====
782 Subject Index 
124, 127-30, 137, 139, 142-44,343, 
365, 517, 523, 551, 579, 580 
— and National Guard—53, 62, 64, 
65, 67, 87, 104-07, 365, 366, 576 
— and Mobile Guard—62-63, 67, 76, 
81, 87, 90, 365, 366 
— and press—30, 31, 32, 38, 39, 107, 
110, 126, 129, 135-40, 263, 343, 
344, 516-19, 520, 568-69 
— and clergy—23, 569, 570 
— and bourgeoisie—22, 49, 51-58, 
61-70, 71-83,  87-91,  94-97, 101, 
107, 114-18, 121, 124-27, 129-31, 
139, 141-44, 261-62, 314-15, 359, 
578-80 
— and financial aristocracy—114-16, 
117-18, 127, 133, 263, 342, 508, 
525 
— and big landowners—55, 61, 65, 
79, 95, 96, 115, 125 
— and middle strata, intermediate 
classes—64, 65, 69, 99, 108, 110, 
125, 126, 366, 367, 368 
— and petty bourgeoisie—27-28, 30-
31, 53, 54, 57, 59, 63-65, 69, 71, 
74-76, 78, 80, 81-82, 96-100, 103-
04, 106, 107, 110, 117, 125-28, 130, 
135, 136, 144, 263, 359, 515-17 
— and working class, its role in rev­
olution—21,  27-28,  30-31,  34, 35, 
53-57, 58-59, 62-64, 67-70, 73-75, 
78-81, 86-91,  94, 95, 96-100, 103-
04, 106-10, 116, 120, 121-22, 124-
29, 135-37, 315, 319-20, 359, 569, 
576,  578 
— demand of right to work—55-56, 
78, 360, 567-68 
— and peasantry—21-22, 28, 39, 54-
55, 57, 61-62, 65, 69, 71, 76, 79-80, 
84, 92, 96-99, 118-23, 125, 262-63, 
364 
— alliance of workers and peas­
ants—22 
— alliance of petty bourgeoisie and 
proletariat—27-28, 34, 368 
— lumpenproletariat—62, 365 
— dynastic opposition—53, 68, 82-
83, 97, 116 
— Legitimists—22, 25, 36, 40, 54, 65, 
68, 72, 78-79,  80-81,  83, 89-90, 92, 
94-97, 101, 108-16, 123, 124, 125, 
129-30, 138, 139, 140-41,262,367, 
519-22 — Orleanists—25, 36, 41, 65, 67, 72, 
81, 83, 89, 90, 92, 94-97, 101, 
108-16, 125, 127, 138-42, 262, 367, 
519, 521, 522 
— Bonapartists, Society of December 
10—40, 90, 96, 111, 113, 124, 
139-43,  262, 520, 521, 523 
— party of Order—28, 31, 32, 33, 
95-96, 99-101, 105, 107, 108, 113-
19, 122-31, 135-44, 344, 516, 517, 
518-25 
— bourgeois republicans (National 
party)—20, 40, 53, 54, 57-59, 65-
66, 69, 71-84, 85, 87-92, 95, 97-99, 
103, 105-06, 110, 114, 125, 128, 
140, 141-42, 315, 322,367, 521-22 
— petty-bourgeois democracy, La Ré­
forme newspaper, Mountain 
party—34, 35, 55, 60, 66, 70, 
74-75,  84, 314, 321-22 
— bloc of democrats and socialists 
(New Mountain)—90, 97, 98-
101, 103-05, 107, 125, 126, 127, 
128-29, 135-37, 138, 141-42, 279, 
320-21,  343, 515-18, 522 
— Utopian socialist views—57,  70-71, 
99, 100, 105, 122, 126-27, 128-29, 
138, 263 
— workers' clubs, secret societies 
— 83, 89-93, 99, 100, 104, 105, 110, 
125, 138, 322-24, 569 
— events of June 13, 1849, and their 
consequences—85, 94, 101-10, 
127-30, 184, 238, 262, 523, 576 
— elections of March 10, 1850—56, 
127-31,  135-36, 324, 516 
— repeal of universal suffrage on 
May 31, 1850—26, 28, 32, 33, 34, 
35, 38, 56, 57, 67-68, 79, 81, 
130-32, 136, 137, 139-40, 141-42, 
263, 360, 367, 516-18, 522, 571, 
572, 577 
— foreign policy—53-54, 58, 60, 72-
73, 78-79, 82-83, 93-96, 99, 101, 
103-05,  108-12, 131, 151-53, 549, 
567 
— expedition to Rome—93-94, 103, 
104, 109-12, 567 
— colonial subjugation of Alge­
ria—524 
— and other European powers—11-
12, 15, 16,58,60, 103, 116-17, 189, 
262,  268, 511, 547 

=====第806页=====
Subject Index 783 
— causes of defeat—132-35 
— influence on European peo­
ples—60, 72-73, 103, 116-17, 279 
— prospects of revolution—16-17, 
20, 21, 23, 24, 26, 28-29, 32, 34 
See also June insurrection of Paris pro­
letariat in 1848 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Germany 
— Germany on eve of revolution 
—481-82 
— March revolution—58, 64, 156-57, 
243-44, 248, 278, 419 
— and absolutism, survivals of feudal­
ism—173-74, 180, 237-38, 248, 
267-68,  481-82 
— and counter-revolutionary forces 
(nobility, junkers, aristocracy and 
bureaucracy)—151,  152, 172, 179, 
187, 188, 190, 192-93, 208, 237, 
278 
— position of bourgeoisie—151, 152, 
157-58,  163-67, 168, 169, 172, 
236-37,  278-79, 399, 406, 407, 
415-19,  481-82 
— petty bourgeoisie—149-51, 157-
61, 163-71,  172, 175-80, 183, 184, 
190-92,  237, 279, 281, 408-09, 
481-82 
— peasantry—150, 151, 154, 159, 
167, 169, 172, 173, 177, 178, 180, 
184, 191, 238, 481 
— working class and working-class 
movement—13,  150-51,  157, 160, 
161, 162, 163,  165-71,  176, 184, 
192, 225-26, 237, 238, 277, 278, 
374, 388, 419, 481-82 
— intelligentsia—172, 224, 237 
— army—101, 151, 152, 159-62, 166, 
167-69,  170, 172-75, 178, 180,181, 
184, 192, 206, 208, 209, 238, 605 
— civic militia—160, 161, 166-69, 
179, 181, 193-94, 196-97 
— United Diet in Prussia (1847, 
1848)—258, 268 
— Prussian National Assembly—7, 
12, 279, 417-18 
— coup  d'état  in Prussia and move­
ment for non-payment of taxes in 
November 1848—279 
— Prussian Constitution of December 
5, 1848—257 
— Chambers of Prussian Diet—257, 
417 — democratic movement, position of 
petty-bourgeois democrats—4, 
147-50, 162, 163, 172, 175, 186, 
190-92,  225-26, 247, 277-80, 285, 
286, 388, 409, 487 
— Neue Rheinische Zeitung, persecu­
tion of editorial board—156-57, 
171, 181, 187, 353, 388, 605 
— and Communist League—165-66, 
186, 201, 225-26, 277-78, 371, 374 
— Cologne Workers' Association 
—226 
— and ways of unifying coun­
try—247 
— national question—70 
— Frankfurt National Assembly, Im­
perial Regency and Ministry—150, 
157, 159, 173, 238, 247-50, 258, 
259, 279, 388, 417 
— Imperial Constitution—150, 151, 
166, 178, 237-38, 248-49 
— campaign for Imperial Constitu­
tion—97,  101, 149-52, 170, 177, 
186, 190, 237-48, 248-50, 278, 
279, 285, 374, 543, 605 
— Dresden uprising (May 3-8, 
1849)—154, 157, 162, 169, 190 
— uprising in Rhine Province—154-
72, 174, 178, 190-92, 196, 605 
— uprising in Palatinate—155, 157, 
162, 170, 172,  179-81,  184-214, 
249 
— uprising in Baden—110, 157, 162, 
170, 171, 172-84,  187-91,  213-39, 
249, 277-78, 285 
— and Hungary—162, 182, 184,200, 
205 
— and Rhine Province—156-71 
— and revolution of 1848 in 
France—64, 182, 184, 238 
— offensive of counter-revolution 
and reaction—108, 110, 151, 152, 
171, 236-37, 239, 279, 481-82, 
597 
— and Austria—248, 482 
— and France—189 
— and Prussia—10, 13, 101, 157, 
158, 189, 248, 482 
— Marx's and Engels' participation in 
— 168, 180-83, 186-87, 192, 200-37 
— results of—149-52, 237-39, 278, 
399, 411, 417, 455-56, 470,481-83, 
489, 490, 637 

=====第807页=====
784 Subject Index 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Hungary—58, 
70, 97, 101, 108, 110, 152, 184, 197, 
200, 205, 214 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Italian states 
—58,  64, 76, 91-94, 97, 101-03, 
108-12,  151-52, 547-48, 553, 567 
Rhenish Federation—547 
Rhenish Hesse—155 
Rhine Province—155-72, 191, 507 
Russia (Russian Empire)—8, 12, 13, 14, 
15, 259-62, 269, 369, 393, 394, 527-28, 
550, 553, 554 
See also Patriotic war of 1812; Tsarism, 
tsarist autocracy 
Russo-Turkish war of 1787-91—548-49 
S 
Saint-Simonism—306 
Savings banks—59-60 
Saxony—156, 426, 469, 471-74 
Schleswig-Hobtein question—392-94, 526-
27 
Sectarianism—98 
Sects, religious—  413-15,  420, 426, 428-30 
See also Anabaptists 
Seehandlung (Preussische Seehandlung-
geselbchaft)—259, 267-68 
Serfdom—419, 439, 443, 451 
Serf peasantry—  402,  403, 405-07, 409, 
415,  478, 551, 578 
Seven Years' War of 1756-63—546, 550 
Social-Democratic Refugee Committee (late 
1840s-early 1850s)—349-52,  600-01, 
608-10, 616-23, 631-32 
Socialism (theories and trends) 
— reactionary—488 
— bourgeois (conservative)—125-26, 
263, 326, 331, 337, 419, 488 
— petty-bourgeois  —30,  31, 125-26, 
127, 128-29, 488, 531-32, 585, 588, 
589, 590 
— doctrinaire  —67-68,  97, 98, 125-
26, 127, 128-29 
— sentimental  — 31, 537 
— eclectic—126, 127 
— Louis Blanc's—63, 125-27, 128, 
537, 541 
— proletarian (revolutionary)  — 30, 
127 
See also Communism, scientific Socialism, socialists in France—35, 125-
27, 255, 319-20 
— social-democratic party of 1840s— 
88, 97-98, 125-27, 129, 279, 518-19 
— during revolution of 1848—57-58, 
63-64,  67-69, 88, 97-98, 110, 118-
19, 122, 125-27, 128-29, 133, 263, 
279, 507, 518-19 
Socialism,  socialists  in Germany—3-4, 177, 
282, 416, 419-20, 488, 489, 596 
Social labour under capitalism—56, 500 
Société des saisons (Society of the Seasons) 
(Paris,  1839)—48, 312, 314, 320 
Societies, secret, revolutionary, proletar­
ian—  110, 277, 311-22, 371, 633, 634 
See also Anarchism, anarchists; Blan-
quism,  Blanquists 
Society—  54, 55-57, 67, 71, 333, 414, 443 
See also Civil  society;  Communism (so­
cial formation) 
Society, bourgeois—51, 55, 57-58, 59, 65, 
67, 91, 156, 255, 271-73, 275, 331, 
363, 387, 408, 415, 509-10, 531 
— and economic crises—134, 509 
— classes, class struggle—57, 65, 68, 
156, 254, 363, 384 
— and the state—54, 76-77, 78, 118, 
125, 156, 251, 254-56, 296, 330-33, 
522 
— and religion—92, 96, 118, 254 
— prerequisites for inevitable de­
struction of bourgeois society and 
rise of new society—134, 275, 299, 
363, 500 
Society, feudal—7, 54, 407-09, 412-13, 
414-15,  419, 461, 480 
Soil fertility—121 
Sonderbund—  51, 261, 358 
Spain—132, 266, 400, 507 
Speculation—  49, 51, 115, 338-39, 342-
44, 358, 482, 490-92, 494-95, 502, 503, 
506-07 
See also Stock Exchange, Bourse 
State, the 
— origin — 72 
— and classes—65, 253, 333, 486 
— class essence of, instrument of 
domination by exploiters—50-51, 
331, 486 
— and society, social system  — 54, 65-
68, 71, 91, 115-16, 125, 280, 285, 
331, 422 

=====第808页=====
Subject Index 785 
— alienation of—422 
— apparent independence of—54, 
333 
— state centralisation—125, 285, 399, 
443, 461, 480 
— state machine—61, 172, 296 
— and abolition of classes, withering 
away of the state under commu­
nism—333,  422, 486 
— critique of anarchist views on 
—334,  486-88 
See also Monarchy; Republic, bourgeois 
State, bourgeois—  54-57,  65-66, 68, 69, 71, 
76-77,  78-79, 101, 118, 126,  130-31, 
151, 156, 251, 254-56, 278, 308, 330-
33, 486, 522 
State, feudal—401 
See also Feudalism 
State, proletarian—see Communism (social 
formation); Dictatorship of the pro­
letariat 
Stock Exchange, Bourse—49, 60, 114, 
115, 292, 342-44, 363, 504 
Styria—  439,  475, 476 
Suffrage (in the bourgeois state)—65, 79, 
131, 263, 296 
— and Bonapartism — 80 
— and peasantry and agricultural 
workers—54, 65, 78, 79, 122 
— significance for working class—79, 
137, 275, 298, 517 
Superstructure—see Basis and superstruc­
ture 
Switzerland—177-78, 261, 268-70, 279, 
285, 393, 413-33, 435-36, 477 
— and revolution of 1848-49 in 
Europe—260-61,  392 
— and France—52 
— and Germany—15-16, 177-78, 
267-70 
See also Peasants, Swiss; Prussian-Swiss 
conflict over Neuchâtel; Sonderbund 
T 
Taborites—414, 415 
Taiping rebellion—266-67 
Taxation—49, 61, 78, 84, 116, 118, 122, 
126, 262, 292, 324, 325, 327, 328-29, 
331, 508 
Ten Hours'  Bill—  271-76,  288, 297-98 Terror 
— revolutionary—57-58, 109, 173, 
471-72 
— counter-revolutionary—22, 70, 85, 
109, 122, 263, 368, 437 
See also Violence 
Teutonic Order—454 
Theology—  411-12,  420, 422 
Theory and practice—  77-78,  91, 127, 471 
Thirty Years' War (1618-48)—478-79 
Thuringia—  408,  418, 421, 426, 469, 
471-73,  475 
Tories—  255,  273, 291-93, 511, 512 
Town,  medieval—  401,  402, 406, 407, 
408, 412-14, 443, 465 
— patricians—155, 406-07, 409, 410, 
414-15,  435, 452-53, 457, 461,465, 
467,469,478,479,480 
See also Burghers; Craftsmen, handi­
crafts; Guilds; Plebeians, plebs 
Trade, commerce—  265-66,  295, 401-02, 
490, 504-06, 584-90 
— world  —393,  585 
— money—294 
— and economic crises—264, 295, 
490,  584 
— trade wars—252 
— and revolution of 1848-49—263 
— merchant navy and merchant ship­
ping—401,  505-07 
Traditions—  47, 320, 399, 560 
Tsarism, tsarist autocracy—259-60, 
546-47 
Turkey—15, 259, 268, 270 
U 
Ulster— 9 
United States of America—265-66, 285, 
333, 341, 486, 501-02, 503-06 
Universal Society of Revolutionary Com­
munists—484, 613-15 
Uprising, armed—106, 154, 172, 173-74, 
282-84, 413 
See also June insurrection of Paris pro­
letariat in 1848; Uprisings of Lyons 
weavers in 1831 and 1834 
Uprisings of Lyons weavers in 1831 and 
1834—48 
Usurious capital—  57, 98, 121-22, 191, 
280, 406, 431, 509 
Utopianism—126, 331, 336 

=====第809页=====
786 Subject Index 
V 
Vagrancy—  407,  409, 433-34, 478 
Venice—  265,  477 
Village—  406,  408 
See also Peasantry 
Violence—279 
See also Terror 
Voltairianism—124, 125 
Voluntarism, voluntaristic attitude towards 
revolution—  318,  372-73, 470, 530 
See also Anarchism, anarchists; Blan-
quism,  Blanquists 
W 
Wage labour—  56, 78, 308, 490, 502 
See also Exploitation, of labour-power 
by capital 
Wages—  275,  295, 331 
Waldenses—413 
War, wars—  56, 252 
— methods of conducting wars— 
548-50, 553-55 
— and revolution, revolutionary 
wars—56, 70, 117, 395, 542, 555, 
556, 560 
— popular, guerrilla—197, 552 
— wars of conquest—268, 549 
— world — 70 
— trade —252 
— threat of war in 1850s-60s—117, 
260, 268, 269, 542 
See also Army 
Wars of First French Republic (late 18th-
early 19th centuries)—236, 542, 543, 
544-46,  552, 560 
Wat Tyler's rebellion (1381)—414 
Whigs—  255,  293, 299, 340, 510 
Women's question—  245,  274, 288-91 
Worker, workers—  271,  272, 273-76, 280-
86, 501-02, 503 
Workhouses—  63, 288, 366 
Working class—  55-57,  69, 281, 361-62, 
485,  585, 590, 591 
— forming in process of development 
of large-scale industry—288 
— industrial (factory) proletariat 
—56,  121, 156, 272-73, 360 
— organising as class—274-75, 387 
— the only consistently revolutionary class—55-57, 81, 96-97, 125, 225, 
237, 277, 429, 502 
— world-historic  role—31,  299 
— historical necessity to win political 
power, to become ruling class—69, 
237, 274-76, 281, 293, 298, 300, 
387 
— conditions of emancipation—55-
57, 274-75, 276, 298, 553-54 
— class consciousness, its growth 
— 176-77 238, 271, 275, 286-87, 
320 
— as leading class (hegemony)—126, 
282-83 
— and peasantry—28, 57, 58, 69, 
96-97,  122, 125, 285, 361 
— and petty bourgeoisie  — 28, 30-31, 
57, 69, 71, 96-97, 103, 104, 125, 
150-57,  177, 279-86, 361 
— as driving force in bourgeois 
revolution—55-56, 57, 66, 67, 81, 
225-26,  277-78, 281-86, 298, 419 
— disappearance of proletariat as a 
result of communist transforma­
tion of society—387 
See also Class struggle; Dictatorship of 
the proletariat; Party, proletarian; Rev­
olution, proletarian, socialist; Worker, 
workers; Working-class movement 
Working class in England—255-56, 274-
76, 287, 298 
— handweavers—293 
— significance of struggle for univer­
sal suffrage—275, 298 
— labour aristocracy—295, 513-14 
See also Chartism; Labour movement in 
England 
Working class in France—53, 54, 55, 
68-69,  98-100, 104, 116-17, 127, 136-
t37, 261-62, 315-16, 507, 515-16, 517-
l18, 553-54, 555, 576-77, 578-79 
— Paris proletariat—55, 317, 319-20 
See also Working-class movement in 
France 
Working class in Germany—13, 156, 165, 
168, 177, 277,  279-81,  286, 388, 410, 
412, 481, 537, 553-54 
— and bourgeoisie, petty bour­
geoisie—177,  279-81,  286, 481 
— and peasants—481 
— lumpenproletarjat—165,407,408, 
450 
— agricultural proletariat—280, 375 

=====第810页=====
Subject Index 787 
See also Working-class movement in 
Germany 
Working-class movement 
— stages of development—127, 291-
94, 428-29, 515 
— immediate and ultimate aims 
—293-94 
— necessity to combine political and 
economic struggle—274-76 
— and revolutionary theory—127, 
318-19,  415 
— and proletarian party—634 
See also Chartism; Class struggle; Com­
munist League; Party, proletarian;  Work­
ing class 
Working-class movement in France—48, 52, 105, 312, 313, 315-18, 319-20, 321 
See also June insurrection of Paris pro­
letariat in 1848; Uprisings of Lyons 
weavers in 1831 and 1834 
Working-class movement in Germany—13, 
277, 482 
Working day—  272-76,  288, 297, 300 
World market—  56, 255, 295, 299, 361, 
501-02,  585 
— Britain's monopoly—56, 116, 134, 
254, 255, 265, 291-95, 340, 495, 
496 
See also Foreign trade; Market 
Württemberg— 10, 11, 435-36, 438, 448, 
450, 455, 456, 457 
Würzburg—  428, 455, 464-66, 480 

=====第811页=====
