The Ideological Decay of Imperialism
The ideological decay of imperialism is expressed in an ever increasing bourgeois
ideological degeneration in the most extreme forms of individualism. This has two
principal tendencies.
The“Left" Form of
Bourgeois ldealism
The "left"l form of bourgeois idealism has its expression in so-called ldentity Politics,
Cancel-Culture, Decolonization, etc. The problem is that our comrades do not understand the
process of this degeneration. This process of degeneration has an origin in the Frankfurt
School, but more specifically in Michel Foucault and Discourse Analysis.
From the Enlightenment to Discourse Analysis - A Brief Historical
Overview
The basis or fundamental methodology of postmodernism is Discourse Analysis, which
was decisively shaped by Michel Foucault. However, this methodology has its origins in
the Enlightenment. The Enlightenment philosopher Baruch de Spinoza² developed three
basic rules in his "Theological-Political Treatise" as early as the late 17th century,using
the example of the treatise of the Bible, which is very similar to Discourse Analysis in
their principles.³ In the same writing, he also establishes the following principles:
"So the universal rule in interpreting Scripture is this: atribute nothing to Scripture as
its teaching unless we have understood it as clearly as possible from the history of
Scripture.
114
"I have also shown that God's divinity can't be proved by miracles. ... So the divinity
of Scripture can only be established by the fact that it teaches true virtue, and this
can only be established by Scripture itself. If we couldn't do that, ouracceptance of
1
 Nota bene: Left does not correspond to our understanding of the characteristics of imperialist
bourgeois ideology, it is a certain variation, according to a vulgar understanding,atributed to
what is colloquially called the "eft (scene)".For the most part, it is something that corresponds to
that faction of the imperialist bourgeoisie that is generally based on the state monopolies. For our
readers, this section is the much more comprehensive one, because what is dealt with just here
unfolds clearly more influence.
2
Baruch de Spinoza, "Treatise on Theology and Politics", 1670
3
Ibid
4
Ibid
=====第1页=====
the only place to look for knowledge of Scripture is in Scripture.
Here an idealistic understanding of written documents (be it also the Bible)is shown,
because the text in itself accommodates the doctrine which is drawn from it, detached
from the historicalrealityin which it wascreated.In additionit is openldeclared that
the correctness of the document does not require any practical proof ("miracle") and the
knowledge does not come from practice, but from the writen text- that is, the theory -
itself.
The basic rules of the handling of texts established by Spinoza were taken up by the
concept of "Immanent Critique" put forward by representatives of the "Critical Theory"
of the Frankfurt School. One of the most important representatives of the Frankfurt
School was Theodor Adorno, who also devoted himself to "Immanent Critique". In this
concept, the main focus is on criticizing texts and their statements by checking the
statements of a text for consistency, or for insufficient justification of theses and the
like. What further emerges here is a strong detachment from practice,since it is no
longer about proving the correctness of a statement with actual results (i.e. in practice),
but the question of argumentation comes to the foreground. This concept has strong
overlaps with Deconstructivism,but is clearly a continuation of Spinoza's rules of
writing treatises.
After Adorno's death, Jürgen Habermas was one of the foremost representatives of
the Frankfurt School; together with others, he advanced the so-called "Consensus
Theory of Truth." This concentrates on attacking the criterion of truth. Thus, here too, it
is not practice that is declared to be the criterion of truth, but the argument. Whether
an assertion is true, is to be worked out by the "best argument",which also means that
just no examination must take place in practice, but, after the "perfect argument" is
found, insight is to be exercised by all sides and the agreement takes place. In this way
the truth shall have been found. He formulates it like this:
(DeepL)"The idea of truth can only be unfolded with reference to the discursive
redemption of claims to validity."9
5
Ibid
6
Theodor W. Adorno, formerly Theodor Ludwig Wiesengrund (1903 - 1969); German philosopher,
sociologist, music philosopher, and composer.
7
Deconstructivism or deconstruction refers to a set of currents in philosophy,hermeeutics,
literature and linguistics, coined by Derrida as a term for a procedure of analysis of texts: "What I
call deconstruction[…] is …] not a method,nor a scientific critique. […] Deconstruction
presupposes the transformation of even the concept of the text and of writing." (Derrida)
8Jürgen Habermas (born 1929); German philosopher and sociologist, second generation of the
Frankfurt School
9Jürgen Habermas, ,,Wahrheitstheorien", 1973
=====第2页=====
In this process, especially with the emergence of imperialism, the increasing
degeneration of bourgeois ideology,and its close connection with the Frankfurt School,
becomes apparent. This was decisively shaped, and the division of Germany after World
War II, directly promoted by Yankee imperialism.¹ The corresponding confusion thus
caused in the revolutionary movement in this country, by the fact that the Frankfurt
School found many adherents among the radical petty-bourgeois intellectuals,
TT
ultimately serves to preserve, the dying system of, imperialism.
Ideas closely related to, or at least similar to, those developed by the Frankfurt School,
especially in its late stages, were then also found in Michel Foucault and his development
Of so-called Discourse Analysis. In its essence, this represents a counterpart to
materialist dialectics. Discourse analysis starts from the concept of the so-called
"discourse",therefore it is first necessary to get an overview of this concept, which
namely does not have a clear definition and is mostly confused especially in the
bourgeois-political public ("Public Discourse"):
(DeepL)
"The term 'discourse' in the Anglo-Saxon language means a simple
conversation, a conversation between different people. In French and Romance
languages, 'discours' ('discorso') is a common term for a 'learned speech', a lecture, a
treatise, sermon, lecture and the like. For some years now, the term 'discourse' has
also appeared in everyday German, usually to refer to a publicly discussed topic (e.g.
the discourse on higher education reform), a specific chain of arguments (e.g. 'the
neoliberal discourse') or the position/statement of a politician, an association
spokesperson (such as 'the trade union discourse') etc. in a current debate,
sometimes also to speak of organised discussion processes. Nevertheless, 'discourse'
as a non-scientific term is much more familiar in English and French, and its scientific
career is largely based on these understandings of the term. Yet 'discourse' is also
understood in very different ways in the social sciences and humanities. This applies
both to the theoretical conceptualisation with regard to discipline-specific research
interests and to the methodological implementation in concrete research projects.
"13
Important for the development of Discourse Analysis is the so-called Language Theory
of Ferdinand de Saussure (1967),who was formative for the philosophical school of
10 In 1931,the foundation assets of the Institute for Social Research / Instituts für
Sozialforschung (IfS) were transferred to the Netherlands, and the headquarters moved to Geneva
in 1933. In the further course, the IfS moved first to Paris, then to the USA. Horkheimer rebuilt the
Institute for Social Research there at Columbia University in New York. Adorno and Horkheimer
returned in 1950 and the IfS was rebuilt with money from the Yankees and the FRG. Cf. Emil Walter-
Busch: "Geschichte der Frankfurter Schule. Kritische Theorie und Politik", 2010
11 Today's so-called left scene in Germany is fundamentally a student-dominated movement in
its entire character, andthe ideasofthe petty-bourgeoisintellectuals haveacorrespondingefct
here.
12Even thoughhe didot claimtheterm Discourse Analysis orhimlit ishe whoproduced and
clearly shaped the basic features of this methodology.
=====第3页=====
structuralism and post-structuralism. We will not go into these two in more depth here,
but in summary and outlined in simple terms,(post)structuralism14 is about using
discourse to discover abstract and objective rule structures in language or in the use of
signs ("symbolic order").
(DeepL)
)"The starting point for the development of structuralism is the reception of
the language theory of the Geneva linguist Ferdinand de Saussure in the French social
sciences and humanities, mediated by the ethnologist Claude Lévi-Strauss. Saussure
developed a scientific concept of language that understands it as a system of signs -
the "langue" - that underlies concrete speaking and writing, i.e. the practical use of
language by individuals. This language system is understood as a historically evolved
social institution - comparable to the political system or the law - whose genesis can
be traced back to the linguistic interactions within a language community. However, it
is an emergent phenomenon that has emerged as a whole from the sum of individual
contributions, without being identical with them.
"15
For a better understanding and greatly simplified, Discourse Analysis could thus also
be called "Language Analysis",whereby the methodology of Discourse Analysis differs
significantly from conventional linguistics. For the concept of Discourse Analysis is based
on the fact that language creates (or "constructs", to use the academic term) reality and
interprets it on the basis of its symbolism and signs. This already makes it clear where
today's Political-Correctness-Linguistic-Acrobatics have their roots. But back to the
Discourse Analysis. The French intellectual and pillar saint of Postmodernism Michel
Foucault already developed this method significantly in his work - even if he claimed the
opposite - applied it and helped it to previously undreamed-of prominence, especially
with his work "Archaeology of Knowledge".16 But in order to fully understand the purpose
of Discourse Analysis and its background, it is necessary to take a brief look at Foucault's
biography.
The French intellectual was a direct disciple of Louis Althusser⁷ and in turn influenced
well-known representatives of postmodernism, such as Jacques Derrida. For a time in
14
Poststructuralism is the term used to describe various approaches and methods in the
humanities and social sciences, in particular the view that language does not represent reality but
constructs it, based on or referring to deconstruction and discourse analysis.
15Reinerller,,,DiskursorschungEineEinfhrung für oialwissenschaftlerlnen",011
16 Vgl. Marianne Pieper: ,,Vor allem die Rezeption der Arbeiten Michel Foucaults hat dem
Diskursbegif in den Geistesund Soialwissenschatenuerhblicer Popularitt verholfen.",in
,,Diskursanalysen
kritische Analytik der Gegenwart und wissenspolitische
Deutunsl"ol:iklrlik"
17Louis Althusser(1918-1990); franzsischer Philosoph, ermordete seine Frauund konnte sich
nicht daran erinnernLehrer u.a. von Alain Badiou,Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida,Maurice
Godelier und Nicos Poulantzas.
Hauptvertreter der ,,Dekonstruktion"
=====第4页=====
the 1950s, he was a member of the French Communist Party (FPF),which was already
walking on revisionist paths. Here, however, he was expelled (or left) because of his
homosexuality. This event in Foucault's life has a special significance in shaping Discourse
Analysis. As already described, Discourse Analysis assumes that language creates reality;
accordingly, it is not important what someone does or represents in practice, but what he
says. Thus, Foucault could also claim to be something he was not: namely,a Marxist
(even if he later moved away from this).
But the whole degeneration of this individual was most evident in his position on
paedophilia. He was of the opinion that children could have consensual sexual relations
with adults and, together with other French intellectuals, campaigned for their
legalisation.19 20 In March of this year, the publicist Guy Sorman came forward and
accused Foucault of abusing boys aged eight to ten in Tunisia in 1969.21 2² Even if these
accusations have not been conclusively proven,they fit all too well into Foucault's
degenerate world view. This also shapes his oeuvre, with a multitude of writings dealing
primarily with the question of sexuality. His four-volume work "Sexuality and Truth" also
includes two books entitled "The Use of Lusts" and "The Confessions of the Flesh". This
focus on the question of sexuality is echoed, among other things, in today's widespread
identity politics,which also places a strong focus on this question, but more on that
later.23 Incidentally, Foucault destroyed his first book that was to become part of the work,
entitled "History of Sexuality",during an LSD trip to Death Valley in the USA.24 25 Foucault
also made longer lecture trips to the USA in the 1970s and 1980s, before his death²It is
no coincidence that discourse analysis also began to spread from here, i.e. linked to
Yankee imperialism from the beginning. The significance of Foucault in today's academia
and bourgeois social sciences are abundantly clear, or as one of those same academics
himself put it: "…] Foucault's conceptual and methodological suggestions are
everywhere to be grasped with one's hands."27
After this brief outline of Foucault's life and above all his (post-)work, we will now delve
deeper into his methodology of Discourse Analysis, which was a necessary prerequisite
for today's postmodernism. Since, as already mentioned,this is already a highly
19
theguardian.com,,,Calls for legal child sex rebound on luminaries of May 68", 24. Februar
2001
20
zeit.de, ,,Gabriel Matzneff: Es war verboten, zu verbieten", 22. Januar 2020
Vgl.sil.d,,llllwt loucaltbacr".Ail21
21
22
,der Freitag", Ausgabe 15/2021: ,,Foucault verbieten?
23
This has its echoes in the revolutionary movement as well, because some comrades keep
centring strongly on the question of sexuality.
deutschlandfunkkultur.de,,Kalifornischer Roadtrip zum Death Valley: Michel Foucault auf
24
LSd", 02. Juni 2019
tagesanzeiger.ch,,Der Himmel ist explodiert,und Sterne regnen auf mich herab",02.Juni
25
2019
faz.etlc:wrdriet.brar009
26
27
Hans-Herbert Kögler, ,,Michel Foucault", 2004
=====第5页=====
intangible and arbitrailyinterpreted term,it is necessarynot to endlesslyexplainthe
differences between the various interpretations of the term and the methodology, but to
bring them together on their general commonalities and subsume them accordingly²8 so
that we do not lose our orientation in an equally academic "discourse". The intangibility
and sponginess of Discourse Analysis also finds its origin already in Foucault, who "[…]
famously liked to describe his work as a 'toolbox' from which the respective analyst
should borrow the instruments useful to her at will."² Thus, from the pragmatic point of
view alone, there is an extremely eclectic basis.
When reading Foucault's "Archaeologyof Knowledge", it becomes clear how this work
was formative for the creation of Discourse Analysis. What he calls "archaeology" is
nothing else, because in the work he describes his procedure for analysing the different
discourses, in this context the idealistic nature of this method also becomes apparent. For
history is analysed on the basis of ideas. Let us remember that materialism understands
consciousness as a reflection of objective reality that exists independently of man, while
idealism claims that the world exists as a reflection of consciousness. The latter applies to
Foucault's "archaeology",which above all tries to trace the history of ideas from which
reality is formed or "constructed",i.e. idealism. Thus, it leads to the investigation of
"systems of thought":
"Again, one can determine a system of thought only starting from a certain set of
discourses. But this set is treated in such a way that one seeks to recover, beyond the
statements themselves, the intention of the speaking subject, his conscious activity,
what he has wanted to say, or even the unconscious play that has come to light
against his will in what he has said or in the almost imperceptible fractures of his
manifest words; in anycase,itis thereconstructionof another discourse,the recovery
of the silent, murmuring, inexhaustible speech that animates from within the voice
that is heard, the recovery of the small and invisible text that passes through the
interstice of the written lines and sometimes overturns them. The analysis of thought
is always allegorical in relation to the discourse it uses.
1130
Foucault takes the same line with his phrase (or "slogan") about the "death of the
author". By this he means that every written word,every text, did not originate
(independently)from the author himself, but that the thinking and writing of the author
himself is already shaped by his own life, by his own accumulation of knowledge, which in
turn was written byother (older)authors,who in turn received their knowledge from
other authors and developed it basedonit.In sum,then,it is saidthatthere isno truth,
but only aconcatenationof diferentobservationsand interprtations,and thatouridea
"ndealojbores
29 Hans-Herbert Kögler,,Michel Foucault", 2004
30 Foucault,Archaeology of Knowledge", 1969
=====第6页=====
of an author with his own thoughts who could mirror the world objectively (or come close
to objectivity) is false.
This sentence by Foucault about the "death of the author" is a good introduction to
understanding postmodernism. He separates the text from the author, which means it is
only important what is said, not who says it. Just as he tried to solve the dilemma of his
own miserable individual. The social practice of class struggle is separated from theory.
"Language creates reality" means in the beginning there is theory
31
not practice, the
Marxist epistemology is turned upside down and this is simply pure idealism. With his
"archaeology",Foucault creates a kindof "historicalidealism" that is completely opposed
to Marxism, even if he tries to put on some Marxist masks.
Before we look at the Postmodernism that emerges from Discourse Analysis,
however, let us look at one of the contemporary applications of Discourse Analysis in
social science in order to better understand the subjectivism inherent in this method. In
the study of history, discourse analysis assumes that history is "doubly mediated". This
refers to mediation, on the one hand, through sources (meaning people present or alive
at the time who write about the event or period in question) and, on the other hand,
through its representation (meaning history books, etc.), in the form of "sign systems".
This basic assumption leads to the conclusion that history is always "constructed". In
the consistent continuation of this concept,this means that there is no real factual
historiography. Here it is visible howthis method wants to give itself a dialectical face,
because that historiography is shaped by the class that writes history, i.e. rules, is
correct, so that the illumination and interpretation of historical events is different, is
correct. Or as a truism puts it: history is always writen by the victor Nevertheless,
there is an objective history3,that does not depend on how the subjective perception of
individuals was,that does not depend on their "narratives" (a term that is gaining
strong weight in postmodernism). For even though it is consistent with dialectics to
examine the inherent contradictoriness of things, this does not mean that there are no
overarching truths and (historical or social) laws that exist independently of people's
cognition. It is because they exist and emerge from material facts that it is precisely a
materialist dialectic. Discourse Analysis, on the other hand, slips completely into
31 l.e. ultimately God or some other superhuman, supernatural, metaphysical entity,in
convergence with the Christian creed "In the beginning was the Word […] and the Word was God.
All things came to be through the Word, and without the Word nothing came to be that has come
to be.", Gospel of John
32 Vgl. Bertolt Brechtin,,Die Verurteilungdes Lukullus",1938/39:,,Immer doch schreibtder
Sieger die Geschichte des Besiegten. Dem Erschlagenen entstellt der Schlager die Züge. Aus der
Welt geht der Schwächere und zurück bleibt die Lüge."
33 On the basis of the materially existing society,i.e. outside of and independent of the
consciousness of the individuals at the level of development of the productive forces and the
resulting socialrelations of production,the resulting divisionof society into classes,because itis
not social consciousness that determines social existence, but the other way round. Marx thus
settles accounts with Hegel's idealist dialectic.
=====第7页=====
metaphysics. It regards things (or ideas, or ideas and their material basis) as isolated
from one another, to such an extent that a historiography that elaborates laws of
development becomes completely impossible; it degenerates into a kind of ultra-
subjectivism. How this manifests itself in the communication of historical knowledge can
be impressively observed today in recent historical documentaries in which, apart from
a loose description of historical events, the main focus is on describing different
individual fates that occurred in this historical period and were handed down, for
example, through diaries, which are sometimes more, sometimes less connected with
the formative events of the historical period. Since these individual fates are often
portrayed by actors in a very emotional way,one gets the impression that one is
watching an episode of "Game of Thrones" or a medieval (or other human epoch) soap
opera. What one actually learns about the historical development of human society and
how this is connected to the overall development is not really clear in this respect, even
if the interest of some viewers is perhaps increased by this form.
Now that we have described discourse analysis in its general, common features as
well as its practical significance, we move on to the postmodernism that follows from it.
 Postmodernism - an Idealist Philosophy of a Dying System
Postmodernism emerges from the metaphysical method of Discourse Analysis and
Foucault's "death of the author". Because of the diffuseness and arbitrariness with
which Discourse Analysis works, postmodernism itself is fragmented into almost
innumerable individual directions, so it is necessary not to get lost in the innumerable
individual directions in which every academic makes his or her mark,so it would be
impossible to identify any philosophical direction at all and to grasp it in a concentrated
way; instead, it is necessary to summarise the commonalities of all these directions and
currents and to develop the critique of them. Otherwise, it would be an exercise akin to
shadow boxing. Here we refer to postmodernism as part of the rotten philosophy of the
dying imperialist system and not to the so-called "postmodernism" as a period of
bourgeois historiography, this term is already over 150 years old, postmodernism on the
other hand is a relative new creation of bourgeois academics.
Francois Lyotard published his book "The Postmodern Condition: A Report on
Knowledge" in 1979. In it, Lyotard postulates the "end of the grand narratives" for
philosophy, art, culture and the social sciences. His thesis in condensed form was apt:
"Simplifying to the extreme, I define postmodern as
incredulity
toward
metanarratives.
"34
By metanarratives,Lyotard understands the Enlightenment, idealism and historicism.
By idealism, however, Lyotard does not comprehend philosophical idealism as the
philosophical counterpart to materialism,but rather "self-consciousness after Hegel",
34 Jean-Franois Lyotard,"The Postmodern Condition: A Reporton Knowledge",1979
=====第8页=====
which leads to an "ideology of wholeness". In other words: Lyotard flatly rejects
universallyvalid truths (and consequently also Marxism)byrejecting the concept of
idealism. The same is true with regard to his understanding of "historicism". At the same
time,Lyotard rejects continuous development or "progress",specifically any "utopia,
freedom and socialism" 35
Slnstead, postmodernism, as an academic discipline, focuses entirely on language or
so-called language games and at the same time rejects all concepts,views and (in
general) ideologies that believe they can objectively understand, describe, prove and
thus practically change the world in the best possible way by means of empirical methods
and theoretical concepts. According to postmodernism,everything in the world is
subjective and ultimately a series of different "narratives",i.e. a concatenation of
subjective views.
After this brief overview of the origins and the basic theses of postmodernism, we now
come to summarise some of its central aspects. As I said, the aim here is to grasp the
different, almost indefinable forms of this idealistic philosophy in their intersection in
order to make them comprehensible in this way. Central aspects of postmodernism are:
First. Advocating a radical pluralism that expresses itself in making "dissent" an
inviolable sovereignty,since it is "structurally anchored in speech". This means that
different opinions and positions stand "inefaceable" next to each other,which in turn
means that unity on a question is impossible. In addition,not only is the struggle of
opinions (contrary to the Marxist principle of unity and struggle: unity - struggle - higher
unity; corresponding to struggle as absolute and unity as relative)trivialised, so to speak
- i.e. a subjectivist and one-sided focus is placed on the simple opposition or juxtaposition
of ideas - but also that these ideas, positions, opinions all have the same right to exist, all
are fundamentally equally legitimate. Hence the great emphasis that postmodernism
places on communication,everyone should / must tell their "narrative",but since all
opinions are fundamentally equal, this also means that no opinion will ever prevail roof
in practice doesn't count anyway),which results in the negation of development,
although struggle is supposedly being waged,which is anti-dialectical in its essence,
since it negates the never-ending development through the struggle of contradictions, as
Lyotard has already done.
Secondly. Strong emphasis on emotionality. Which takes the position of a result and a
cause at the same time, for the negation of the objective dialectical materialistic
consideration of different postions. Postmodernism has thus created a tautology³ that
allows it to negate the existence of a higher level of truth on the basis of a person's
feelings. For, because a higher truth does not exist, an opinion can also be rejected or
negated on the basis of another person's feelings. In general negation, that on the basis of
35
Ibid
36
In "logic" a generally valid statement, e.g. "If it rains, it rains".
=====第9页=====
practice as a criterion of truth, a higher truth must be recognised. The dog bites its own
tail. A person's feelings are declared to be an argument, who doesn't know it who has once
moved within the "left scene" when the political discussion is suddenly neutered because it
becomes uncomfortable for someone.
Thirdly. Ultra-individualism. If the individual and his or her supposed subjective needs
and sensitivities are in the foreground, a vulgar "me-me-me mentality" follows. In
particular,it is felt impossible to dedicate oneself to a higher cause that is more
important than one's own ego, which also means not exposing oneself to the hardships of
struggle that this noble goal requires, e.g. an organization based on democratic
centralism in which one only has as much say as one is actually willing to work for (not
only in word but also in deed).
These are some of the most important core elements of postmodernism. From the
comments already made, it is clear how it opposes dialectical materialism (and its
application to history) and evokes a crass idealism that has nothing whatsoever in
common with the reflection of material reality. He tries to create a new reality from his
idea of the world by focusing especially on language, but language does not create
material reality.
Comrade Stalin develops the following in this regard: "Language exists, language
has been created precisely in order to serve society as a whole, as a means of
intercourse between people, in order to be common to the members of society
and constitute the single language of society, serving members of society
equally, irrespective of their class status. A language has only to depart from
this position of being a language common to the whole people, it has only to
give preference and support to some one social group to the detriment of other
social groups of the society, and it loses its virtue,ceases to be a means of
intercourse between the people of the society, and becomes the jargon of some
social group, degenerates and is doomed to disappear." Comrade Stalin does not
deny that "everything in the world has a class character" when he states: "It is no
secret to anyone that the Russian language served Russian capitalism and
Russian bourgeois culture before the October Revolution just as well as it now
serves the socialist system and socialist culture of Russian society." Further:
"What object would there be in calling "water," "earth," "mountain," "forest,"
"fish," "man," "towalk,""todo,""toproduce,""totrade,"tc.,otwaterarth,
mountain, etc., but something else? What object would there be in having the
modification of words in a language and the combination of words in sentences
follow not the existing grammar, but some entirely different grammar? What
Theold
=====第10页=====
course of a few years, in order to give free scope for the development of the
productive forces of society; but how can an existing language be destroyed
and a new one built in its place in the course of a few years without causing
anarchy in social life and without creating the threat of the disintegration of
society? Who but a Don Quixote could set himself such a task?"37
Postmodernism in Practice
Since human society in itself, like everything that exists, is moving matter,
postmodernism cannot avoid practice. However, from the pure idea, it tries to "construct"
reality with the help of language, which means that practice is not the criterion of truth,
but merely a sign of whether the idea has already been fully realised. Based on
postmodernist thinking,it then follows in practice that the problem is not mainly class
struggle, because where there are no "metanarratives", classes do not exist as the main
form of division in society, but a "new" form of social order is fantasised.
This is expressed in the questionof "Empire" and "Multitude" by Antonio Negri38and
Michel Hardt³ - it is important to draw this connection. And let us remember: Foucault
originally comes from the revolutionary movement, Negri and Hardt come from the
autonomous movement and Negri is often wrongly attributed a connection to the Red
Brigades.
Then comes the Tripple-Oppression-Theory. This spread at the beginning of the 90s in
the so-called autonomous left in the FRG, it came from the USA in its beginnings in the
70s, spread mainly through the petty-bourgeois feminist movement also in Europe and
was also connected with groups that led armed struggle and with revisionism. According
to this theory, there are three forms of oppression: race, gender and class. And there is
no difference between them, i.e. a woman (any woman) is just as much a revolutionary
subject as a proletarian man and therefore these forms of oppression must be fought
simultaneously. In the book "Three to One", this theory is summarised as follows:
(DeepL)"/t is not the separateness of oppressions that is essential, but their
articulation to each other. None of them is completely reduced to another or
completely appropriated by others; they form a coherent reality. The model of a
network of domination is not bad as an aid to imagination:
The meshes of the net are wider (metropolis) or tighter (tricont). The threads are older
(patriarchy) or newer (capitalism). More stable (in the FRG, for example) or weaker (in
Central America, for example). The threads form different knots (racisms are
connected to capitalism differently than patriarchy, etc.) and the web is repaired and
37
Stalin, "Marxism and Problems of Linguistics", 1950
38
Antonio Negri (born 1933); Italian political scientist
39
 Michael Hardt (born 1960); U.S.-American literary theorist
=====第11页=====
rewoven by some (capital, state,whites, men) to tie up others (women, blacks,
workers) and they tear it as best they can.
The notion of a net-like domination, in which top and bottom are preserved in each
thread and knot, but no sole cause, no main contradiction is presupposed anymore,
also touches the question of the revolutionary subject.
1140
The influence of postmodernism, with its negation of materialist dialectics, is already
evident here. Everything is equally important, you don't have to find out the principal side
of a contradiction, but strike hard everywhere at the same time. In the revolutionary
movement in the FRG,this theory finds its expression until today in the slogan "unite
struggles". The "equally importante" struggles would have to be waged simultaeously
and then these "partial struggles" could be linked. But in the end,everyone is individually
at the mercy of their oppression. But this takes us in circles and the logical consequence
of this theory is intersectionality, which in part leads to an absurd competition to see who
is most oppressed due to different "mechanisms of oppression".
The Triple-Oppression-Theory was followed by people like Judith Butler⁴l who put the
question of "gender" on the agenda. While the Triple-Oppression-Theory still talks about
patriarchy, Gender-Theory is no longer about patriarchy, but about sexism, i.e. the
question of gender as an idea, not a material reality. The term "sexism" is a substitute for
patriarchy. Whoever uses the term sexism negates patriarchal oppression, because it is
not about the oppression of women by men, but about the oppression of all forms of
"genders", which again are only "constructs".⁴² So they only exist on the basis of the idea
created before.
This gender theory then plays a crucial role in what comes with LGBT etc.. It
culminates in the identity politics that are so widespread today and are now wildly
discussed even in bourgeois circles, which also brings up a whole range of different
concepts. This also brings up the questions of decolonisation or post-colonialism or "Black
Lives Matter", which includes much of this thinking. The unintentional founder of
postcolonialism studies was Edward Said with his well-known work "Orientalism". He sees
the cause of the oppression of semi-colonial and semi-feudal countries in an ominous
"Eurocentrism" that would separate the Orient from the Occident through its "Western
science" and exert dominance especially through its language. Accordingly,one would
40
Klaus Viehmann u.a., ,,Drei zu Eins", 1993
41
Judith Butler (born in 1956); U.S.-American philosoph
reinterpreted inpostmodest wa,thatupodatiachow loerstands r
=====第12页=====
have to "decolonise"The problem with this decolonisation is that it negates real existing
imperialism. For its problem is not to promote the national liberation struggle of the
oppressed nations, but above all to change the ideas of the people in the imperialist
countries, that is, to impose change on the basis of ideas. In the same breath, the
peoples of the oppressed nations are also denied the right to the actual solution to
eliminate their exploitation and oppression. This is because they are not allowed to turn
to or apply Marxism, since this too is supposedly informed by the Western Enlightenment.
Following the postmodern premise of the elimination of "metanarratives", the universal
applicability of Marxism is negated. This, incidentally, has shown itself to be particularly
vivid and indispensable to the liberation struggle in oppressed nations; the victorious
revolution in China is the best example of this, but also the liberation struggle of Korea
and Vietnam and today's people's wars in Peru, India, Turkey and the Philippines put the
post-colonialists in their place. For we recall one of the basic theses of Marxism: the
problem is not to interpret the world, but to change it. The communists enforce Marxism
by changing reality,and people's war is the most radical form of changing matter. And
thoughts are also matter. What the post-colonialists say is that decolonisation is an
ideological struggle,a "cultural struggle" in other words. In political practice,this then
leads to discussions about who is allowed to say what. Suddenly, the communists and
progressive forces in the imperialist countries are no longer allowed to show solidarity
with the struggles of the peoples of the oppressed nations, are not allowed to use slogans
in their languages because that would allegedly be "cultural appropriation". At the same
time,the concept of "communities" is being advanced, then there is the African
community,the Latino community,the Kurdish community,etc.,etc. But this concept
creates or "constructs" something that does not exist in this way at all, because it ignores
the class differences within these alleged communities, but even among Africans, there
are bourgeoisie, petty bourgeois, workers, intellectuals, etc. These often do not have very
much in common. These often do not have much in common (in addition, there is no such
thing as "the Africans"). Among them there are different ideological and political opinions,
different class interests,class sentiments, class positions and world views,there are
fascists, communists, progressives, etc. among them. There are atheists, Christians,
Muslims,agnostics, etc. among them. What is then made the characteristic of the
association here is what is actually not supposed to play a role: The origin or the alleged
"race", the skin colour.
The Rollback in the Women's Movement
The harmful and reactionary influence of postmodernism or identity politics is also
leaving its clear mark on the women's movement. In the emergence of the progressive
women's movement, especially in the 1960s, one of the central points was the negation
of the traditional role of women. One should no longer wear a bra, shave one's legs,
accept "female" role models or ideals of beauty. Although this movement was strongly
influenced by the petty bourgeoisie, the communist parties also had their influence here.
Postmodernism then says that all this,the role of women in society, gender itself, are all
=====第13页=====
constructs. As described above, Gender-Theory emerges,in which the question of an
allegedly constructed gender plays an important role.
This leads to a problem inidentity politicstoday, because ifthere isno biological sex,
what defines what a woman is? The answer that identity politics arrives at is: woman is
whoever is or looks "female" (or simply claims to be a woman). The struggle of the
women's movement used to be that these differences in appearance should not exist. You
can see this in how "flirtatious" the women comrades were in the Cultural Revolution.
They had the same cap and the same jacket as the male comrades, a slightly different
haircut perhaps and sometimes a skirt, but that was it. And that was a good thing. They
then also did the same jobs as the men and were in no way inferior to them.4 This is the
Marxist understanding of women's liberation. Today with identity politics, a woman is
defined by whether she moves, dresses and makes up like a woman. A transsexual man
who claims to be a woman is celebrated as a woman because he is "feminine" and
moves, dresses and makes up like a woman. This has negated the whole struggle for
women's liberation of the last decades, thus plays a backwarded role in the women's
movement. On top of that, one idea of identity politics is that a marginalised minority can
take degrading and stigmatising terms and reinterpret them to their liking,"positively
occupy" them. This leads to the fact that suddenly there are people in the women's
movement who claim that when women call each other "whore" or "bitch" all the time,
instead of slapping pimps and patriarchal pigs on the head,this is part of women's
liberation. This postmodernist position,which emerges from Discourse Analysis and
grants languathablitcatlityihalexsindanguage
acrobatics with all their asterisks,colons and Binnen-I What does this lead to? To a
change in the situation of women? To the destruction of patriarchy? Unfortunately not,
because that requires the struggle against the imperialist system. What it actually leads
to is the eternal academic discussion about which spelling would be the most "inclusive"
in order to make women "visible",but in reality it does not advance the fight against
imperialism and patriarchy one step, but instead the women's movement is further
fragmented and those who do not use the proper "gender" become the preferred target
of moral apostolic rebukes. If women are to become truly"visible", then they themselves
must ensure this in directmilitant action,guided by theideologyofthe proletariat.
Finally,to summarize: To realise its idea, postmodernism has given birth to identity
politics. Better said,identity politics is the next step in the increasing decay of
bourgeois idealism in its "left" manifestation, as an expression of the ideological decay
of imperialism, in a long strand of increasing decay. It is idealist because, in the
tradition of Discourse Analysis and postmodernism,it puts the idea first and not the
actually existing material realityof human society,which is being transformed bythe
class struggle.Today,when alleged communist groups,organisations and parties adopt
aspects of this bourgeois idealism,it is nothing other than revisionism. For they
Claudie Broyelle, ,,Die Hälfte des Himmels - Frauenemanzipation und
43Vgl.
u.a.
Kindererziehung in China", 1974
=====第14页=====
smuggle bourgeois points of view into the ideology of the international proletariat and
thereby reject it as a self-contained, harmonious system,all-powerful because it is
true.44 True because it is confirmed in practice over and over again.
The"Right" Form of Bourgeois Idealism
Having discussed the "left" form of bourgeois idealism, we now come to the other side
of the coin, the "right" form45. This is expressed in a resurgence of religious obscurantism
(religiosity is one of the feelings of the masses that we must explicitly respect in order to
change them in a long ideological struggle). It is important to emphasise here that we are
talking about imperialism as a world system. Because we can see how massive
campaigns are being carried out in the oppressed nations in this sense - there is the Is
(Islamic State/ISlS, translators note.) especially in Arab countries, Modi in India, especially
the evangelicals in Africa and Latin America. All these forces have - despite their obvious
differences - one big thing in common: they correspond (more or less and more or less
obviously) to the interests of imperialism by dividing the national liberation movement,
this is so even though parts of these forces are at a certain moment put in a position by
"coincidence and necessity" (mainly by the shortcomings of the communists, who do not
correspond to their role and tasks) to be at the head of the national liberation movement
and to lead at that moment the anti-imperialist struggle of the masses. Their greatest
common denominator is anti-communism or anti-materialism. This circumstance is also
concretised here in the FRG in our neighbourhoods, the workers' neighbourhoods, where
all these forces have their effect.
We have to understand this religiosity as obscurantism, i.e. the purpose to keep people
deliberately ignorant, often but not always,combined with the belief in an inexplicale
higher power, such as a "god". This obscurantism is not only expressed in religiosity,
because fewer and fewer people are members of the large church congregations (in the
FRG mainly of Protestant and Catholic origin).4 But at the same time, homeopathy is sold
in pharmacies and the health insurance companies in Germany pay for it to a certain
extent.⁴ The manufacturers of the remedies, which demonstrably have no medical effect,
44 Vgl. Lenin in: "The Three Sources and Three Components of Marxism",LW Volume 19: "The
Marxist doctrine is omnipotent because it is true. It is comprehensive and harmonious,
and provides men with an integral world outlook irreconcilable with any form of
superstition, reaction, or defence of bourgeois oppression."
45Our comment on "left" also applies accordingly at this point.
46The abuseaalsttkeep lguppcllinteathiChucadtwait dals
with them contribute to this general tendency.
=====第15页=====
receive support notonlyom theranksofthe Green Party48,but alo from thetop floor of
the Ministry of Health. Jens Spahn, for example, decided not to abolish the coverage of
homeopathy by health insurers; he could, but he won't.4 And as I said, homeopathy
means that it is not medicine and it has been proven that it doesn't work. Nevertheless,
this obscurantism is an accepted part of society and even gets support in its propagation
by the highest levels of the German government. The so-called "New Age", the esoterics,
compensate - perhaps not in the number of their members or followers, but in their work
more than enough - for the loss of paying church members in the political sense.
How religiosity is spread and promoted can also be seen in the UsA, where anyone can
found a church and then not have to pay taxes. And it goes so far that the negation of the
right to abortion is brought forward, more and more and more. Examples of this are
among others countries like Poland, the USA and so on. By the Catholic Church above all,
but in conspiracy with the Protestant Church and its most radical offshoots, the
Evangelicals. For example, the Catholic Church has formed joint hospitals with non-
Catholic providers and there, as a "compromise", the right to abort is then abolished. 50 In
the Malteser-Diako-Klinikum, Germany's first ecumenical hospital, a merger between the
Malteser Franziskus Hospital and the Diakonissen Hospital in Flensburg, no abortions are
performed, according to a report in the "taz".51
Obscurantism is also spread by the so-called conspiracy theories, which exist in the
most diverse forms. UFO myths and so-called "Urban Legends" of all kinds, which are also
actively spread and are an accepted part of society,and are currently particularly
popular. Exemplary are the UFO myths,which are now no longer presented as mere
theories or possibilities in various TV formats, but as cash. The TV series "Ancient Aliens"
stands out in particular here; it is now in its 16th season with 193 episodes. In Germany it
runs on the channel KabelEinsDoku up and down. It has been produced since 2009, which
means that this trash has been broadcast for twelve years. The basic premise,
regurgitated in every episode, is that aliens have repeatedly visited Earth in the past and
that all ancient cultures were founded or influenced by them. Their anti-materialism is
also more than obvious. For like religions, these theories claim that the basic premise of
human society lies not in the contradictions of society itself, i.e. class struggle, but that a
higher power had to intervene from outside to bring human society to the point it is
banned, paid among others for character assassination campaigns against journalists and medical
practitioners; cf. sueddeutsche.de, "Schmutzige Methoden der sanften Medizin"("Dirty methods of
soft medicine"), 30 June 2012) provides a list of 65 health insurance companies on its website.
48 The Green health politician Kordula Schulz-Asche described homeopathy as "complementary
medicine",whichis"animporant additiotoorthodoxmedicine"eearblat.de,"Spahn does
not want to touch homeopathy at health insurance costs", 18 September 2019
49 aerzteblatt.de,,Spahn will Homoopathie auf Kassenkostennicht antasten",18. September
2019
50 usatoday.com,,Worried about abortion laws? Catholic hospital mergers also seen as threat to
women's health care", 27. Dezember 2019
51Vgl.taz.de,,Keine Abtreibungen in Flensburger Klinik: Fusion mit Folgen",04.November 2019
=====第16页=====
today. This is just as obscurantism and sometimes comrades make fun of it, but it is the
ideology of imperialism and it is also propagated by the highest echelons of Yankee
imperialism, as only recently former US president Obama,through some nebulous
comments, again triggered a debate about aliens visiting Earth,which was even dealt
with in official government document.52 53
This is the "right" form of bourgeois idealism,which, just like its "left-wing" variation,
negates any kind of materialism.
The Response of Revisionism and Opportunism
What is the response of the revisionist and opportunist of any kind, if they are not
anyway supporters of postmodernism and identity politics? Their answer is to uphold an
extremely mechanical materialism. And this has been expressed very clearly in the
pandemic, but also before. What did Greta Thunberg,the Jeanne d'Arc of the climate
movement,say: "Listen to the scientists"4? That means forget the class struggle and
listen to the scientists, they are supposed to exist detached from the class struggle and
their ideas should not have the stamp of a class. But that is not how the world works. And
what are we experiencing now in the pandemic? Drosten, Lauterbach and all their names
are sitting there dictating how we should live. And what are large sections of the youth
doing? Instead of rebelling,they join in. That is "Listen to the scientists". What is Zero-
Covid？Also"Listtothscietists",it'sthecall"Forttheclass strugleand lsnt
the scientists,they'll show you the way!" But in human society, their ideas are also linked
to the interests of different classes, accordingly we cannot and must not forget the class
struggle.
The task, accordingly, is not to uphold "materialism" but DiALETIC MATERiALiSM, as we
show in this account of the decomposition of the ideology of imperialism. This misery that
imperialism has created for itself, the flags it has raised because it is a dying system,
these are flags that do not even have anything to do with enlightenment. But our task is
not to raise the flags of enlightenment against it, not to come with Diderot, but with
Marxism, today Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, Principally Maoism with the Universally Valid
Contributions of Chairman Gonzalo, i.e. Gonzalo Thought. That is, we must show the
strength of Marxist philosophy and its vitality, that it is not a mystery but belongs to the
masses. Just as the Chinese comrades have done in many dozens of writen examples in
which the workers, peasants, soldiers show how they apply dialectical materialism to
their reality in order to change it further. The classics have armed us accordingly for this
52
tagesschau.de, ,,Was der Senat über UFOs wissen muss", 25. Juni 2021
53
swr.de/swr2, ,,Sogar Obama glaubt an UFOs", 08. Juni 2021
54
theguardian.com,,Listen to the scientists': Greta Thunbergurges Congress to take action",
18. September 2019
55
 Siehe u.a. die Schriften ,Eins teilt sich in zwei" und ,,Philosophy is no Mystery"
=====第17页=====
and comrades must accordingly master, above all, Chairman Mao's works "On Practice"
and "On Contradiction" like the ABC and this must be passed on to the masses.
Identity politics,conspiracy theories or "listen to the scientists" are expressions of the rot,
the decline, the decay of imperialism, they are expressions of its backward ideology and
nothing new. The new must replace the old. Accordingly, Marxist philosophy will replace
bourgeois philosophy. This is a law, but it requires eforts that have to be made, and what
a joy it is to sweep away all the reactionary dirt, the great heap of rubbish, with an all-
powerful, because true and ever more true, scientific ideology.
=====第18页=====