# Selected Works

==========

## Table of contents








Marx & Engels Selected Works




MIA: M.I.A. Library: Marx & Engels: Selected Works


 

Marx Engels Selected Works

Progress Publishers, 1968


Karl Marx: Brief biographical sketch with an exposition of Marxism by V.I. Lenin
11

Engels by V.I. Lenin
15

The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism by V.I. Lenin
23

Theses on Feuerbach by Karl Marx
28

Manifesto of the Communist Party
31

Preface to the German Edition of 1872
31

From the Preface to the German Edition of 1890
32

Manifesto of the Communist Party

I. Bourgeois and Proletarians
35

II. Proletarians and Communists
46

III. Socialist and Communist Literature
53

1. Reactionary Socialism
53

A. Feudal Socialism
53

B. Petty-Bourgeois Socialism
55

C. German or “True” Socialism
56

2. Conservative or Bourgeois Socialism
58

3. Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism
59

IV. Position of the Communists in Relation to
  the Various Existing Opposition Parties
62

Wage Labor and Capital by Karl Marx
64

Introduction by Engels
64

Wage Labor and Capital
72

The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte by Karl Marx
95

Preface to the Third German Edition by Engels
95

The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte

I. 
97

II. 
105

III. 
115

IV. 
127

V. 
136

VI. 
152

VII. 
168

Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy by Karl Marx
181

Wages, Price and Profit by Karl Marx
186

[Preliminary] 
186

I. [Production and Wages] 
186

II. [Production, Wages, Profits] 
188

III. [Wages and Currency] 
195

IV. [Supply and Demand] 
198

V. [Wages and Prices] 
200

VI. [Value and Labour] 
202

VII. Labouring Power 
209

VIII. Production of Surplus Value 
211

IX. Value of Labour 
213

X. Profit is made by Selling a Commodity at its Value 
214

XI. The different Parts into which Surplus Value is Decomposed 
215

XII. General Relation of Profits, Wages and Prices 
217

XIII. Main cases of Attempts at Raising Wages or Resisting their Fall 
219

XIV. The Struggle between Capital and Labour and its Results 
224

Preface to the First German Edition of Capital by Karl Marx
230

Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation by Marx, Capital Ch XXXII, Vol. I
235

Preface to The Peasant War in Germany
238

Supplement to the Preface of 1870 for the Third Edition of 1875
238

The Civil War in France by Marx
252

Introduction by Engels
252

First Address of the General Council of the International
263

Second Address of the General Council of the International
267

The Civil War in France. Address of the General Council of the International

I. [France Capitulates & the Government of Thiers]
274

II. Paris Workers' Revolution & Thiers' Reactionary Massacres] 
282

III. [The Paris Commune] 
288

IV. [The Fall of Paris] 
301

Notes.
311

Apropos of Working-Class Political Action by Engels
314

Critique of the Gotha Programme by Karl Marx
315

Part I. 
319

Part II. 
328

Part III. 
329

Part IV. 
330

Letter to A. Bebel by Engels
336

Introduction to Dialectics of Nature by Engels
342

The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man by Engels
358

Karl Marx by Engels
369

Socialism: Utopian and Scientific by Engels
379

Special Introduction to the English Edition of 1892
379

Socialism: Utopian and Scientific

Part I: [Utopian Socialism]
399

Part II: [Dialectics]
410

Part III: [Historical Materialism]
417

Speech at the Graveside of Karl Marx by Engels
435

On the History of the Communist League by Engels
437

The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State by Engels
455

Preface to the First Edition 1884
455

Preface to the Fourth Edition 1891
457

The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State

Stages of Prehistoric Culture
468

The Family
473

The Iroquois Gens
518

The Greek Gens [The Rise of Private Property]
530

The Rise of the Athenian State 
537

The Gens and the State in Rome
546

The Gens Among Celts and Germans
555

The Formation of the State Among the Germans
567

Barbarism and Civilization
576

Appendix: A Recently Discovered Case of Group Marriage
 

Ludwig Feuerbach & the end of Classical German Philosophy
594

Foreword
594

Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy

Part 1: Hegel
596

Part 2: Materialism
603

Part 3: Feuerbach
611

Part 4: Marx
618

The Peasant Question in France and Germany
633

Introduction to Marx's The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850
651

Letters669

Marx to P. V. Annenkov, December 28, 1846669

Marx to J. Weydemeyer, March 5, 1852 679

Marx to L. Kugelmann, April 12, 1871 679

Marx to L. Kugelmann, April 17, 1871 681

Marx to F. Bolte, November 23, 1871 681

Engels to A. Bebel, June 20, 1873 684

Marx to W. Blos, November 10, 1877 687

Engels to K. Kautsly, September 12, 1882 688

Engels to C. Schmidt, August 5, 1890 688

Engels to Otto von Boenigk, August 21, 1890 690

Engels to J. Bloch, September 21, 1890692

Engels to C. Schmidt, October 27, 1890 694

Engels to F. Mehring, July 14, 1893 699

Engels to W. Borgius, January 25, 1894704





Selected Works Index
Marx & Engels Internet Archive | MIA

 






==========

## Karl Marx: Brief biographical sketch with an exposition of Marxism











Index to Lenin's 'Karl Marx'




Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Karl Marx
A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism


Written: 1914
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Moscow, 1974,
  Volume 21, pp. 43-91.
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1915 in the Granat Encyclopaedia, 
  Seventh Edition, Vol. 28, over the signature of V. Ilyin.
      Published according to the manuscript, checked against the text of the pamphlet of 1918.
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription:
Zodiac
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters, 
  B. Baggins, 
  R. Cymbala, and
  Kevin Goins
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008).You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Lenin wrote this article for the Encyclopaedia
    Dictionary published by the Granat Brothers, which was then the most popular
    in Russia. In the preface for the pamphlet edition in 1918 Lenin gave the
    date of writing as 1913, from memory. Actually, he began it in the spring of
    1914 in Poronin, but had to interrupt it, being too busy with his work
    guiding the Party and the newspaper Pravda. Lenin resumed his work
    on the aritcle only in September that year, after he had moved to Berne, and
    finished it in the first half of November.
The aritcle was published in 1915 in Volume 28 of the
    Dictionary with Bibliography of Marxism appended to it; it
    was signed V. Ilyin. For censorship reasons, the editors omitted
    two chapters: Socialism and Tactics of the Class Struggle of
    the Proletariat and made a number of changes in the text.
In 1918, the Priboi Publishers put out the article in
    pamphlet form exactly as published in the Dictionary but without
    the “Bibliography.”
The full text of the article according to the manuscript was
    first published by the Lenin Institute of the C.P.S.U. Central Committee in
    the collection of Lenin’s articles Marx, Engels, Marxism,
    which appeared in 1925.

Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript.

 

Contents




Preface




Marx, Karl, was born...




The Marxist Doctrine




Marx’s Economic Doctrine




Socialism




Tactics of the Class Struggle 
  of the Proletariat




Bibliography




 
 







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 



==========

## Engels






Lenin: Frederick Engels







Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Frederick Engels




Written: Written in autumn 1895 

Published:

      First published in 1896 in the miscellany Rabotnik, No. 1–2.

      Published according to the text in Rabotnik.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Moscow,

      Volume 2,

      pages 15-28.

      Transcription:
Zodiac
Transcription\Markup:
B. Baggins and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive.

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



      What a torch of reason ceased to burn, What a heart has ceased to

      beat!
    

      On August 5 (new style), 1895, Frederick Engels died in London. After his
      friend Karl Marx (who died in 1883), Engels was the finest scholar and
      teacher of the modern proletariat in the whole civilised world. From the
      time that fate brought Karl Marx and Frederick Engels together, the two
      friends devoted their life’s work to a common cause. And so to understand
      what Frederick Engels has done for the proletariat, one must have a clear
      idea of the significance of Marx’s teaching and work for the development
      of the contemporary working-class movement. Marx and Engels were the first
      to show that the working class and its demands are a necessary outcome of
      the present economic system, which together with the bourgeoisie
      inevitably creates and organises the proletariat. They showed that it is
      not the well-meaning efforts of noble-minded individuals, but the class
      struggle of the organised proletariat that will deliver humanity from the
      evils which now oppress it. In their scientific works, Marx and Engels
      were the first to explain that socialism is not the invention of dreamers,
      but the final aim and necessary result of the development of the
      productive forces in modern society. All recorded history hitherto has
      been a history of class struggle, of the succession of the rule and
      victory of certain social classes over others. And this will continue
      until the foundations of class struggle and of class domination – private
      property and anarchic social production – disappear. The interests of the
      proletariat demand the destruction of these foundations, and therefore the
      conscious class struggle of the organised workers must be directed against
      them. And every class struggle is a political struggle.

    

      These views of Marx and Engels have now been adopted by all proletarians
      who are fighting for their emancipation.
      But when in the forties the two friends took part in the socialist
      literature and the social movements of their time, they were absolutely
      novel. There were then many people, talented and without talent, honest
      and dishonest, who, absorbed in the struggle for political freedom, in the
      struggle against the despotism of kings, police and priests, failed to
      observe the antagonism between the interests of the bourgeoisie and those
      of the proletariat. These people would not entertain the idea of the
      workers acting as an independent social force. On the other hand, there
      were many dreamers, some of them geniuses, who thought that it was only
      necessary to convince the rulers and the governing classes of the
      injustice of the contemporary social order, and it would then be easy to
      establish peace and general well-being on earth. They dreamt of a
      socialism without struggle. Lastly, nearly all the socialists of that time
      and the friends of the working class generally regarded the proletariat
      only as an ulcer, and observed with horror how it grew with the
      growth of industry. They all, therefore, sought for a means to stop the
      development of industry and of the proletariat, to stop the “wheel of
      history.”  Marx and Engels did not share the general fear of the
      development of the proletariat; on the contrary, they placed all their
      hopes on its continued growth. The more proletarians there are, the
      greater is their strength as a revolutionary class, and the nearer and
      more possible does socialism become. The services rendered by Marx and
      Engels to the working class may be expressed in a few words thus: they
      taught the working class to know itself and be conscious of itself, and
      they substituted science for dreams.

    

      That is why the name and life of Engels should be known to every
      worker. That is why in this collection of articles, the aim of which, as
      of all our publications, is to awaken class-consciousness in the Russian
      workers, we must give a sketch of the life and work of Frederick Engels,
      one of the two great teachers of the modern proletariat.
    


      Engels was born in 1820 in Barmen, in the Rhine Province of the
      kingdom of Prussia. His father was a manufacturer. In 1838 Engels, without
      having completed his high-school studies, was forced by family circumstances
      to enter a commercial house in Bremen as a clerk. Commercial affairs did

    

      not prevent Engels from pursuing his scientific and political education.
      He had come to hate autocracy and the tyranny of bureaucrats while still
      at high school. The study of philosophy led him further. At that time
      Hegel’s teaching dominated German philosophy, and Engels became his
      follower. Although Hegel himself was an admirer of the autocratic Prussian
      state, in whose service he was as a professor at Berlin University,
      Hegel’s teachings were revolutionary. Hegel’s faith in human
      reason and its rights, and the fundamental thesis of Hegelian philosophy
      that the universe is undergoing a constant process of change and
      development, led some of the disciples of the Berlin philosopher – those
      who refused to accept the existing situation – to the idea that the
      struggle against this situation, the struggle against existing wrong and
      prevalent evil, is also rooted in the universal law of eternal
      development. If all things develop, if institutions of one kind give place
      to others, why should the autocracy of the Prussian king or of the Russian
      tsar, the enrichment of an insignificant minority at the expense of the
      vast majority, or the domination of the bourgeoisie over the people,
      continue for ever? Hegel’s philosophy spoke of the development of the mind
      and of ideas; it was idealistic. From the development of the mind
      it deduced the development of nature, of man, and of human, social
      relations. While retaining Hegel’s idea of the eternal process of
      development,[1]

 Marx and Engels rejected the
      preconceived idealist view; turning to life, they saw that it is not the
      development of mind that explains the development of nature but that, on
      the contrary, the explanation of mind must be derived from nature, from
      matter.... Unlike Hegel and the other Hegelians, Marx and Engels were
      materialists. Regarding the world and humanity materialistically, they
      perceived that just as material causes underlie all natural phenomena, so
      the development of human society is conditioned by the development of
      material forces, the productive forces.  On the development of the
      productive forces depend the relations into which

    

      men enter with one another in the production of the things required for
      the satisfaction of human needs. And in these relations lies the
      explanation of all the phenomena of social life, human aspirations, ideas
      and laws.  The development of the productive forces creates social
      relations based upon private property, but now we see that this same
      development of the productive forces deprives the majority of their
      property and concentrates it in the hands of an insignificant minority. It
      abolishes property, the basis of the modern social order, it itself
      strives towards the very aim which the socialists have set themselves. All
      the socialists have to do is to realise which social force, owing to its
      position in modern society, is interested in bringing socialism about, and
      to impart to this force the consciousness of its interests and of its
      historical task. This force is the proletariat. Engels got to know the
      proletariat in England, in the centre of English industry, Manchester,
      where he settled in 1842, entering the service of a commercial firm of
      which his father was a shareholder.  Here Engels not only sat in the
      factory office but wandered about the slums in which the workers were
      cooped up, and saw their poverty and misery with his own eyes. But he did
      not confine himself to personal observations.  He read all that had been
      revealed before him about the condition of the British working class and
      carefully studied all the official documents he could lay his hands
      on. The fruit of these studies and observations was the book which
      appeared in 1845: The Condition of the Working Class in England.
      We have already mentioned what was the chief service rendered by Engels in
      writing The Condition of the Working Class in England. Even
      before Engels, many people had described the sufferings of the proletariat
      and had pointed to the necessity of helping it. Engels was the
      first to say that the proletariat is not only a
      suffering class; that it is, in fact, the disgraceful economic condition
      of the proletariat that drives it irresistibly forward and compels it to
      fight for its ultimate emancipation. And the fighting proletariat will
      help itself. The political movement of the working class will
      inevitably lead the workers to realise that their only salvation lies in
      socialism. On the other hand, socialism will become a force only when it
      becomes the aim of the political struggle

    

      of the working class. Such are the main ideas of Engels’ book on
      the condition of the working class in England, ideas which have now been
      adopted by all thinking and fighting proletarians, but which at that time
      were entirely new. These ideas were set out in a book written in absorbing
      style and filled with most authentic and shocking pictures of the misery
      of the English proletariat. The book was a terrible indictment of
      capitalism and the bourgeoisie and created a profound impression. Engels’
      book began to be quoted everywhere as presenting the best picture of the
      condition of the modern proletariat. And, in fact, neither before 1845 nor
      after has there appeared so striking and truthful a picture of the misery
      of the working class.

    

      It was not until he came to England that Engels became a socialist.  In
      Manchester he established contacts with people active in the English
      labour movement at the time and began to write for English socialist
      publications.  In 1844, while on his way back to Germany, he became
      acquainted in Paris with Marx, with whom he had already started to
      correspond. In Paris, under the influence of the French socialists and
      French life, Marx had also become a socialist. Here the friends jointly
      wrote a book entitled The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical
      Critique. This book, which appeared a year before The Condition
      of the Working Class in England, and the greater part of which was
      written by Marx, contains the foundations of revolutionary materialist
      socialism, the main ideas of which we have expounded above. “The holy
      family” is a facetious nickname for the Bauer brothers, the philosophers,
      and their followers. These gentlemen preached a criticism which stood
      above all reality, above parties and politics, which rejected all
      practical activity, and which only “critically” contemplated the
      surrounding world and the events going on within it. These gentlemen, the
      Bauers, looked down on the proletariat as an uncritical mass. Marx and
      Engels vigorously opposed this absurd and harmful tendency. In the name of
      a real, human person – the worker, trampled down by the ruling classes
      and the state – they demanded, not contemplation, but a struggle for a
      better order of society. They, of course, regarded the proletariat as the
      force that is capable of waging this struggle and that is interested in
      it. Even before

    

      the appearance of The Holy Family, Engels had published in Marx’s
      and Ruge’s Deutsch-Franz\"osische

Jahrb\"ucher his “Critical Essays
      on Political

Economy,” in which he examined the principal phenomena of the
      contemporary economic order from a socialist standpoint, regarding them as
      necessary consequences of the rule of private property.  Contact with
      Engels was undoubtedly a factor in Marx’s decision to study political
      economy, the science in which his works have produced a veritable
      revolution.

    

      From 1845 to 1847 Engels lived in Brussels and Paris, combining scientific
      work with practical activities among the German workers in Brussels and
      Paris. Here Marx and Engels established contact with the secret German
      Communist

League, which commissioned them to expound the main principles
      of the socialism they had worked out. Thus arose the famous Manifesto
      of the Communist Party of Marx and Engels, published in 1848. This
      little booklet is worth whole volumes: to this day its spirit inspires and
      guides the entire organised and fighting proletariat of the civilised
      world.

    

      The revolution of 1848, which broke out first in France and then spread to
      other West-European countries, brought Marx and Engels back to their
      native country. Here, in Rhenish Prussia, they took charge of the
      democratic Neue Rheinische

Zeitung published in Cologne. The two
      friends were the heart and soul of all revolutionary-democratic
      aspirations in Rhenish Prussia. They fought to the last ditch in defence
      of freedom and of the interests of the people against the forces of
      reaction. The latter, as we know, gained the upper hand. The Neue
      Rheinische Zeitung was suppressed. Marx, who during his exile had
      lost his Prussian citizenship, was deported; Engels took part in the armed
      popular uprising, fought for liberty in three battles, and after the
      defeat of the rebels fled, via Switzerland, to London.
    


      Marx also settled in London. Engels soon became a clerk again, and then a
      shareholder, in the Manchester commercial firm in which he had worked in
      the forties. Until 1870 he lived in Manchester, while Marx lived in
      London, but this did not prevent their maintaining a most lively
      interchange of ideas: they corresponded almost daily. In this
      correspondence

    

      the two friends exchanged views and discoveries and continued to
      collaborate in working out scientific socialism. In 1870 Engels moved to
      London, and their joint intellectual life, of the most strenuous nature,
      continued until 1883, when Marx died. Its fruit was, on Marx’s side,
      Capital, the greatest work on political economy of our age, and
      on Engels’ side, a number of works both large and small. Marx worked on
      the analysis of the complex phenomena of capitalist economy. Engels, in
      simply written works, often of a polemical character, dealt with more
      general scientific problems and with diverse phenomena of the past and
      present in the spirit of the materialist conception of history and Marx’s
      economic theory. Of Engels’ works we shall mention: the polemical work
      against D\"uhring (analysing highly important problems in the domain of
      philosophy, natural science and the social

sciences),[2]
The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State
      (translated into Russian, published in St. Petersburg, 3rd ea.,

1895),
      Ludwig Feuerbach (Russian translation and notes by G.  Plekhanov,
      Geneva,

1892), an article on the foreign policy of the Russian Government
      (translated into Russian in the Geneva Social-Demokrat, Nos. 1
      and

2), splendid articles on the housing

question, and finally, two small
      but very valuable articles on Russia’s economic development (Frederick
      Engels on Russia, translated into Russian by Zasulich, Geneva,

1894).
      Marx died before he could put the final touches to his vast work on
      capital.  The draft, however, was already finished, and after the death of
      his friend, Engels undertook the onerous task of preparing and publishing
      the second and the third volumes of Capital. He published Volume
      II in 1885 and Volume III in 1894 (his death prevented the preparation of

      Volume IV).  These two volumes entailed a vast amount of labour. Adler,
      the Austrian Social-Democrat, has rightly remarked that by publishing
      volumes II and III of Capital Engels erected a majestic monument
      to the genius who had been his friend, a monument on which, without
      intending it, he indelibly carved his own name. Indeed

    

      these two volumes of Capital are the work of two men: Marx and
      Engels. Old legends contain various moving instances of friendship. The
      European proletariat may say that its science was created by two scholars
      and fighters, whose relationship to each other surpasses the most moving
      stories of the ancients about human friendship.  Engels always – and, on
      the whole, quite justly – placed himself after Marx. “In Marx’s
      lifetime,” he wrote to an old friend, “I played second

fiddle.” His love
      for the living Marx, and his reverence for the memory of the dead Marx
      were boundless. This stern fighter and austere thinker possessed a deeply
      loving soul.
    

      After the movement of 1848-49, Marx and Engels in exile did not confine
      themselves to scientific research. In 1864 Marx founded the International
      Working Men’s

Association, and led this society for a whole decade. Engels
      also took an active part in its affairs. The work of the International
      Association, which, in accordance with Marx’s idea, united proletarians of
      all countries, was of tremendous significance in the development of the
      working-class movement. But even with the closing down of the
      International Association in the seventies, the unifying role of Marx and
      Engels did not cease. On the contrary, it may be said that their
      importance as the spiritual leaders of the working-class movement grew
      continuously, because the movement itself grew uninterruptedly. After the
      death of Marx, Engels continued alone as the counsellor and leader of the
      European socialists.  His advice and directions were sought for equally by
      the German socialists, whose strength, despite government persecution,
      grew rapidly and steadily, and by representatives of backward countries,
      such as the Spaniards, Rumanians and Russians, who were obliged to ponder
      and weigh their first steps. They all drew on the rich store of knowledge
      and experience of Engels in his old age.

    

      Marx and Engels, who both knew Russian and read Russian books, took a
      lively interest in the country, followed the Russian revolutionary
      movement with sympathy and maintained contact with Russian
      revolutionaries.  They both became socialists after being
      democrats, and the democratic feeling of hatred for
      political despotism was exceedingly strong in them. This direct political
      feeling, combined

    

      with a profound theoretical understanding of the connection between
      political despotism and economic oppression, and also their rich
      experience of life, made Marx and Engels uncommonly responsive
      politically. That is why the heroic struggle of the handful of
      Russian revolutionaries against the mighty tsarist government evoked a
      most sympathetic echo in the hearts of these tried revolutionaries.  On
      the other hand, the tendency, for the sake of illusory economic
      advantages, to turn away from the most immediate and important task of the
      Russian socialists, namely, the winning of political freedom, naturally
      appeared suspicious to them and was even regarded by them as a direct
      betrayal of the great cause of the social revolution. “The emancipation of
      the workers must be the act of the working class itself” – Marx and
      Engels constantly

taught. But in order to fight for its economic
      emancipation, the proletariat must win itself certain political
      rights. Moreover, Marx and Engels clearly saw that a political revolution
      in Russia would be of tremendous significance to the West-European
      working-class movement as well. Autocratic Russia had always been a
      bulwark of European reaction in general. The extraordinarily favourable
      international position enjoyed by Russia as a result of the war of 1870,
      which for a long time sowed discord between Germany and France, of course
      only enhanced the importance of autocratic Russia as a reactionary
      force. Only a free Russia, a Russia that had no need either to oppress the
      Poles, Finns, Germans, Armenians or any other small nations, or constantly
      to set France and Germany at loggerheads, would enable modern Europe, rid
      of the burden of war, to breathe freely, would weaken all the reactionary
      elements in Europe and strengthen the European working class. That was why
      Engels ardently desired the establishment of political freedom in Russia
      for the sake of the progress of the working-class movement in the West as
      well. In him the Russian revolutionaries have lost their best friend.
    

      Let us always honour the memory of Frederick Engels, a great fighter and
      teacher of the proletariat!
    



Marx/Engels Biography


 
Notes
 

[1]

      Marx and Engels frequently pointed out that in their intellectual
      development they were much indebted to the great German philosophers,
      particularly to Hegel. “Without German philosophy,” Engels says,
      “scientific socialism would never have come into

being.”
    —Lenin

[2]

      This is a wonderfully rich and instructive

book. Unfortunately, only a
      small portion of it, containing a historical outline of the development of
      socialism, has been translated into Russian (The Development of
      Scientific Socialism, 2nd ea., Geneva,

1892).
    —Lenin
 







==========

## The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism




Lenin: The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism


 Published: Prosveshcheniye 
  No 3., March 1913.  Signed: V. I..  Published according 
  to the Prosveshcheniye text.
      Source: Lenin’s Collected 
  Works, Progress Publishers, 1977, Moscow, Volume 19,
      pages 21-28.
      Translated: The Late George Hanna
      Original Transcription:
Lee 
  Joon Koo and Marc 
  Luzietti
Re-Marked up by: K. Goins (2008)
  Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (1996).
      You may freely copy, distribute,
  display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
  commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
  Archive” as your source.





  This article was published in 1913 in Prosveshcheniye No. 3,
  dedicated to the Thirtieth Anniversary of Marx’s death.

Prosveshcheniye (Enlightenment) was a Bolshevik
  social, political and literary monthly published legally in St. Petersburg
  from December 1911 onwards. Its inauguration was proposed by Lenin to
  replace the Bolshevik journal Mysl (Thought), a Moscow
  publication banned by the tsarist government. Lenin directed the work of
  the journal from abroad and wrote the following articles for it:
  “Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign”, 
  “Results of the Election”, “Critical Remarks on the 
  National Question”, “The Right of
  Nations to Self-Determination”, and others.

  The journal was suppressed by the tsarist government in June
  1914, on the eve of the First World War. Publication was resumed in the
  autumn of 1917 but only one double number appeared; this number contained
  two articles by Lenin: “Can the Bolsheviks Retain State Power?” and “A
  Review of the Party Programme”.


Throughout the civilised world the teachings of Marx evoke
the utmost hostility and hatred of all bourgeois science (both official and
liberal), which regards Marxism as a kind of “pernicious sect”. And no
other attitude is to be expected, for there can be no “impartial” social
science in a society based on class struggle. In one way or another,
all official and liberal science defends wage-slavery,
whereas Marxism has declared relentless war on that slavery. To expect
science to be impartial in a wage-slave society is as foolishly naïve as
to expect impartiality from manufacturers on the question of whether
workers’ wages ought not to be increased by decreasing the profits of
capital.

But this is not all. The history of philosophy and the history of
social science show with perfect clarity that there is nothing resembling
“sectarianism” in Marxism, in the sense of its being a hidebound,
petrified doctrine, a doctrine which arose away from the high road
of the development of world civilisation. On the contrary, the genius of
Marx consists precisely in his having furnished answers to questions
already raised by the foremost minds of mankind. His doctrine emerged as
the direct and immediate continuation of the teachings of the
greatest representatives of philosophy, political economy and socialism.

The Marxist doctrine is omnipotent because it is true. It is
comprehensive and harmonious, and provides men with an integral world
outlook irreconcilable with any form of superstition, reaction, or defence
of bourgeois oppression. It is the legitimate successor to the best that
man produced in the nineteenth century, as represented by German

 

philosophy, English political economy and French socialism.

It is these three sources of Marxism, which are also its component
parts that we shall outline in brief.
I

The philosophy of Marxism is materialism. Throughout the
modern history of Europe, and especially at the end of the eighteenth
century in France, where a resolute struggle was conducted against every
kind of medieval rubbish, against serfdom in institutions and ideas,
materialism has proved to be the only philosophy that is consistent, true
to all the teachings of natural science and hostile to superstition, cant
and so forth. The enemies of democracy have, therefore, always exerted all
their efforts to “refute”, under mine and defame materialism, and have
advocated various forms of philosophical idealism, which always, in one way
or another, amounts to the defence or support of religion.

Marx and Engels defended philosophical materialism in the most
determined manner and repeatedly explained how profoundly erroneous is
every deviation from this basis. Their views are most clearly and fully
expounded in the works of Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and
Anti-Dühring, which, like the Communist Manifesto, are
handbooks for every class-conscious worker.

But Marx did not stop at eighteenth-century materialism:
he developed philosophy to a higher level, he enriched it with the
achievements of German classical philosophy, especially of Hegel’s system,
which in its turn had led to the materialism of Feuerbach. The main
achievement was dialectics, i.e., the doctrine of development in
its fullest, deepest and most comprehensive form, the doctrine of the
relativity of the human knowledge that provides us with a reflection of
eternally developing matter. The latest discoveries of natural
science—radium, electrons, the transmutation of elements—have been a
remarkable confirmation of Marx’s dialectical materialism despite the
teachings of the bourgeois philosophers with their “new” reversions to
old and decadent idealism.


Marx deepened and developed philosophical materialism to the full, and
extended the cognition of nature to include the cognition of human
society. His historical materialism was a great achievement
in scientific thinking. The chaos and arbitrariness that had previously
reigned in views on history and politics were replaced by a strikingly
integral and harmonious scientific theory, which shows how, in consequence
of the growth of productive forces, out of one system of social life
another and higher system develops—how capitalism, for instance, grows
out of feudalism.  

Just as man’s knowledge reflects nature (i.e., developing matter),
which exists independently of him, so man’s social knowledge
(i.e., his various views and doctrines—philosophical, religious,
political and so forth) reflects the economic system of
society. Political institutions are a superstructure on the economic
foundation. We see, for example, that the various political forms of the
modern European states serve to strengthen the domination of the
bourgeoisie over the proletariat.  

Marx’s philosophy is a consummate philosophical materialism which has
provided mankind, and especially the working class, with powerful
instruments of knowledge.  
II

Having recognised that the economic system is the foundation on which
the political superstructure is erected, Marx devoted his greatest
attention to the study of this economic system. Marx’s principal work,
Capital, is devoted to a study of the economic system of modern,
i.e., capitalist, society.  

Classical political economy, before Marx, evolved in England, the most
developed of the capitalist countries. Adam Smith and David Ricardo, by
their investigations of the economic system, laid the foundations of the
labour theory of value. Marx continued their work; he provided a
proof of the theory and developed it consistently. He showed that the value
of every commodity is determined by the quantity of socially necessary
labour time spent on its production.  


Where the bourgeois economists saw a relation between things (the
exchange of one commodity for another) Marx revealed a relation between
people. The exchange of commodities expresses the connection between
individual producers through the market. Money signifies that the
connection is becoming closer and closer, inseparably uniting the entire
economic life of the individual producers into one whole. Capital
signifies a further development of this connection: man’s labour-power
becomes a commodity. The wage-worker sells his labour-power to the owner of
land, factories and instruments of labour. The worker spends one part of
the day covering the cost of maintaining himself and his family (wages),
while the other part of the day he works without remuneration, creating for
the capitalist surplus-value, the source of profit, the source of
the wealth of the capitalist class.  

The doctrine of surplus-value is the corner-stone of Marx’s economic
theory.  

Capital, created by the labour of the worker, crushes the worker,
ruining small proprietors and creating an army of unemployed. In industry,
the victory of large-scale production is immediately apparent, but the same
phenomenon is also to be observed in agriculture, where the superiority of
large-scale capitalist agriculture is enhanced, the use of machinery
increases and the peasant economy, trapped by money-capital, declines and
falls into ruin under the burden of its backward technique. The decline of
small-scale production assumes different forms in agriculture, but the
decline itself is an indisputable fact.  

By destroying small-scale production, capital leads to an increase in
productivity of labour and to the creation of a monopoly position for the
associations of big capitalists. Production itself becomes more and more
social—hundreds of thousands and millions of workers become bound
together in a regular economic organism—but the product of this
collective labour is appropriated by a handful of capitalists. Anarchy of
production, crises, the furious chase after markets and the insecurity of
existence of the mass of the population are intensified.  

By increasing the dependence of the workers on capital, the capitalist
system creates the great power of united labour.  


Marx traced the development of capitalism from embryonic commodity
economy, from simple exchange, to its highest forms, to large-scale
production.  

And the experience of all capitalist countries, old and new, year by
year demonstrates clearly the truth of this Marxian doctrine to increasing
numbers of workers.  

Capitalism has triumphed all over the world, but this triumph is only
the prelude to the triumph of labour over capital.  
III

When feudalism was overthrown and “free” capitalist society
appeared in the world, it at once became apparent that this freedom meant a
new system of oppression and exploitation of the working people. Various
socialist doctrines immediately emerged as a reflection of and protest
against this oppression. Early socialism, however, was utopian
socialism. It criticised capitalist society, it condemned and damned it, it
dreamed of its destruction, it had visions of a better order and
endeavoured to convince the rich of the immorality of exploitation.  

But utopian socialism could not indicate the real solution. It could
not explain the real nature of wage-slavery under capitalism, it could not
reveal the laws of capitalist development, or show what social
force is capable of becoming the creator of a new society.  

Meanwhile, the stormy revolutions which everywhere in Europe, and
especially in France, accompanied the fall of feudalism, of serfdom, more
and more clearly revealed the struggle of classes as the basis and
the driving force of all development.  

Not a single victory of political freedom over the feudal class was won
except against desperate resistance. Not a single capitalist country
evolved on a more or less free and democratic basis except by a
life-and-death struggle between the various classes of capitalist society.

The genius of Marx lies in his having been the first to deduce from
this the lesson world history teaches and to apply that lesson
consistently. The deduction he made is the doctrine of the class
struggle.  


People always have been the foolish victims of deception and
self-deception in politics, and they always will be until they have learnt
to seek out the interests of some class or other behind all moral,
religious, political and social phrases, declarations and
promises. Champions of reforms and improvements will always be fooled by
the defenders of the old order until they realise that every old
institution, how ever barbarous and rotten it may appear to be, is kept
going by the forces of certain ruling classes. And there is only
one way of smashing the resistance of those classes, and that is to
find, in the very society which surrounds us, the forces which can—and,
owing to their social position, must—constitute the power capable of
sweeping away the old and creating the new, and to enlighten and organise
those forces for the struggle.  

Marx’s philosophical materialism alone has shown the proletariat the
way out of the spiritual slavery in which all oppressed classes have
hitherto languished. Marx’s economic theory alone has explained the true
position of the proletariat in the general system of capitalism.  

Independent organisations of the proletariat are multi plying all over
the world, from America to Japan and from Sweden to South Africa. The
proletariat is becoming enlightened and educated by waging its class
struggle; it is ridding itself of the prejudices of bourgeois society; it
is rallying its ranks ever more closely and is learning to gauge the
measure of its successes; it is steeling its forces and is growing
irresistibly.  
 
 






Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 19

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 



==========

## Theses on Feuerbach









Theses on Feuerbach



Marx/Engels Internet Archive


Theses On Feuerbach
Download PDF


Written: by Marx in the Spring of 1845, but slightly edited by Engels;
First Published: As an appendix to Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy in 1888;
Source: Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume One, p. 13 – 15.
Note that this version differs from the version of Engels’ edition published in MECW Volume 5, pp. 6-8;
Publisher: Progress Publishers, Moscow, USSR, 1969;
Translated: W. Lough from the German;
Transcription/Markup: Zodiac/Brian Baggins;
Copyleft: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 1995, 1999, 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the Creative Commons ShareAlike License;
Proofread: by Andy Blunden February 2005.

 
I

The chief defect of all hitherto existing materialism – that of Feuerbach included – is that the thing, reality, sensuousness, is conceived only in the form of the object or of contemplation, but not as sensuous human activity, practice, not subjectively.
Hence, in contradistinction to materialism, the active side was developed abstractly by idealism – which, of course, does not know real, sensuous activity as such.


Feuerbach wants sensuous objects, really distinct from the
thought objects, but he does not conceive human activity itself as objective
activity. Hence, in The Essence of Christianity, he regards the theoretical
attitude as the only genuinely human attitude, while practice is conceived
and fixed only in its dirty-judaical manifestation. Hence he does not grasp
the significance of “revolutionary”, of “practical-critical”, activity.


 
II

The question whether objective truth can be attributed to human thinking is not a question of theory but is a practical question. Man must prove the truth — i.e. the reality and power, the this-sidedness of his thinking in practice. The dispute over the reality or non-reality
of thinking that is isolated from practice is a purely scholastic question.

 
III

The materialist doctrine concerning the changing of circumstances and upbringing forgets that circumstances are changed by men and that it is essential to educate the educator himself. This doctrine must, therefore, divide society into two parts, one of which is superior to society.
 

The coincidence of the changing of circumstances and of human activity or self-changing can be conceived and rationally understood only as revolutionary practice.

 
IV

Feuerbach starts out from the fact of religious self-alienation, of the duplication of the world into a religious world and a secular one. His work consists in resolving the religious world into its secular basis. 

But that the secular basis detaches itself from itself and establishes itself as an independent realm in the clouds can only be explained by the cleavages and self-contradictions within this secular basis. The latter must, therefore, in itself be both understood in its contradiction
and revolutionized in practice. Thus, for instance, after the earthly family is discovered to be the secret of the holy family, the former must then itself be destroyed in theory and in practice.

 
V

Feuerbach, not satisfied with abstract thinking, wants contemplation; but he does not conceive sensuousness as practical, human-sensuous activity.

 
VI

Feuerbach resolves the religious essence into the human essence. But the human essence is no abstraction inherent in each single individual. 

In its reality it is the ensemble of the social relations.
 

Feuerbach, who does not enter upon a criticism of this real essence, is consequently compelled:
 

To abstract from the historical process and to fix the religious sentiment as something by itself and to presuppose an abstract – isolated – human individual. 

Essence, therefore, can be comprehended only as “genus”, as an internal, dumb generality which naturally unites the many individuals. 


 
VII

Feuerbach, consequently, does not see that the “religious sentiment” is itself a social product, and that the abstract individual whom he analyses belongs to a particular form of society.

 
VIII

All social life is essentially practical. All mysteries which lead theory to mysticism find their rational solution in human practice and in the comprehension of this practice.

 
IX

The highest point reached by contemplative materialism, that is, materialism which does not comprehend sensuousness as practical activity, is contemplation of single individuals and of civil society.

 
X

The standpoint of the old materialism is civil society; the standpoint of the new is human society, or social humanity. 

 
XI

The philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways; the point is to change it.

 


Deutsch |
1938 translation of Marx’s original | 
2002 translation of Marx’s original | 
MECW translation of Engels’ 1888 version

Marx/Engels Works Archive |
Study Guide |
Engels on Feuerbach |
Image of Thesis 11 |
Works Index






==========

## Preface to the German Edition of 1872










Communist Manifesto (Preface)



MIA: Marxists: Marx & Engels: Library: 1848: Manifesto of the Communist Party: Preface




Preface



| 1872
German Edition
 | 
1882
Russian Edition
 | 
1883
German Edition
 | 
| 1888
English Edition
 | 
1890
German Edition | 1892 Polish Edition | 1893 Italian Edition |





The 1872 German Edition


The Communist League, an international association
of workers, which could of course be only a secret one, under conditions
obtaining at the time, commissioned us, the undersigned, at the Congress
held in London in November 1847, to write for publication a detailed theoretical
and practical programme for the Party. Such was the origin of the following
Manifesto, the manuscript of which travelled to London to be printed a
few weeks before the February [French] Revolution [in 1848]. First published in German, it
has been republished in that language in at least twelve different editions
in Germany, England, and America. It was published in English for the first
time in 1850 in the Red Republican, London, translated by Miss Helen
Macfarlane, and in 1871 in at least three different translations in America.
The french version first appeared in Paris shortly before the June insurrection
of 1848, and recently in Le Socialiste of New York. A new translation
is in the course of preparation. A Polish version appeared in London shortly
after it was first published in Germany. A Russian translation was published
in Geneva in the sixties [A]. Into Danish, too, it was translated shortly
after its appearance.


However much that state of things may have altered during the last twenty-five
years, the general principles laid down in the Manifesto are, on the whole,
as correct today as ever. Here and there, some detail might be improved.
The practical application of the principles will depend, as the Manifesto
itself states, everywhere and at all times, on the historical conditions
for the time being existing, and, for that reason, no special stress is
laid on the revolutionary measures proposed at the end of Section II. That
passage would, in many respects, be very differently worded today. In view
of the gigantic strides of Modern Industry since 1848, and of the accompanying
improved and extended organization of the working class, in view of the
practical experience gained, first in the February Revolution, and then,
still more, in the Paris Commune, where the proletariat for the first time
held political power for two whole months, this programme has in some details
been antiquated. One thing especially was proved by the Commune, viz.,
that “the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state machinery,
and wield it for its own purposes.” (See The Civil War in France: Address
of the General Council of the International Working Men’ s Association,
1871, where this point is further developed.) Further, it is self-evident
that the criticism of socialist literature is deficient in relation to
the present time, because it comes down only to 1847; also that the remarks
on the relation of the Communists to the various opposition parties (Section
IV), although, in principle still correct, yet in practice are antiquated,
because the political situation has been entirely changed, and the progress
of history has swept from off the earth the greater portion of the political
parties there enumerated.

But then, the Manifesto has become a historical document which we have
no longer any right to alter. A subsequent edition may perhaps appear with
an introduction bridging the gap from 1847 to the present day; but this
reprint was too unexpected to leave us time for that.


Karl Marx & Frederick Engels

June 24, 1872, London

 




The 1882 Russian Edition


The first Russian edition of the Manifesto of the
Communist Party, translated by Bakunin [A], was published early in the ’sixties by the printing office of the Kolokol [reference to the Free Russian Printing House]. Then the West could see in it (the
Russian edition of the Manifesto) only a literary curiosity. Such a view
would be impossible today.


What a limited field the proletarian movement occupied at that time
(December 1847) is most clearly shown by the last section: the position
of the Communists in relation to the various opposition parties in various
countries. Precisely Russia and the United States are missing here. It
was the time when Russia constituted the last great reserve of all European
reaction, when the United States absorbed the surplus proletarian forces
of Europe through immigration. Both countries provided Europe with raw
materials and were at the same time markets for the sale of its industrial
products. Both were, therefore, in one way of another, pillars of the
existing European system.


How very different today. Precisely European immigration fitted North
American for a gigantic agricultural production, whose competition is shaking
the very foundations of European landed property — large and small. At
the same time, it enabled the United States to exploit its tremendous industrial
resources with an energy and on a scale that must shortly break the industrial
monopoly of Western Europe, and especially of England, existing up to now.
Both circumstances react in a revolutionary manner upon America itself.
Step by step, the small and middle land ownership of the farmers, the basis
of the whole political constitution, is succumbing to the competition of
giant farms; at the same time, a mass industrial proletariat and a fabulous
concentration of capital funds are developing for the first time in the
industrial regions.


And now Russia! During the Revolution of 1848-9, not only the European
princes, but the European bourgeois as well, found their only salvation
from the proletariat just beginning to awaken in Russian intervention.
The Tsar was proclaimed the chief of European reaction. Today, he is a
prisoner of war of the revolution in Gatchina [B], and Russia forms the vanguard
of revolutionary action in Europe.


The Communist Manifesto had, as its object, the proclamation of the
inevitable impending dissolution of modern bourgeois property. But in Russia
we find, face-to-face with the rapidly flowering capitalist swindle and
bourgeois property, just beginning to develop, more than half the land
owned in common by the peasants. Now the question is: can the Russian obshchina,
though greatly undermined, yet a form of primeval common ownership of
land, pass directly to the higher form of Communist common ownership? Or,
on the contrary, must it first pass through the same process of dissolution
such as constitutes the historical evolution of the West?


The only answer to that possible today is this: If the Russian
Revolution becomes the signal for a proletarian revolution in the West,
so that both complement each other, the present Russian common ownership
of land may serve as the starting point for a communist development.


Karl Marx & Frederick Engels

January 21, 1882, London

 




The 1883 German Edition


The preface to the present edition I must, alas,
sign alone. Marx, the man to whom the whole working class of Europe
and America owes more than to any one else — rests at Highgate Cemetery
and over his grave the first grass is already growing. Since his
death [March 14, 1883], there can be even less thought of revising or supplementing
the Manifesto. But I consider it all the more necessary again to state
the following expressly:


The basic thought running through the Manifesto — that economic
production, and the structure of society of every historical epoch necessarily
arising therefrom, constitute the foundation for the political and intellectual
history of that epoch; that consequently (ever since the dissolution of
the primaeval communal ownership of land) all history has been a history
of class struggles, of struggles between exploited and exploiting, between
dominated and dominating classes at various stages of social evolution;
that this struggle, however, has now reached a stage where the exploited
and oppressed class (the proletariat) can no longer emancipate itself from
the class which exploits and oppresses it (the bourgeoisie), without at
the same time forever freeing the whole of society from exploitation, oppression,
class struggles — this basic thought belongs solely and exclusively to
Marx. (1)


I have already stated this many times; but precisely now is it necessary
that it also stand in front of the Manifesto itself.


Frederick Engels

June 28, 1883, London

 




The 1888 English Edition


The Manifesto was published as the platform of
the Communist League, a working men’ s association, first exclusively German,
later on international, and under the political conditions of the Continent
before 1848, unavoidably a secret society. At a Congress of the League,
held in November 1847, Marx and Engels were commissioned to prepare a complete
theoretical and practical party programme. Drawn up in German, in January
1848, the manuscript was sent to the printer in London a few weeks before
the French Revolution of February 24. A French translation was brought
out in Paris shortly before the insurrection of June 1848. The first English
translation, by Miss Helen Macfarlane, appeared in George Julian Harney’ s
Red Republican, London, 1850. A Danish and a Polish edition had
also been published.


The defeat of the Parisian insurrection of June 1848 — the first great
battle between proletariat and bourgeoisie — drove again into the background,
for a time, the social and political aspirations of the European working
class. Thenceforth, the struggle for supremacy was, again, as it had been
before the Revolution of February, solely between different sections of
the propertied class; the working class was reduced to a fight for political
elbow-room, and to the position of extreme wing of the middle-class Radicals.
Wherever independent proletarian movements continued to show signs of life,
they were ruthlessly hunted down. Thus the Prussian police hunted out the
Central Board of the Communist League, then located in Cologne. The members
were arrested and, after eighteen months’  imprisonment, they were tried
in October 1852. This celebrated “Cologne Communist Trial” lasted from
October 4 till November 12; seven of the prisoners were sentenced to terms
of imprisonment in a fortress, varying from three to six years. Immediately
after the sentence, the League was formally dissolved by the remaining members.
As to the Manifesto, it seemed henceforth doomed to oblivion.


When the European workers had recovered sufficient strength for another
attack on the ruling classes, the International Working Men’ s Association
sprang up. But this association, formed with the express aim of welding
into one body the whole militant proletariat of Europe and America, could
not at once proclaim the principles laid down in the Manifesto. The International
was bound to have a programme broad enough to be acceptable to the English
trade unions, to the followers of Proudhon in France, Belgium, Italy, and
Spain, and to the Lassalleans in Germany. (2)


Marx, who drew up this programme to the satisfaction of all parties,
entirely trusted to the intellectual development of the working class,
which was sure to result from combined action and mutual discussion. The
very events and vicissitudes in the struggle against capital, the defeats
even more than the victories, could not help bringing home to men’ s minds
the insufficiency of their various favorite nostrums, and preparing the
way for a more complete insight into the true conditions for working-class
emancipation. And Marx was right. The International, on its breaking in
1874, left the workers quite different men from what it found them in 1864.
Proudhonism in France, Lassalleanism in Germany, were dying out, and even
the conservative English trade unions, though most of them had long since
severed their connection with the International, were gradually advancing
towards that point at which, last year at Swansea, their president [W. Bevan] could
say in their name: “Continental socialism has lost its terror for us.”
In fact, the principles of the Manifesto had made considerable headway
among the working men of all countries.


The Manifesto itself came thus to the front again. Since 1850, the German
text had been reprinted several times in Switzerland, England, and America.
In 1872, it was translated into English in New York, where the translation
was published in Woodhull and Claflin’ s Weekly. From this English
version, a French one was made in Le Socialiste of New York. Since
then, at least two more English translations, more or less mutilated, have
been brought out in America, and one of them has been reprinted in England.
The first Russian translation, made by Bakunin, was published at Herzen’ s
Kolokol office in Geneva, about 1863; a second one, by the heroic Vera
Zasulich, also in Geneva, in 1882. A new Danish edition is to be found
in Socialdemokratisk Bibliothek, Copenhagen, 1885; a fresh French
translation in Le Socialiste, Paris, 1886. From this latter, a Spanish
version was prepared and published in Madrid, 1886. The German reprints
are not to be counted; there have been twelve altogether at the least.
An Armenian translation, which was to be published in Constantinople some
months ago, did not see the light, I am told, because the publisher was
afraid of bringing out a book with the name of Marx on it, while the translator
declined to call it his own production. Of further translations into other
languages I have heard but had not seen. Thus the history of the Manifesto
reflects the history of the modern working-class movement; at present,
it is doubtless the most wide spread, the most international production
of all socialist literature, the common platform acknowledged by millions
of working men from Siberia to California.


Yet, when it was written, we could not have called it a socialist
manifesto. By Socialists, in 1847, were understood, on the one hand the
adherents of the various Utopian systems: Owenites in England, Fourierists
in France, [See Robert Owen and François Fourier] both of them already reduced to the position of mere sects,
and gradually dying out; on the other hand, the most multifarious social
quacks who, by all manner of tinkering, professed to redress, without any
danger to capital and profit, all sorts of social grievances, in both cases
men outside the working-class movement, and looking rather to the “educated"
classes for support. Whatever portion of the working class had become convinced
of the insufficiency of mere political revolutions, and had proclaimed
the necessity of total social change, called itself Communist. It was a
crude, rough-hewn, purely instinctive sort of communism; still, it touched
the cardinal point and was powerful enough amongst the working class to
produce the Utopian communism of Cabet in France, and of Weitling in Germany.
Thus, in 1847, socialism was a middle-class movement, communism a working-class
movement. Socialism was, on the Continent at least, “respectable”; communism
was the very opposite. And as our notion, from the very beginning, was
that “the emancipation of the workers must be the act of the working class
itself,” there could be no doubt as to which of the two names we must take.
Moreover, we have, ever since, been far from repudiating it.


The Manifesto being our joint production, I consider myself bound to
state that the fundamental proposition which forms the nucleus belongs
to Marx. That proposition is: That in every historical epoch, the prevailing
mode of economic production and exchange, and the social organization necessarily
following from it, form the basis upon which is built up, and from 
which alone can be explained the political and intellectual history of
that epoch; that consequently the whole history of mankind (since the dissolution
of primitive tribal society, holding land in common ownership) has been
a history of class struggles, contests between exploiting and exploited,
ruling and oppressed classes; That the history of these class struggles
forms a series of evolutions in which, nowadays, a stage has been reached
where the exploited and oppressed class — the proletariat — cannot attain
its emancipation from the sway of the exploiting and ruling class — the
bourgeoisie — without, at the same time, and once and for all, emancipating
society at large from all exploitation, oppression, class distinction,
and class struggles.


This proposition, which, in my opinion, is destined to do for history
what Darwin’ s theory has done for biology, we both of us, had been gradually
approaching for some years before 1845. How far I had independently progressed
towards it is best shown by my Conditions of the Working Class in England.
But when I again met Marx at Brussels, in spring 1845, he had it already
worked out and put it before me in terms almost as clear as those in which
I have stated it here.


From our joint preface to the German edition of 1872, I quote the following:


“However much that state of things may have altered during
the last twenty-five years, the general principles laid down in the Manifesto
are, on the whole, as correct today as ever. Here and there, some detail
might be improved. The practical application of the principles will depend,
as the Manifesto itself states, everywhere and at all times, on the historical
conditions for the time being existing, and, for that reason, no special
stress is laid on the revolutionary measures proposed at the end of Section
II. That passage would, in many respects, be very differently worded today.
In view of the gigantic strides of Modern Industry since 1848, and of the
accompanying improved and extended organization of the working class, in
view of the practical experience gained, first in the February Revolution,
and then, still more, in the Paris Commune, where the proletariat for the
first time held political power for two whole months, this programme has
in some details been antiquated. One thing especially was proved by the
Commune, viz., that “the working class cannot simply lay hold of ready-made
state machinery, and wield it for its own purposes.” (See The Civil
War in France: Address of the General Council of the International Working
Men’ s Assocation 1871, where this point is further developed.) Further,
it is self-evident that the criticism of socialist literature is deficient
in relation to the present time, because it comes down only to 1847; also
that the remarks on the relation of the Communists to the various opposition
parties (Section IV), although, in principle still correct, yet in practice
are antiquated, because the political situation has been entirely changed,
and the progress of history has swept from off the Earth the greater portion
of the political parties there enumerated.


"But then, the Manifesto has become a historical document which we have
no longer any right to alter."


The present translation is by Mr Samuel Moore, the translator of the greater
portion of Marx’ s Capital. We have revised it in common, and I have added a few notes explanatory of historical allusions.


Frederick Engels

January 30, 1888, London

 




The 1890 German Edition


Since [the first German preface (1883)] was written,
a new German edition of the Manifesto has again become necessary, and much
has also happened to the Manifesto which should be recorded here.


A second Russian translation — by Vera Zasulich — appeared in Geneva
in 1882; the preface to that edition was written by Marx and myself. Unfortunately, the original German manuscript has gone astray; I must therefore retranslate
from the Russian which will in no way improve the text. It reads:


[ Reprint of the 1882 Russian Edition ]


At about the same date, a new Polish version appeared in Geneva: Manifest
Kommunistyczny.


Furthermore, a new Danish translation has appeared in the Socialdemokratisk
Bibliothek, Copenhagen, 1885. Unfortunately, it is not quite complete;
certain essential passages, which seem to have presented difficulties to
the translator, have been omitted, and, in addition, there are signs of
carelessness here and there, which are all the more unpleasantly conspicuous
since the translation indicates that had the translator taken a little
more pains, he would have done an excellent piece of work.


A new French version appeared in 1886, in Le Socialiste of Paris;
it is the best published to date.


From this latter, a Spanish version was published the same year in El
Socialista of Madrid, and then reissued in pamphlet form: Manifesto
del Partido Communista por Carlos Marx y F. Engels, Madrid, Administracion
de El Socialista, Hernan Cortes 8.


As a matter of curiosity, I may mention that in 1887 the manuscript
of an Armenian translation was offered to a publisher in Constantinople.
But the good man did not have the courage to publish something bearing
the name of Marx and suggested that the translator set down his own name
as author, which the latter however declined.


After one, and then another, of the more or less inaccurate American
translations had been repeatedly reprinted in England, an authentic version
at last appeared in 1888. This was my friend Samuel Moore, and we went
through it together once more before it went to press. It is entitled:
Manifesto of the Communist Party, by Karl Marx and Frederick Engels.
Authorized English translation, edited and annotated by Frederick Engels,
1888, London, William Reeves, 185 Fleet Street, E.C. I have added some
of the notes of that edition to the present one.


The Manifesto has had a history of its own. Greeted with enthusiasm,
at the time of its appearance, by the not at all numerous vanguard of scientific
socialism (as is proved by the translations mentioned in the first place),
it was soon forced into the background by the reaction that began with
the defeat of the Paris workers in June 1848, and was finally excommunicated
“by law” in the conviction of the Cologne Communists in November 1852.
With the disappearance from the public scene of the workers’  movement that
had begun with the February Revolution, the Manifesto too passed into the
background.


When the European workers had again gathered sufficient strength for
a new onslaught upon the power of the ruling classes, the International
Working Men’ s Association came into being. Its aim was to weld together
into one huge army the whole militant working class of Europe and
America. Therefore it could not set out from the principles laid
down in the Manifesto. It was bound to have a programme which would not
shut the door on the English trade unions, the French, Belgian, Italian,
and Spanish Proudhonists, and the German Lassalleans. This programme —
the considerations underlying the Statutes of the International — was
drawn up by Marx with a master hand acknowledged even by the Bakunin and
the anarchists. For the ultimate final triumph of the ideas set forth in
the Manifesto, Marx relied solely upon the intellectual development of
the working class, as it necessarily has to ensue from united action and
discussion. The events and vicissitudes in the struggle against capital,
the defeats even more than the successes, could not but demonstrate to
the fighters the inadequacy of their former universal panaceas, and make
their minds more receptive to a thorough understanding of the true conditions
for working-class emancipation. And Marx was right. The working class of
1874, at the dissolution of the International, was altogether different
from that of 1864, at its foundation. Proudhonism in the Latin countries,
and the specific Lassalleanism in Germany, were dying out; and even the
ten arch-conservative English trade unions were gradually approaching the
point where, in 1887, the chairman of their Swansea Congress could say
in their name: “Continental socialism has lost its terror for us.” Yet
by 1887 continental socialism was almost exclusively the theory heralded
in the Manifesto. Thus, to a certain extent, the history of the Manifesto
reflects the history of the modern working-class movement since 1848. At
present, it is doubtless the most widely circulated, the most international
product of all socialist literature, the common programme of many millions
of workers of all countries from Siberia to California.


Nevertheless, when it appeared, we could not have called it a socialist
manifesto. In 1847, two kinds of people were considered socialists. On
the one hand were the adherents of the various utopian systems, notably
the Owenites in England and the Fourierists in France, both of whom, at
that date, had already dwindled to mere sects gradually dying out. On the
other, the manifold types of social quacks who wanted to eliminate social
abuses through their various universal panaceas and all kinds of patch-work,
without hurting capital and profit in the least. In both cases, people
who stood outside the labor movement and who looked for support rather
to the “educated” classes. The section of the working class, however, which
demanded a radical reconstruction of society, convinced that mere political
revolutions were not enough, then called itself Communist. It was
still a rough-hewn, only instinctive and frequently somewhat crude communism.
Yet, it was powerful enough to bring into being two systems of utopian
communism — in France, the “Icarian” communists of Cabet, and in Germany
that of Weitling. Socialism in 1847 signified a bourgeois movement, communism
a working-class movement. Socialism was, on the Continent at least, quite
respectable, whereas communism was the very opposite. And since we were
very decidedly of the opinion as early as then that “the emancipation of
the workers must be the task of the working class itself,” [from the General Rules of the International] we could have
no hesitation as to which of the two names we should choose. Nor has it
ever occurred to us to repudiate it.


“Working men of all countries, unite!” But few voices responded when
we proclaimed these words to the world 42 years ago, on the eve of the
first Paris Revolution in which the proletariat came out with the demands
of its own. On September 28, 1864, however, the proletarians of most of
the Western European countries joined hands in the International Working
Men’ s Association of glorious memory. True, the International itself lived
only nine years. But that the eternal union of the proletarians of all
countries created by it is still alive and lives stronger than ever, there
is no better witness than this day. Because today[C], as I write these lines,
the European and American proletariat is reviewing its fighting forces,
mobilized for the first time, mobilized as one army, under one
flag, for one immediate aim: the standard eight-hour working day
to be established by legal enactment, as proclaimed by the Geneva Congress
of the International in 1866, and again by the Paris Workers’  Congress
of 1889. And today’ s spectacle will open the eyes of the capitalists and
landlords of all countries to the fact that today the proletarians of all
countries are united indeed.


If only Marx were still by my side to see this with his own eyes!


Frederick Engels

May 1, 1890, London

 




The 1892 Polish Edition


The fact that a new Polish edition of the Communist Manifesto has become necessary gives rise to various thoughts.


First of all, it is noteworthy that of late the Manifesto has become an index, as it were, of the development of large-scale industry on the European continent. In proportion as large-scale industry expands in a given country, the demand grows among the workers of that country for enlightenment regarding their position as the working class in relation to the possessing classes, the socialist movement spreads among them and the demand for the Manifesto increases. Thus, not only the state of the labour movement but also the degree of development of large-scale industry can be measured with fair accuracy in every country by the number of copies of the Manifesto circulated in the language of that country.


Accordingly, the new Polish edition indicates a decided progress of Polish industry. And there can be no doubt whatever that this progress since the previous edition published ten years ago has actually taken place. Russian Poland, Congress Poland, has become the big industrial region of the Russian Empire. Whereas Russian large-scale industry is scattered sporadically — a part round the Gulf of Finland, another in the centre (Moscow and Vladimir), a third along the coasts of the Black and Azov seas, and still others elsewhere — Polish industry has been packed into a relatively small area and enjoys both the advantages and disadvantages arising from such concentration. The competing Russian manufacturers acknowledged the advantages when they demanded protective tariffs against Poland, in spit of their ardent desire to transform the Poles into Russians. The disadvantages — for the Polish manufacturers and the Russian government — are manifest in the rapid spread of socialist ideas among the Polish workers and in the growing demand for the Manifesto.


But the rapid development of Polish industry, outstripping that of Russia, is in its turn a new proof of the inexhaustible vitality of the Polish people and a new guarantee of its impending national restoration. And the restoration of an independent and strong Poland is a matter which concerns not only the Poles but all of us. A sincere international collaboration of the European nations is possible only if each of these nations is fully autonomous in its own house. The Revolution of 1848, which under the banner of the proletariat, after all, merely let the proletarian fighters do the work of the bourgeoisie, also secured the independence of Italy, Germany and Hungary through its testamentary executors, Louis Bonaparte and Bismarck; but Poland, which since 1792 had done more for the Revolution than all these three together, was left to its own resources when it succumbed in 1863 to a tenfold greater Russian force. The nobility could neither maintain nor regain Polish independence; today, to the bourgeoisie, this independence is, to say the last, immaterial. Nevertheless, it is a necessity for the harmonious collaboration of the European nations. It can be gained only by the young Polish proletariat, and in its hands it is secure. For the workers of all the rest of Europe need the independence of Poland just as much as the Polish workers themselves.


F. Engels
London, February 10, 1892

 




The 1893 Italian Edition


Publication of the Manifesto of the Communist Party coincided, one may say, with March 18, 1848, the day of the revolution in Milan and Berlin, which were armed uprisings of the two nations situated in the centre, the one, of the continent of Europe, the other, of the Mediterranean; two nations until then enfeebled by division and internal strife, and thus fallen under foreign domination. While Italy was subject to the Emperor of Austria, Germany underwent the yoke, not less effective though more indirect, of the Tsar of all the Russias. The consequences of March 18, 1848, freed both Italy and Germany from this disgrace; if from 1848 to 1871  these two great nations were reconstituted and somehow again put on their own, it was as Karl Marx used to say, because the men who suppressed the Revolution of 1848 were, nevertheless, its testamentary executors in spite of themselves.


Everywhere that revolution was the work of the working class; it was the latter that built the barricades and paid with its lifeblood. Only the Paris workers, in overthrowing the government, had the very definite intention of overthrowing the bourgeois regime. But conscious though they were of the fatal antagonism existing between their own class and the bourgeoisie, still, neither the economic progress of the country nor the intellectual development of the mass of French workers had as yet reached the stage which would have made a social reconstruction possible. In the final analysis, therefore, the fruits of the revolution were reaped by the capitalist class. In the other countries, in Italy, in Germany, in Austria, the workers, from the very outset, did nothing but raise the bourgeoisie to power. But in any country the rule of the bourgeoisie is impossible without national independence Therefore, the Revolution of 1848 had to bring in its train the unity and autonomy of the nations that had lacked them up to then: Italy, Germany, Hungary. Poland will follow in turn.


Thus, if the Revolution of 1848 was not a socialist revolution, it paved the way, prepared the ground for the latter. Through the impetus given to large-scaled industry in all countries, the bourgeois regime during the last forty-five years has everywhere created a numerous, concentrated and powerful proletariat. It has thus raised, to use the language of the Manifesto, its own grave-diggers. Without restoring autonomy and unity to each nation, it will be impossible to achieve the international union of the proletariat, or the peaceful and intelligent co-operation of these nations toward common aims. Just imagine joint international action by the Italian, Hungarian, German, Polish and Russian workers under the political conditions preceding 1848!

The battles fought in 1848 were thus not fought in vain. Nor have the forty-five years separating us from that revolutionary epoch passed to no purpose. The fruits are ripening, and all I wish is that the publication of this Italian translation may augur as well for the victory of the Italian proletariat as the publication of the original did for the international revolution.

The Manifesto does full justice to the revolutionary part played by capitalism in the past. The first capitalist nation was Italy. The close of the feudal Middle Ages, and the opening of the modern capitalist era are marked by a colossal figured: an Italian, Dante, both the last poet of the Middle Ages and the first poet of modern times. Today, as in 1300, a new historical era is approaching. Will Italy give us the new Dante, who will mark the hour of birth of this new, proletarian era?


Frederick Engels
London, February 1, 1893


Chapter 1: Bourgeois and Proletarians



1.
“This proposition,” I wrote in the preface to the English translation, “which, in my opinion, is destined to do for history what Darwin’ s theory has done for biology, we both of
us, had been gradually approaching for some years before 1845. How far
I had independently progressed towards it is best shown by my Conditions
of the Working Class in England. But when I again met Marx at Brussels,
in spring 1845, he had it already worked out and put it before me in terms
almost as clear as those in which I have stated it here.” [Note by Engels to the German edition of 1890]


2.
Lassalle personally, to us, always acknowledged himself
to be a disciple of Marx, and, as such, stood on the ground of the Manifesto.
But in his first public agitation, 1862-1864, he did not go beyond demanding
co-operative workshops supported by state credit.



A.
The first Russian translation of the Manifesto of the Communist Party was made by Bakunin, who despite being one of Marx and Engels’ most pronounced opponents in the working class movement, saw the great revolutionary importance contained within the Manifesto. Published in Geneva in 1869 (printing it in Russia was impossible due to state censorship), Bakunin’s translation was not completely accurate, and was replaced a decade later by Plekhanov’s translation in 1882, for which both Marx and Engels  wrote a preface.


B.
A reference to the events that occurred in Russia after the assassination, on March, 1, 1881, of Emperor Alexander II by Narodnaya Volya members. Alexander III, his successor, was staying in Gatchina for fear of further terrorism.


C.
The issue of 30 December 1871 of Woodhulls & Claiflin's weekly contained an exact copy of Helen Macfarlane's translation for the Red Republican but neither the Red Republican nor Helen Macfarlane were acknowledged.



Table of Contents: Manifesto of the Communist Party







==========

## I. Bourgeois and Proletarians










Communist Manifesto (Chapter 1)



MIA: Marxists: Marx & Engels: Library: 1848: Manifesto of the Communist Party:  Chapter 1:       [German Original]



Manifesto of the Communist Party

A spectre is haunting Europe — the spectre of
communism. All the powers of old Europe have entered into a holy alliance
to exorcise this spectre: Pope and Tsar, Metternich and Guizot, French
Radicals and German police-spies.
 

Where is the party in opposition that has not been decried as communistic
by its opponents in power? Where is the opposition that has not hurled
back the branding reproach of communism, against the more advanced opposition
parties, as well as against its reactionary adversaries?
 

Two things result from this fact:
 

I. Communism is already acknowledged by all European powers to be itself
a power.
 

II. It is high time that Communists should openly, in the face
of the whole world, publish their views, their aims, their tendencies,
and meet this nursery tale of the Spectre of Communism with a manifesto
of the party itself.
 

To this end, Communists of various nationalities have assembled in London
and sketched the following manifesto, to be published in the English, French,
German, Italian, Flemish and Danish languages.
 

Chapter I. Bourgeois and Proletarians(1)


[German Original]
 
The history of all hitherto existing society(2) is the history of class struggles.
 

Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord
and serf, guild-master(3) and
journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constant opposition
to one another, carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden, now open fight,
a fight that each time ended, either in a revolutionary reconstitution
of society at large, or in the common ruin of the contending classes.
 
In the earlier epochs of history, we find almost everywhere a complicated
arrangement of society into various orders, a manifold gradation of social
rank. In ancient Rome we have patricians, knights, plebeians, slaves; in
the Middle Ages, feudal lords, vassals, guild-masters, journeymen, apprentices,
serfs; in almost all of these classes, again, subordinate gradations.
 
The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the ruins of feudal
society has not done away with class antagonisms. It has but established
new classes, new conditions of oppression, new forms of struggle in place
of the old ones.
 
Our epoch, the epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however, this distinct
feature: it has simplified class antagonisms. Society as a whole is more
and more splitting up into two great hostile camps, into two great classes
directly facing each other — Bourgeoisie and Proletariat.
 
From the serfs of the Middle Ages sprang the chartered burghers of
the earliest towns. From these burgesses the first elements of the bourgeoisie
were developed.
 
The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape, opened up fresh
ground for the rising bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and Chinese markets,
the colonisation of America, trade with the colonies, the increase in the
means of exchange and in commodities generally, gave to commerce, to navigation,
to industry, an impulse never before known, and thereby, to the revolutionary
element in the tottering feudal society, a rapid development.
 
The feudal system of industry, in which industrial production was monopolised
by closed guilds, now no longer sufficed for the growing wants of the new
markets. The manufacturing system took its place. The guild-masters were
pushed on one side by the manufacturing middle class; division of labour between
the different corporate guilds vanished in the face of division of labour
in each single workshop.
 
Meantime the markets kept ever growing, the demand ever rising. Even
manufacturer no longer sufficed. Thereupon, steam and machinery revolutionised
industrial production. The place of manufacture was taken by the giant,
Modern Industry; the place of the industrial middle class by industrial
millionaires, the leaders of the whole industrial armies, the modern bourgeois.
 
Modern industry has established the world market, for which the discovery
of America paved the way. This market has given an immense development
to commerce, to navigation, to communication by land. This development
has, in its turn, reacted on the extension of industry; and in proportion as
industry, commerce, navigation, railways extended, in the same proportion
the bourgeoisie developed, increased its capital, and pushed into the background
every class handed down from the Middle Ages.
 
We see, therefore, how the modern bourgeoisie is itself the product
of a long course of development, of a series of revolutions in the modes
of production and of exchange.
 
Each step in the development of the bourgeoisie
was accompanied by a corresponding political advance of that class. An
oppressed class under the sway of the feudal nobility, an armed and self-governing
association in the medieval commune(4):
here independent urban republic (as in Italy and Germany); there taxable
“third estate” of the monarchy (as in France); afterwards, in the period
of manufacturing proper, serving either the semi-feudal or the absolute
monarchy as a counterpoise against the nobility, and, in fact, cornerstone
of the great monarchies in general, the bourgeoisie has at last, since
the establishment of Modern Industry and of the world market, conquered
for itself, in the modern representative State, exclusive political sway.
The executive of the modern state is but a committee for managing the common
affairs of the whole bourgeoisie.
 
The bourgeoisie, historically, has played a most revolutionary part.
 
The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the upper hand, has put an end
to all feudal, patriarchal, idyllic relations. It has pitilessly torn asunder
the motley feudal ties that bound man to his “natural superiors”, and has
left remaining no other nexus between man and man than naked self-interest, than
callous “cash payment”. It has drowned the most heavenly ecstasies
of religious fervour, of chivalrous enthusiasm, of philistine sentimentalism,
in the icy water of egotistical calculation. It has resolved personal worth
into exchange value, and in place of the numberless indefeasible chartered
freedoms, has set up that single, unconscionable freedom — Free Trade.
In one word, for exploitation, veiled by religious and political illusions,
it has substituted naked, shameless, direct, brutal exploitation.
 
The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halo every occupation hitherto honoured
and looked up to with reverent awe. It has converted the physician, the
lawyer, the priest, the poet, the man of science, into its paid wage labourers.
 
The bourgeoisie has torn away from the family its sentimental
veil, and has reduced the family relation to a mere money relation.
 
The bourgeoisie has disclosed how it came to pass that the brutal
display of vigour in the Middle Ages, which reactionaries so much admire,
found its fitting complement in the most slothful indolence. It has been
the first to show what man’s activity can bring about. It has accomplished
wonders far surpassing Egyptian pyramids, Roman aqueducts, and Gothic cathedrals;
it has conducted expeditions that put in the shade all former Exoduses
of nations and crusades.
 
The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionising
the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of production,
and with them the whole relations of society. Conservation of the old modes
of production in unaltered form, was, on the contrary, the first condition
of existence for all earlier industrial classes. Constant revolutionising
of production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting
uncertainty and agitation distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier
ones. All fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train of ancient and
venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new-formed ones
become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into
air, all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face
with sober senses his real conditions of life, and his relations with his kind.
 
The need of a constantly expanding market for its products chases
the bourgeoisie over the entire surface of the globe. It must nestle everywhere,
settle everywhere, establish connexions everywhere.
 
The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world market
given a cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in every country.
To the great chagrin of Reactionists, it has drawn from under the feet
of industry the national ground on which it stood. All old-established
national industries have been destroyed or are daily being destroyed. They
are dislodged by new industries, whose introduction becomes a life and
death question for all civilised nations, by industries that no longer
work up indigenous raw material, but raw material drawn from the remotest
zones; industries whose products are consumed, not only at home, but in
every quarter of the globe. In place of the old wants, satisfied by the
production of the country, we find new wants, requiring for their satisfaction
the products of distant lands and climes. In place of the old local and
national seclusion and self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every direction,
universal inter-dependence of nations. And as in material, so also in intellectual
production. The intellectual creations of individual nations become common
property. National one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness become more and
more impossible, and from the numerous national and local literatures,
there arises a world literature.
 
The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production,
by the immensely facilitated means of communication, draws all, even the
most barbarian, nations into civilisation. The cheap prices of commodities
are the heavy artillery with which it batters down all Chinese walls, with 
which it forces the barbarians’ intensely
obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate. It compels all nations, on
pain of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it compels
them to introduce what it calls civilisation into their midst, i.e., to
become bourgeois themselves. In one word, it creates a world after its
own image.
 
The bourgeoisie has subjected the country to the rule of the towns.
It has created enormous cities, has greatly increased the urban population
as compared with the rural, and has thus rescued a considerable part of
the population from the idiocy of rural life. Just as it has made the country
dependent on the towns, so it has made barbarian and semi-barbarian countries
dependent on the civilised ones, nations of peasants on nations of bourgeois,
the East on the West.
 
The bourgeoisie keeps more and more doing away with the scattered state
of the population, of the means of production, and of property. It has
agglomerated population, centralised the means of production, and has concentrated
property in a few hands. The necessary consequence of this was political
centralisation. Independent, or but loosely connected provinces, with separate
interests, laws, governments, and systems of taxation, became lumped together
into one nation, with one government, one code of laws, one national 
class-interest, one frontier, and one customs-tariff.
 
The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years,
has created more massive and more colossal productive forces than have
all preceding generations together. Subjection of Nature’s forces to man,
machinery, application of chemistry to industry and agriculture, 
steam-navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of whole continents
for cultivation, canalisation of rivers, whole populations conjured out
of the ground — what earlier century had even a presentiment that such
productive forces slumbered in the lap of social labour?
 
We see then: the means of production and of exchange, on whose
foundation the bourgeoisie built itself up, were generated in feudal society.
At a certain stage in the development of these means of production and
of exchange, the conditions under which feudal society produced and exchanged,
the feudal organisation of agriculture and manufacturing industry, in one
word, the feudal relations of property became no longer compatible with
the already developed productive forces; they became so many fetters. They
had to be burst asunder; they were burst asunder.
 
Into their place stepped free competition, accompanied by a social and
political constitution adapted in it, and the economic and political sway
of the bourgeois class.
 
A similar movement is going on before our own eyes. Modern bourgeois
society, with its relations of production, of exchange and of property,
a society that has conjured up such gigantic means of production and of
exchange, is like the sorcerer who is no longer able to control the powers
of the nether world whom he has called up by his spells. For many a decade
past the history of industry and commerce is but the history of the revolt
of modern productive forces against modern conditions of production, against
the property relations that are the conditions for the existence of the
bourgeois and of its rule. It is enough to mention the commercial crises
that by their periodical return put the existence of the entire bourgeois
society on its trial, each time more threateningly. In these crises, a
great part not only of the existing products, but also of the previously
created productive forces, are periodically destroyed. In these crises,
there breaks out an epidemic that, in all earlier epochs, would have seemed
an absurdity — the epidemic of over-production. Society suddenly finds
itself put back into a state of momentary barbarism; it appears as if a
famine, a universal war of devastation, had cut off the supply of every
means of subsistence; industry and commerce seem to be destroyed; and why?
Because there is too much civilisation, too much means of subsistence,
too much industry, too much commerce. The productive forces at the disposal
of society no longer tend to further the development of the conditions
of bourgeois property; on the contrary, they have become too powerful for
these conditions, by which they are fettered, and so soon as they overcome
these fetters, they bring disorder into the whole of bourgeois society,
endanger the existence of bourgeois property. The conditions of bourgeois
society are too narrow to comprise the wealth created by them. And how
does the bourgeoisie get over these crises? On the one hand by enforced
destruction of a mass of productive forces; on the other, by the conquest
of new markets, and by the more thorough exploitation of the old ones.
That is to say, by paving the way for more extensive and more destructive
crises, and by diminishing the means whereby crises are prevented.
 
The weapons with which the bourgeoisie felled feudalism to the
ground are now turned against the bourgeoisie itself.
 
But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the weapons that bring
death to itself; it has also called into existence the men who are to wield
those weapons — the modern working class — the proletarians.
 
In proportion as the bourgeoisie, i.e., capital, is developed,
in the same proportion is the proletariat, the modern working class, developed
— a class of labourers, who live only so long as they find work, and who
find work only so long as their labour increases capital. These labourers,
who must sell themselves piecemeal, are a commodity, like every other article
of commerce, and are consequently exposed to all the vicissitudes of competition,
to all the fluctuations of the market.
 
Owing to the extensive use of machinery, and to the division of
labour, the work of the proletarians has lost all individual character,
and, consequently, all charm for the workman. He becomes an appendage of
the machine, and it is only the most simple, most monotonous, and most
easily acquired knack, that is required of him. Hence, the cost of production
of a workman is restricted, almost entirely, to the means of subsistence
that he requires for maintenance, and for the propagation of his race.
But the price of a commodity, and therefore also of labour, is equal to
its cost of production. In proportion, therefore, as the repulsiveness
of the work increases, the wage decreases. Nay more, in proportion
as the use of machinery and division of labour increases, in the same proportion
the burden of toil also increases, whether by prolongation of the working
hours, by the increase of the work exacted in a given time or by increased
speed of machinery, etc.
 
Modern Industry has converted the little workshop of the patriarchal
master into the great factory of the industrial capitalist. Masses of labourers,
crowded into the factory, are organised like soldiers. As privates of the
industrial army they are placed under the command of a perfect hierarchy
of officers and sergeants. Not only are they slaves of the bourgeois class,
and of the bourgeois State; they are daily and hourly enslaved by the machine,
by the overlooker, and, above all, by the individual bourgeois manufacturer
himself. The more openly this despotism proclaims gain to be its end and
aim, the more petty, the more hateful and the more embittering it is.
 
The less the skill and exertion of strength implied in manual
labour, in other words, the more modern industry becomes developed, the
more is the labour of men superseded by that of women. Differences of age
and sex have no longer any distinctive social validity for the working
class. All are instruments of labour, more or less expensive to use, according
to their age and sex.
 
No sooner is the exploitation of the labourer by the manufacturer,
so far, at an end, that he receives his wages in cash, than he is set upon
by the other portions of the bourgeoisie, the landlord, the shopkeeper,
the pawnbroker, etc.
 
The lower strata of the middle class — the small tradespeople,
shopkeepers, and retired tradesmen generally, the handicraftsmen and peasants
— all these sink gradually into the proletariat, partly because their
diminutive capital does not suffice for the scale on which Modern Industry
is carried on, and is swamped in the competition with the large capitalists,
partly because their specialised skill is rendered worthless by new methods
of production. Thus the proletariat is recruited from all classes of the
population.
 
The proletariat goes through various stages of development. With
its birth begins its struggle with the bourgeoisie. At first the contest
is carried on by individual labourers, then by the workpeople of a factory,
then by the operative of one trade, in one locality, against the individual
bourgeois who directly exploits them. They direct their attacks not against
the bourgeois conditions of production, but against the instruments of production
themselves; they destroy imported wares that compete with their labour,
they smash to pieces machinery, they set factories ablaze, they seek to
restore by force the vanished status of the workman of the Middle Ages.
 
At this stage, the labourers still form an incoherent mass scattered
over the whole country, and broken up by their mutual competition. If anywhere
they unite to form more compact bodies, this is not yet the consequence
of their own active union, but of the union of the bourgeoisie, which class,
in order to attain its own political ends, is compelled to set the whole
proletariat in motion, and is moreover yet, for a time, able to do so.
At this stage, therefore, the proletarians do not fight their enemies,
but the enemies of their enemies, the remnants of absolute monarchy, the
landowners, the non-industrial bourgeois, the petty bourgeois. Thus, the
whole historical movement is concentrated in the hands of the bourgeoisie;
every victory so obtained is a victory for the bourgeoisie.
 
But with the development of industry, the proletariat not only increases
in number; it becomes concentrated in greater masses, its strength grows,
and it feels that strength more. The various interests and conditions of
life within the ranks of the proletariat are more and more equalised, in
proportion as machinery obliterates all distinctions of labour, and nearly
everywhere reduces wages to the same low level. The growing competition
among the bourgeois, and the resulting commercial crises, make the wages
of the workers ever more fluctuating. The increasing improvement of machinery,
ever more rapidly developing, makes their livelihood more and more precarious;
the collisions between individual workmen and individual bourgeois take
more and more the character of collisions between two classes. Thereupon,
the workers begin to form combinations (Trades’ Unions) against the bourgeois;
they club together in order to keep up the rate of wages; they found permanent
associations in order to make provision beforehand for these occasional
revolts. Here and there, the contest breaks out into riots.
 
Now and then the workers are victorious, but only for a time.
The real fruit of their battles lies, not in the immediate result, but in
the ever expanding union of the workers. This union is helped on by the
improved means of communication that are created by modern industry, and
that place the workers of different localities in contact with one another.
It was just this contact that was needed to centralise the numerous local
struggles, all of the same character, into one national struggle between
classes. But every class struggle is a political struggle. And that union,
to attain which the burghers of the Middle Ages, with their miserable highways,
required centuries, the modern proletarian, thanks to railways, achieve
in a few years.
 
This organisation of the proletarians into a class, and, consequently
into a political party, is continually being upset again by the competition
between the workers themselves. But it ever rises up again, stronger, firmer,
mightier. It compels legislative recognition of particular interests of
the workers, by taking advantage of the divisions among the bourgeoisie
itself. Thus, the ten-hours’ bill in England was carried.
 
Altogether collisions between the classes of the old society further,
in many ways, the course of development of the proletariat. The bourgeoisie
finds itself involved in a constant battle. At first with the aristocracy;
later on, with those portions of the bourgeoisie itself, whose interests
have become antagonistic to the progress of industry; at all time with
the bourgeoisie of foreign countries. In all these battles, it sees itself
compelled to appeal to the proletariat, to ask for help, and thus, to drag
it into the political arena. The bourgeoisie itself, therefore, supplies
the proletariat with its own elements of political and general education,
in other words, it furnishes the proletariat with weapons for fighting
the bourgeoisie.
 
Further, as we have already seen, entire sections of the ruling class
are, by the advance of industry, precipitated into the proletariat, or
are at least threatened in their conditions of existence. These also supply
the proletariat with fresh elements of enlightenment and progress.
 
Finally, in times when the class struggle nears the decisive hour, the
progress of dissolution going on within the ruling class, in fact within
the whole range of old society, assumes such a violent, glaring character,
that a small section of the ruling class cuts itself adrift, and joins
the revolutionary class, the class that holds the future in its hands.
Just as, therefore, at an earlier period, a section of the nobility went
over to the bourgeoisie, so now a portion of the bourgeoisie goes over
to the proletariat, and in particular, a portion of the bourgeois ideologists,
who have raised themselves to the level of comprehending theoretically
the historical movement as a whole.
 
Of all the classes that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie today,
the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The other classes
decay and finally disappear in the face of Modern Industry; the proletariat
is its special and essential product.
 
The lower middle class, the small manufacturer, the shopkeeper, the
artisan, the peasant, all these fight against the bourgeoisie, to save
from extinction their existence as fractions of the middle class. They
are therefore not revolutionary, but conservative. Nay more, they are
reactionary, for they try to roll back the wheel of history. If by chance,
they are revolutionary, they are only so in view of their impending transfer
into the proletariat; they thus defend not their present, but their future
interests, they desert their own standpoint to place themselves at that
of the proletariat.
 
The “dangerous class”, [lumpenproletariat]
the social scum, that passively rotting mass
thrown off by the lowest layers of the old society, may, here and there,
be swept into the movement by a proletarian revolution; its conditions
of life, however, prepare it far more for the part of a bribed tool of
reactionary intrigue.
 
In the condition of the proletariat, those of old society at large are
already virtually swamped. The proletarian is without property; his relation
to his wife and children has no longer anything in common with the bourgeois
family relations; modern industry labour, modern subjection to capital,
the same in England as in France, in America as in Germany, has stripped
him of every trace of national character. Law, morality, religion, are
to him so many bourgeois prejudices, behind which lurk in ambush just as
many bourgeois interests.
 
All the preceding classes that got the upper hand sought to fortify
their already acquired status by subjecting society at large to their conditions
of appropriation. The proletarians cannot become masters of the productive
forces of society, except by abolishing their own previous mode of appropriation,
and thereby also every other previous mode of appropriation. They have
nothing of their own to secure and to fortify; their mission is to destroy
all previous securities for, and insurances of, individual property.
 
All previous historical movements were movements of minorities, or in
the interest of minorities. The proletarian movement is the self-conscious,
independent movement of the immense majority, in the interest of the immense
majority. The proletariat, the lowest stratum of our present society, cannot
stir, cannot raise itself up, without the whole superincumbent strata of
official society being sprung into the air.
 
Though not in substance, yet in form, the struggle of the proletariat
with the bourgeoisie is at first a national struggle. The proletariat of
each country must, of course, first of all settle matters with its own
bourgeoisie.
 
In depicting the most general phases of the development of the proletariat,
we traced the more or less veiled civil war, raging within existing society,
up to the point where that war breaks out into open revolution, and where
the violent overthrow of the bourgeoisie lays the foundation for the sway
of the proletariat.
 
Hitherto, every form of society has been based, as we have already seen,
on the antagonism of oppressing and oppressed classes. But in order to
oppress a class, certain conditions must be assured to it under which it
can, at least, continue its slavish existence. The serf, in the period
of serfdom, raised himself to membership in the commune, just as the petty
bourgeois, under the yoke of the feudal absolutism, managed to develop
into a bourgeois. The modern labourer, on the contrary, instead of rising
with the process of industry, sinks deeper and deeper below the conditions
of existence of his own class. He becomes a pauper, and pauperism develops
more rapidly than population and wealth. And here it becomes evident, that
the bourgeoisie is unfit any longer to be the ruling class in society,
and to impose its conditions of existence upon society as an over-riding
law. It is unfit to rule because it is incompetent to assure an existence
to its slave within his slavery, because it cannot help letting him sink
into such a state, that it has to feed him, instead of being fed by him.
Society can no longer live under this bourgeoisie, in other words, its
existence is no longer compatible with society.
 
The essential conditions for the existence and for the sway of the bourgeois
class is the formation and augmentation of capital; the condition for capital
is wage-labour. Wage-labour rests exclusively on competition between the
labourers. The advance of industry, whose involuntary promoter is the bourgeoisie,
replaces the isolation of the labourers, due to competition, by the revolutionary
combination, due to association. The development of Modern Industry, therefore,
cuts from under its feet the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces
and appropriates products. What the bourgeoisie therefore produces, above
all, are its own grave-diggers. Its fall and the victory of the proletariat
are equally inevitable.



Chapter 2: Proletarians and Communists



1.
By bourgeoisie is meant the class of modern capitalists, owners of the
means of social production and employers of wage labour.


By proletariat, the class of modern wage labourers who, having
no means of production of their own, are reduced to selling their labour
power in order to live. [Engels, 1888 English edition]


2.
That is, all written history. In 1847, the pre-history of society,
the social organisation existing previous to recorded history, all but
unknown. Since then, August von Haxthausen (1792-1866) discovered common
ownership of land in Russia, Georg Ludwig von Maurer proved it to be the
social foundation from which all Teutonic races started in history, and,
by and by, village communities were found to be, or to have been, the primitive
form of society everywhere from India to Ireland. The inner organisation
of this primitive communistic society was laid bare, in its typical form,
by Lewis Henry Morgan's (1818-1881) crowning discovery of the true nature
of the gens and its relation to the tribe. With the dissolution of the
primeval communities, society begins to be differentiated into separate
and finally antagonistic classes. I have attempted to retrace this dissolution
in The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State,
second edition, Stuttgart, 1886. [Engels, 1888 English Edition and 1890 German Edition (with the last sentence omitted)]


3.
Guild-master, that is, a full member of a guild, a master within, not a
head of a guild. [Engels, 1888 English Edition]


4.
This was the name given their urban communities by the townsmen of Italy
and France, after they had purchased or conquered their initial rights
of self-government from their feudal lords. [Engels, 1890 German edition]


“Commune” was the name taken in France by the nascent towns even
before they had conquered from their feudal lords and masters local self-government
and political rights as the “Third Estate.” Generally speaking, for the
economical development of the bourgeoisie, England is here taken as the
typical country, for its political development, France. [Engels, 1888 English Edition]

 


Table of Contents: Manifesto of the Communist Party |
Marx-Engels Archive





==========

## II. Proletarians and Communists










Communist Manifesto (Chapter 2)



MIA: Marxists: Marx & Engels: Library: 1848: Manifesto of the Communist Party: Chapter 2:       [German Original]




Chapter II. Proletarians and Communists

 
In what relation do the Communists stand to the proletarians as a whole?
The Communists do not form a separate party opposed to the other working-class parties.
 
They have no interests separate and apart from those of the proletariat as a whole.
 
They do not set up any sectarian principles of their own, by which to
shape and mould the proletarian movement.
 
The Communists are distinguished from the other working-class parties
by this only:
 
1. In the national struggles of the proletarians of the different
countries, they point out and bring to the front the common interests of
the entire proletariat, independently of all nationality.
 
2. In the various stages of development which the struggle of
the working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass through, they always
and everywhere represent the interests of the movement as a whole.
 

The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically, the most advanced
and resolute section of the working-class parties of every country, that
section which pushes forward all others; on the other hand, theoretically,
they have over the great mass of the proletariat the advantage of clearly
understanding the line of march, the conditions, and the ultimate general
results of the proletarian movement.
 
The immediate aim of the Communists is the same as that of all other
proletarian parties: formation of the proletariat into a class, overthrow
of the bourgeois supremacy, conquest of political power by the proletariat.
 
The theoretical conclusions of the Communists are in no way based on
ideas or principles that have been invented, or discovered, by this or
that would-be universal reformer.
 
They merely express, in general terms, actual relations springing from
an existing class struggle, from a historical movement going on under our
very eyes. The abolition of existing property relations is not at all a
distinctive feature of communism.
 
All property relations in the past have continually been subject to
historical change consequent upon the change in historical conditions.
 
The French Revolution, for example, abolished feudal property in favour
of bourgeois property.
 
The distinguishing feature of Communism is not the abolition of property
generally, but the abolition of bourgeois property. But modern bourgeois
private property is the final and most complete expression of the system
of producing and appropriating products, that is based on class antagonisms,
on the exploitation of the many by the few.
 
In this sense, the theory of the Communists may be summed up in the
single sentence: Abolition of private property.
 
We Communists have been reproached with the desire of abolishing the
right of personally acquiring property as the fruit of a man’s own labour,
which property is alleged to be the groundwork of all personal freedom,
activity and independence.
 
Hard-won, self-acquired, self-earned property! Do you mean the property
of petty artisan and of the small peasant, a form of property that preceded
the bourgeois form? There is no need to abolish that; the development of
industry has to a great extent already destroyed it, and is still destroying
it daily.
 
Or do you mean the modern bourgeois private property?
 
But does wage-labour create any property for the labourer? Not a
bit. It creates capital, i.e., that kind of property which exploits 
wage-labour, and which cannot increase except upon condition of begetting a
new supply of wage-labour for fresh exploitation. Property, in its present
form, is based on the antagonism of capital and wage labour. Let us examine
both sides of this antagonism.
 
To be a capitalist, is to have not only a purely personal, but a social
status in production. Capital is a collective product, and only by the
united action of many members, nay, in the last resort, only by the united
action of all members of society, can it be set in motion.
 
Capital is therefore not only personal; it is a social power.
 
When, therefore, capital is converted into common property, into
the property of all members of society, personal property is not thereby
transformed into social property. It is only the social character of the
property that is changed. It loses its class character.
 
Let us now take wage-labour.
 
The average price of wage-labour is the minimum wage, i.e., that quantum
of the means of subsistence which is absolutely requisite to keep the labourer
in bare existence as a labourer. What, therefore, the wage-labourer appropriates
by means of his labour, merely suffices to prolong and reproduce a bare existence.
We by no means intend to abolish this personal appropriation of the products
of labour, an appropriation that is made for the maintenance and reproduction
of human life, and that leaves no surplus wherewith to command the labour
of others. All that we want to do away with is the miserable character
of this appropriation, under which the labourer lives merely to increase
capital, and is allowed to live only in so far as the interest of the ruling
class requires it.
 
In bourgeois society, living labour is but a means to increase accumulated
labour. In Communist society, accumulated labour is but a means to widen,
to enrich, to promote the existence of the labourer.
 
In bourgeois society, therefore, the past dominates the present; in
Communist society, the present dominates the past. In bourgeois society
capital is independent and has individuality, while the living person is
dependent and has no individuality.
 
And the abolition of this state of things is called by the bourgeois,
abolition of individuality and freedom! And rightly so. The abolition of
bourgeois individuality, bourgeois independence, and bourgeois freedom
is undoubtedly aimed at.
 
By freedom is meant, under the present bourgeois conditions of production,
free trade, free selling and buying.
 
But if selling and buying disappears, free selling and buying disappears
also. This talk about free selling and buying, and all the other “brave
words” of our bourgeois about freedom in general, have a meaning, if any,
only in contrast with restricted selling and buying, with the fettered
traders of the Middle Ages, but have no meaning when opposed to the Communistic
abolition of buying and selling, of the bourgeois conditions of production,
and of the bourgeoisie itself.
 
You are horrified at our intending to do away with private property.
But in your existing society, private property is already done away with
for nine-tenths of the population; its existence for the few is solely
due to its non-existence in the hands of those nine-tenths. You reproach
us, therefore, with intending to do away with a form of property, the necessary
condition for whose existence is the non-existence of any property for
the immense majority of society.
 
In one word, you reproach us with intending to do away with your property.
Precisely so; that is just what we intend.
 
From the moment when labour can no longer be converted into capital,
money, or rent, into a social power capable of being monopolised, i.e.,
from the moment when individual property can no longer be transformed into
bourgeois property, into capital, from that moment, you say, individuality
vanishes.
 
You must, therefore, confess that by “individual” you mean no other
person than the bourgeois, than the middle-class owner of property. This
person must, indeed, be swept out of the way, and made impossible.
 
Communism deprives no man of the power to appropriate the products of
society; all that it does is to deprive him of the power to subjugate the
labour of others by means of such appropriations.
 
It has been objected that upon the abolition of private property, all
work will cease, and universal laziness will overtake us.
 
According to this, bourgeois society ought long ago to have gone to
the dogs through sheer idleness; for those of its members who work, acquire nothing, 
and those who acquire anything do not work. 
The whole of this objection is but another expression of the tautology:
that there can no longer be any wage-labour when there is no longer any capital.
 
All objections urged against the Communistic mode of producing and appropriating
material products, have, in the same way, been urged against the Communistic
mode of producing and appropriating intellectual products. Just as, to the
bourgeois, the disappearance of class property is the disappearance of
production itself, so the disappearance of class culture is to him identical
with the disappearance of all culture.
 
That culture, the loss of which he laments, is, for the enormous majority,
a mere training to act as a machine.
 
But don’t wrangle with us so long as you apply, to our intended abolition
of bourgeois property, the standard of your bourgeois notions of freedom,
culture, law, &c. Your very ideas are but the outgrowth of the conditions
of your bourgeois production and bourgeois property, just as your jurisprudence
is but the will of your class made into a law for all, a will whose essential
character and direction are determined by the economical conditions of
existence of your class.
 
The selfish misconception that induces you to transform into eternal
laws of nature and of reason, the social forms springing from your present
mode of production and form of property – historical relations that rise
and disappear in the progress of production – this misconception you share
with every ruling class that has preceded you. What you see clearly in
the case of ancient property, what you admit in the case of feudal property,
you are of course forbidden to admit in the case of your own bourgeois
form of property.
 
Abolition [Aufhebung] of the family! Even the most radical flare up at this infamous
proposal of the Communists.
 
On what foundation is the present family, the bourgeois family, based?
On capital, on private gain. In its completely developed form, this family
exists only among the bourgeoisie. But this state of things finds its complement
in the practical absence of the family among the proletarians, and in public
prostitution.
 
The bourgeois family will vanish as a matter of course when its complement
vanishes, and both will vanish with the vanishing of capital.
 
Do you charge us with wanting to stop the exploitation of children by
their parents? To this crime we plead guilty.
 
But, you say, we destroy the most hallowed of relations, when we replace
home education by social.
 
And your education! Is not that also social, and determined by the social
conditions under which you educate, by the intervention direct or indirect,
of society, by means of schools, &c.? The Communists have not invented
the intervention of society in education; they do but seek to alter the
character of that intervention, and to rescue education from the influence
of the ruling class.
 
The bourgeois clap-trap about the family and education, about the hallowed
co-relation of parents and child, becomes all the more disgusting, the
more, by the action of Modern Industry, all the family ties among the proletarians
are torn asunder, and their children transformed into simple articles of
commerce and instruments of labour.
 
But you Communists would introduce community of women, screams the bourgeoisie
in chorus.
 
The bourgeois sees his wife as a mere instrument of production. He hears
that the instruments of production are to be exploited in common, and,
naturally, can come to no other conclusion than that the lot of being common
to all will likewise fall to the women.
 
He has not even a suspicion that the real point aimed at is to do away
with the status of women as mere instruments of production.
 
For the rest, nothing is more ridiculous than the virtuous indignation
of our bourgeois at the community of women which, they pretend, is to be
openly and officially established by the Communists. The Communists have
no need to introduce community of women; it has existed almost from time immemorial.
 
Our bourgeois, not content with having wives and daughters of their
proletarians at their disposal, not to speak of common prostitutes, take
the greatest pleasure in seducing each other’s wives. 
 
Bourgeois marriage is, in reality, a system of wives in common
and thus, at the most, what the Communists might possibly be reproached
with is that they desire to introduce, in substitution for a hypocritically
concealed, an openly legalised community of women. For the rest, it is
self-evident that the abolition of the present system of production must
bring with it the abolition of the community of women springing from that system, i.e.,
of prostitution both public and private.
 
The Communists are further reproached with desiring to abolish countries
and nationality.
 
The working men have no country. We cannot take from them what they
have not got. Since the proletariat must first of all acquire political
supremacy, must rise to be the leading class of the nation, must constitute
itself the nation, it is so far, itself national, though not in
the bourgeois sense of the word.
 
National differences and antagonism between peoples are daily more and
more vanishing, owing to the development of the bourgeoisie, to freedom
of commerce, to the world market, to uniformity in the mode of production
and in the conditions of life corresponding thereto.
 
The supremacy of the proletariat will cause them to vanish still faster.
United action, of the leading civilised countries at least, is one of the
first conditions for the emancipation of the proletariat.
 
In proportion as the exploitation of one individual by another will
also be put an end to, the exploitation of one nation by another will also
be put an end to. In proportion as the antagonism between classes within
the nation vanishes, the hostility of one nation to another will come to
an end.
 
The charges against Communism made from a religious, a philosophical
and, generally, from an ideological standpoint, are not deserving of serious
examination.
 
Does it require deep intuition to comprehend that man’s ideas, views,
and conception, in one word, man’s consciousness, changes with every change
in the conditions of his material existence, in his social relations and
in his social life?
 
What else does the history of ideas prove, than that intellectual
production changes its character in proportion as material production is
changed? The ruling ideas of each age have ever been the ideas of its ruling
class.
 
When people speak of the ideas that revolutionise society, they do but
express that fact that within the old society the elements of a new one
have been created, and that the dissolution of the old ideas keeps even
pace with the dissolution of the old conditions of existence.
 
When the ancient world was in its last throes, the ancient religions
were overcome by Christianity. When Christian ideas succumbed in the 18th
century to rationalist ideas, feudal society fought its death battle with
the then revolutionary bourgeoisie. The ideas of religious liberty and
freedom of conscience merely gave expression to the sway of free competition
within the domain of knowledge.
 
“Undoubtedly,” it will be said, “religious, moral, philosophical, and
juridical ideas have been modified in the course of historical development.
But religion, morality, philosophy, political science, and law, constantly
survived this change.” 
 
“There are, besides, eternal truths, such as Freedom, Justice,
etc., that are common to all states of society. But Communism abolishes
eternal truths, it abolishes all religion, and all morality, instead of
constituting them on a new basis; it therefore acts in contradiction to
all past historical experience.” 
 
What does this accusation reduce itself to? The history of all
past society has consisted in the development of class antagonisms, antagonisms
that assumed different forms at different epochs.
 
But whatever form they may have taken, one fact is common to all past
ages, viz., the exploitation of one part of society by the other. No wonder,
then, that the social consciousness of past ages, despite all the multiplicity
and variety it displays, moves within certain common forms, or general
ideas, which cannot completely vanish except with the total disappearance
of class antagonisms.
 
The Communist revolution is the most radical rupture with traditional
property relations; no wonder that its development involved the most radical rupture
with traditional ideas.
 
But let us have done with the bourgeois objections to Communism.
 
We have seen above, that the first step in the revolution by the working
class is to raise the proletariat to the position of ruling class to win
the battle of democracy.
 
The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by degrees,
all capital from the bourgeoisie, to centralise all instruments of production
in the hands of the State, i.e., of the proletariat organised as the ruling
class; and to increase the total of productive forces as rapidly as possible.
 
Of course, in the beginning, this cannot be effected except by means
of despotic inroads on the rights of property, and on the conditions of
bourgeois production; by means of measures, therefore, which appear economically
insufficient and untenable, but which, in the course of the movement, outstrip
themselves, necessitate further inroads upon the old social order, and
are unavoidable as a means of entirely revolutionising the mode of production.

These measures will, of course, be different in different countries.
 
Nevertheless, in most advanced countries, the following will be pretty
generally applicable.
 

1. Abolition of property in land and application of all rents of land to public
purposes.

2. A heavy progressive or graduated income tax.

3. Abolition of all rights of inheritance.

4. Confiscation of the property of all emigrants and rebels.

5. Centralisation of credit in the hands of the state, by means of a national
bank with State capital and an exclusive monopoly.

6. Centralisation of the means of communication and transport in the hands
of the State.

7. Extension of factories and instruments of production owned by the State;
the bringing into cultivation of waste-lands, and the improvement of the
soil generally in accordance with a common plan.

8. Equal liability of all to work. Establishment of industrial armies, especially
for agriculture.

9. Combination of agriculture with manufacturing industries; gradual abolition
of all the distinction between town and country by a more equable distribution
of the populace over the country.

10. Free education for all children in public schools. Abolition of children’s
factory labour in its present form. Combination of education with industrial
production, &c, &c.
 

When, in the course of development, class distinctions have disappeared,
and all production has been concentrated in the hands of a vast association
of the whole nation, the public power will lose its political character.
Political power, properly so called, is merely the organised power of one
class for oppressing another. If the proletariat during its contest with
the bourgeoisie is compelled, by the force of circumstances, to organise
itself as a class, if, by means of a revolution, it makes itself the ruling
class, and, as such, sweeps away by force the old conditions of production,
then it will, along with these conditions, have swept away the conditions
for the existence of class antagonisms and of classes generally, and will
thereby have abolished its own supremacy as a class.
 
In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and class antagonisms,
we shall have an association, in which the free development of each is the
condition for the free development of all.



Chapter 3: Socialist and Communist Literature



Table of Contents: Manifesto of the Communist Party |
Marx-Engels Archive




 

==========

## III. Socialist and Communist Literature










Communist Manifesto (Chapter 3)



MIA: Marxists: Marx & Engels: Library: 1848: Manifesto of the Communist Party: Chapter 3:       [German Original]



Chapter III. Socialist and Communist Literature


 
1. Reactionary Socialism


A. Feudal Socialism


Owing to their historical position, it became the vocation of the 
aristocracies of France and England
to write pamphlets against modern bourgeois society. In the French Revolution
of July 1830, and in the English reform agitation[A], these aristocracies
again succumbed to the hateful upstart. Thenceforth, a serious political
struggle was altogether out of the question. A literary battle alone remained
possible. But even in the domain of literature the old cries of the restoration
period had become impossible.(1)
 
In order to arouse sympathy, the aristocracy was obliged to lose
sight, apparently, of its own interests, and to formulate their indictment
against the bourgeoisie in the interest of the exploited working class
alone. Thus, the aristocracy took their revenge by singing lampoons on
their new masters and whispering in his ears sinister prophesies of coming
catastrophe.
 
In this way arose feudal Socialism: half lamentation, half lampoon;
half an echo of the past, half menace of the future; at times, by its bitter,
witty and incisive criticism, striking the bourgeoisie to the very heart’s
core; but always ludicrous in its effect, through total incapacity to comprehend
the march of modern history.
 
The aristocracy, in order to rally the people to them, waved the proletarian
alms-bag in front for a banner. But the people, so often as it joined them,
saw on their hindquarters the old feudal coats of arms, and deserted with
loud and irreverent laughter.
 
One section of the French Legitimists and “Young England” exhibited
this spectacle.
 
In pointing out that their mode of exploitation was different
to that of the bourgeoisie, the feudalists forget that they exploited under
circumstances and conditions that were quite different and that are now
antiquated. In showing that, under their rule, the modern proletariat never
existed, they forget that the modern bourgeoisie is the necessary offspring
of their own form of society.
 
For the rest, so little do they conceal the reactionary character of
their criticism that their chief accusation against the bourgeois amounts
to this, that under the bourgeois régime a class is being developed which
is destined to cut up root and branch the old order of society.
 
What they upbraid the bourgeoisie with is not so much that it creates
a proletariat as that it creates a revolutionary proletariat.
 
In political practice, therefore, they join in
all coercive measures against the working class; and in ordinary life,
despite their high-falutin phrases, they stoop to pick up the golden apples
dropped from the tree of industry, and to barter truth, love, and honour,
for traffic in wool, beetroot-sugar, and potato spirits.(2)
 
As the parson has ever gone hand in hand with the landlord, so
has Clerical Socialism with Feudal Socialism.
 
Nothing is easier than to give Christian asceticism a Socialist tinge.
Has not Christianity declaimed against private property, against marriage,
against the State? Has it not preached in the place of these, charity and
poverty, celibacy and mortification of the flesh, monastic life and Mother
Church? Christian Socialism is but the holy water with which the priest
consecrates the heart-burnings of the aristocrat.


 
B. Petty-Bourgeois Socialism


The feudal aristocracy was not the only class that
was ruined by the bourgeoisie, not the only class whose conditions of existence
pined and perished in the atmosphere of modern bourgeois society. The medieval
burgesses and the small peasant proprietors were the precursors of the
modern bourgeoisie. In those countries which are but little developed,
industrially and commercially, these two classes still vegetate side by
side with the rising bourgeoisie.
 
In countries where modern civilisation has become fully developed, a
new class of petty bourgeois has been formed, fluctuating between proletariat
and bourgeoisie, and ever renewing itself as a supplementary part of bourgeois
society. The individual members of this class, however, are being constantly
hurled down into the proletariat by the action of competition, and, as
modern industry develops, they even see the moment approaching when they
will completely disappear as an independent section of modern society,
to be replaced in manufactures, agriculture and commerce, by overlookers,
bailiffs and shopmen.
 
In countries like France, where the peasants constitute far more than
half of the population, it was natural that writers who sided with the
proletariat against the bourgeoisie should use, in their criticism of the
bourgeois régime, the standard of the peasant and petty bourgeois, and
from the standpoint of these intermediate classes, should take up the cudgels
for the working class. Thus arose petty-bourgeois Socialism. Sismondi was
the head of this school, not only in France but also in England.
 
This school of Socialism dissected with great acuteness the contradictions
in the conditions of modern production. It laid bare the hypocritical apologies
of economists. It proved, incontrovertibly, the disastrous effects of machinery
and division of labour; the concentration of capital and land in a few hands;
overproduction and crises; it pointed out the inevitable ruin of the petty
bourgeois and peasant, the misery of the proletariat, the anarchy in production,
the crying inequalities in the distribution of wealth, the industrial war
of extermination between nations, the dissolution of old moral bonds, of
the old family relations, of the old nationalities.
 
In its positive aims, however, this form of Socialism aspires either
to restoring the old means of production and of exchange, and with them
the old property relations, and the old society, or to cramping the modern
means of production and of exchange within the framework of the old property
relations that have been, and were bound to be, exploded by those means.
In either case, it is both reactionary and Utopian.
 
Its last words are: corporate guilds for manufacture; patriarchal relations
in agriculture.
 
Ultimately, when stubborn historical facts had dispersed all intoxicating
effects of self-deception, this form of Socialism ended in a miserable
fit of the blues.


 
C. German or “True” Socialism

The Socialist and Communist literature of France,
a literature that originated under the pressure of a bourgeoisie in power,
and that was the expressions of the struggle against this power, was introduced
into Germany at a time when the bourgeoisie, in that country, had just begun
its contest with feudal absolutism.
 
German philosophers, would-be philosophers, and beaux esprits
(men of letters),
eagerly seized on this literature, only forgetting, that when
these writings immigrated from France into Germany, French social conditions
had not immigrated along with them. In contact with German social conditions,
this French literature lost all its immediate practical significance and
assumed a purely literary aspect. Thus, to the German philosophers of the
Eighteenth Century, the demands of the first French Revolution were nothing
more than the demands of “Practical Reason” in general, and the utterance
of the will of the revolutionary French bourgeoisie signified, in their
eyes, the laws of pure Will, of Will as it was bound to be, of true human
Will generally.
 
The work of the German literati consisted solely in bringing the new
French ideas into harmony with their ancient philosophical conscience,
or rather, in annexing the French ideas without deserting their own philosophic
point of view.
 
This annexation took place in the same way in which a foreign language
is appropriated, namely, by translation.
 
It is well known how the monks wrote silly lives of Catholic Saints
over the manuscripts on which the classical works of ancient heathendom
had been written. The German literati reversed this process with the profane
French literature. They wrote their philosophical nonsense beneath the
French original. For instance, beneath the French criticism of the economic
functions of money, they wrote “Alienation of Humanity”, and beneath the
French criticism of the bourgeois state they wrote “Dethronement of the
Category of the General”, and so forth.
 
The introduction of these philosophical phrases at the back of the French
historical criticisms, they dubbed “Philosophy of Action”, “True Socialism”,
“German Science of Socialism”, “Philosophical Foundation of Socialism”,
and so on.
 
The French Socialist and Communist literature was thus completely emasculated.
And, since it ceased in the hands of the German to express the struggle
of one class with the other, he felt conscious of having overcome “French
one-sidedness” and of representing, not true requirements, but the requirements
of Truth; not the interests of the proletariat, but the interests of Human
Nature, of Man in general, who belongs to no class, has no reality, who
exists only in the misty realm of philosophical fantasy.
 
This German socialism, which took its schoolboy task so seriously and
solemnly, and extolled its poor stock-in-trade in such a mountebank fashion,
meanwhile gradually lost its pedantic innocence.
 
The fight of the Germans, and especially of the Prussian bourgeoisie,
against feudal aristocracy and absolute monarchy, in other words, the liberal
movement, became more earnest.
 
By this, the long-wished for opportunity was offered to “True” Socialism
of confronting the political movement with the Socialist demands, of
hurling the traditional anathemas against liberalism, against representative
government, against bourgeois competition, bourgeois freedom of the press,
bourgeois legislation, bourgeois liberty and equality, and of preaching
to the masses that they had nothing to gain, and everything to lose, by
this bourgeois movement. German Socialism forgot, in the nick of time,
that the French criticism, whose silly echo it was, presupposed the existence
of modern bourgeois society, with its corresponding economic conditions
of existence, and the political constitution adapted thereto, the very
things those attainment was the object of the pending struggle in Germany.
 
To the absolute governments, with their following of parsons, professors,
country squires, and officials, it served as a welcome scarecrow against
the threatening bourgeoisie.
 
It was a sweet finish, after the bitter pills of flogging and bullets,
with which these same governments, just at that time, dosed the German
working-class risings.
 
While this “True” Socialism thus served the government as a weapon for
fighting the German bourgeoisie, it, at the same time, directly represented
a reactionary interest, the interest of German Philistines. In Germany,
the petty-bourgeois class, a relic of the sixteenth century, and since
then constantly cropping up again under the various forms, is the real
social basis of the existing state of things.
 
To preserve this class is to preserve the existing state of things in
Germany. The industrial and political supremacy of the bourgeoisie threatens
it with certain destruction — on the one hand, from the concentration
of capital; on the other, from the rise of a revolutionary proletariat.
“True” Socialism appeared to kill these two birds with one stone. It spread
like an epidemic.
 
The robe of speculative cobwebs, embroidered with flowers of rhetoric,
steeped in the dew of sickly sentiment, this transcendental robe in which
the German Socialists wrapped their sorry “eternal truths”, all skin and
bone, served to wonderfully increase the sale of their goods amongst such
a public.
And on its part German Socialism recognised, more and more, its
own calling as the bombastic representative of the petty-bourgeois Philistine.
 
It proclaimed the German nation to be the model
nation, and the German petty Philistine to be the typical man. To every
villainous meanness of this model man, it gave a hidden, higher, Socialistic
interpretation, the exact contrary of its real character. It went to the
extreme length of directly opposing the “brutally destructive” tendency
of Communism, and of proclaiming its supreme and impartial contempt of
all class struggles. With very few exceptions, all the so-called Socialist
and Communist publications that now (1847) circulate in Germany belong
to the domain of this foul and enervating literature.(3)

  

 
2. Conservative or Bourgeois Socialism

A part of the bourgeoisie is desirous of redressing
social grievances in order to secure the continued existence of bourgeois
society.
 
To this section belong economists, philanthropists, humanitarians, improvers
of the condition of the working class, organisers of charity, members of
societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals, temperance fanatics,
hole-and-corner reformers of every imaginable kind. This form of socialism
has, moreover, been worked out into complete systems.
 
We may cite Proudhon’s Philosophie de la Misère as an example of
this form.
 
The Socialistic bourgeois want all the advantages of modern social conditions
without the struggles and dangers necessarily resulting therefrom. They
desire the existing state of society, minus its revolutionary and disintegrating
elements. They wish for a bourgeoisie without a proletariat. The bourgeoisie
naturally conceives the world in which it is supreme to be the best; and
bourgeois Socialism develops this comfortable conception into various more
or less complete systems. In requiring the proletariat to carry out such
a system, and thereby to march straightway into the social New Jerusalem,
it but requires in reality, that the proletariat should remain within the
bounds of existing society, but should cast away all its hateful ideas
concerning the bourgeoisie.
 
A second, and more practical, but less systematic, form of this Socialism
sought to depreciate every revolutionary movement in the eyes of the working
class by showing that no mere political reform, but only a change in the
material conditions of existence, in economical relations, could be of
any advantage to them. By changes in the material conditions of existence,
this form of Socialism, however, by no means understands abolition of the
bourgeois relations of production, an abolition that can be affected only
by a revolution, but administrative reforms, based on the continued existence
of these relations; reforms, therefore, that in no respect affect the relations
between capital and labour, but, at the best, lessen the cost, and simplify
the administrative work, of bourgeois government.
 
Bourgeois Socialism attains adequate expression when, and only when,
it becomes a mere figure of speech.
 
Free trade: for the benefit of the working class. Protective duties:
for the benefit of the working class. Prison Reform: for the benefit of
the working class. This is the last word and the only seriously meant word
of bourgeois socialism.
 
It is summed up in the phrase: the bourgeois is a bourgeois — for the
benefit of the working class.

   


3. Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism


We do not here refer to
that literature which, in every great modern revolution, has always given
voice to the demands of the proletariat, such as the writings of Babeuf and others.
 
The first direct attempts of the proletariat to attain its own ends,
made in times of universal excitement, when feudal society was being overthrown,
necessarily failed, owing to the then undeveloped state of the proletariat,
as well as to the absence of the economic conditions for its emancipation,
conditions that had yet to be produced, and could be produced by the impending
bourgeois epoch alone. The revolutionary literature that accompanied these
first movements of the proletariat had necessarily a reactionary character.
It inculcated universal asceticism and social levelling in its crudest
form.
 
The Socialist and Communist systems, properly
so called, those of Saint-Simon,
Fourier, Owen,
and others, spring into existence in the early undeveloped period, described
above, of the struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie (see Section
1. Bourgeois and Proletarians).
 
The founders of these systems see, indeed, the class antagonisms, as
well as the action of the decomposing elements in the prevailing form of
society. But the proletariat, as yet in its infancy, offers to them the
spectacle of a class without any historical initiative or any independent
political movement.
 
Since the development of class antagonism keeps even pace with the development
of industry, the economic situation, as they find it, does not as yet offer
to them the material conditions for the emancipation of the proletariat.
They therefore search after a new social science, after new social laws,
that are to create these conditions.
 
Historical action is to yield to their personal inventive action; historically
created conditions of emancipation to fantastic ones; and the gradual,
spontaneous class organisation of the proletariat to an organisation of
society especially contrived by these inventors. Future history resolves
itself, in their eyes, into the propaganda and the practical carrying out
of their social plans.
 
In the formation of their plans, they are conscious of caring chiefly
for the interests of the working class, as being the most suffering class.
Only from the point of view of being the most suffering class does the
proletariat exist for them.
 
The undeveloped state of the class struggle, as well as their own surroundings,
causes Socialists of this kind to consider themselves far superior to all
class antagonisms. They want to improve the condition of every member of
society, even that of the most favoured. Hence, they habitually appeal to
society at large, without the distinction of class; nay, by preference,
to the ruling class. For how can people, when once they understand their
system, fail to see in it the best possible plan of the best possible state
of society?
 
Hence, they reject all political, and especially all revolutionary
action; they wish to attain their ends by peaceful means, necessarily doomed
to failure, and by the force of example, to pave the way for the new social
Gospel.
 
Such fantastic pictures of future society, painted at a time when the
proletariat is still in a very undeveloped state and has but a fantastic
conception of its own position, correspond with the first instinctive yearnings
of that class for a general reconstruction of society.
 
But these Socialist and Communist publications contain also a critical
element. They attack every principle of existing society. Hence, they are
full of the most valuable materials for the enlightenment of the working
class. The practical measures proposed in them — such as the abolition
of the distinction between town and country, of the family, of the carrying
on of industries for the account of private individuals, and of the wage
system, the proclamation of social harmony, the conversion of the function
of the state into a mere superintendence of production — all these proposals
point solely to the disappearance of class antagonisms which were, at that
time, only just cropping up, and which, in these publications, are recognised
in their earliest indistinct and undefined forms only. These proposals,
therefore, are of a purely Utopian character.
 
The significance of Critical-Utopian Socialism
and Communism bears an inverse relation to historical development. In proportion
as the modern class struggle develops and takes definite shape, this fantastic
standing apart from the contest, these fantastic attacks on it, lose all
practical value and all theoretical justification. Therefore, although
the originators of these systems were, in many respects, revolutionary,
their disciples have, in every case, formed mere reactionary sects. They
hold fast by the original views of their masters, in opposition to the
progressive historical development of the proletariat. They, therefore,
endeavour, and that consistently, to deaden the class struggle and to reconcile
the class antagonisms. They still dream of experimental realisation of
their social Utopias, of founding isolated “phalansteres”, of establishing
“Home Colonies”, or setting up a “Little Icaria”(4)
— duodecimo editions of the New Jerusalem — and to realise all these castles
in the air, they are compelled to appeal to the feelings and purses of
the bourgeois. By degrees, they sink into the category of the reactionary [or] 
conservative Socialists depicted above, differing from these only by more
systematic pedantry, and by their fanatical and superstitious belief in
the miraculous effects of their social science.
 
They, therefore, violently oppose all political action on the part of
the working class; such action, according to them, can only result from
blind unbelief in the new Gospel.
 
The Owenites in England, and the Fourierists in France, respectively,
oppose the Chartists and the Réformistes.



Chapter 4: Position of the Communists in Relation to the Various Existing Opposition Parties 



(1)
Not the English Restoration (1660-1689), but the French Restoration (1814-1830). [Note by Engels to the English edition of 1888.]
 

(2)
This applies chiefly to Germany, where the landed aristocracy and squirearchy have large portions of their estates cultivated for their own account by stewards, and are, moreover, extensive beetroot-sugar manufacturers and distillers of potato spirits. The wealthier British aristocracy are, as yet, rather above that; but they, too, know how to make up for declining rents by lending their names to floaters or more or less shady joint-stock companies. [Note by Engels to the English edition of 1888.]
 

(3)
The revolutionary storm of 1848 swept away this whole shabby tendency and cured its protagonists of the desire to dabble in socialism. The chief representative and classical type of this tendency is Mr Karl Gruen. [Note by Engels to the German edition of 1890.]
 

(4) Phalanstéres were Socialist colonies on the plan of Charles Fourier; Icaria was the name given by Cabet to his Utopia and, later on, to his American Communist colony. [Note by Engels to the English edition of 1888.]
 

“Home Colonies” were what Owen called his Communist model societies. Phalanstéres was the name of the public palaces planned by Fourier. Icaria was the name given to the Utopian land of fancy, whose Communist institutions Cabet portrayed. [Note by Engels to the German edition of 1890.]


 
[A]
A reference to the movement for a reform of the electoral law which, under the pressure of the working class, was passed by the British House of Commons in 1831 and finally endorsed by the House of Lords in June, 1832. The reform was directed against monopoly rule of the landed and finance aristocracy and opened the way to Parliament for the representatives of the industrial bourgeoisie. Neither workers nor the petty-bourgeois were allowed electoral rights, despite assurances they would.



Table of Contents: Manifesto of the Communist Party |
Marx-Engels Archive






==========

## IV. Position of the Communists in Relation to
  the Various Existing Opposition Parties










Communist Manifesto (Chapter 4)



MIA: Marxists: Marx & Engels: Library: 1848: Manifesto of the Communist Party: Chapter 4:       [German Original]



Chapter IV. Position of the Communists in Relation to the Various Existing Opposition Parties

 
Section II has made clear the relations of the
Communists to the existing working-class parties, such as the Chartists
in England and the Agrarian Reformers in America.
 

The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, 
for the enforcement of the momentary interests of the working
class; but in the movement of the present, they also represent and take
care of the future of that movement. In France, the Communists ally with
the Social-Democrats(1) against the conservative and radical bourgeoisie, reserving, however, the right to take up a critical
position in regard to phases and illusions traditionally handed down from
the great Revolution.
 
In Switzerland, they support the Radicals, without losing sight of the
fact that this party consists of antagonistic elements, partly of Democratic
Socialists, in the French sense, partly of radical bourgeois.
 
In Poland, they support the party that insists on an agrarian revolution
as the prime condition for national emancipation, that party which fomented
the insurrection of Cracow in 1846.
 
In Germany, they fight with the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a revolutionary
way, against the absolute monarchy, the feudal squirearchy, and the petty bourgeoisie.
 
But they never cease, for a single instant, to instill into the working
class the clearest possible recognition of the hostile antagonism between
bourgeoisie and proletariat, in order that the German workers may straightway
use, as so many weapons against the bourgeoisie, the social and political
conditions that the bourgeoisie must necessarily introduce along with its
supremacy, and in order that, after the fall of the reactionary classes
in Germany, the fight against the bourgeoisie itself may immediately begin.
 
The Communists turn their attention chiefly to Germany, because that
country is on the eve of a bourgeois revolution that is bound to be carried
out under more advanced conditions of European civilisation and with a
much more developed proletariat than that of England was in the seventeenth,
and France in the eighteenth century, and because the bourgeois revolution
in Germany will be but the prelude to an immediately following proletarian
revolution.
 
In short, the Communists everywhere support every revolutionary movement
against the existing social and political order of things.
 
In all these movements, they bring to the front, as the leading question
in each, the property question, no matter what its degree of development
at the time.
 
Finally, they labour everywhere for the union and agreement of the democratic
parties of all countries.
 
The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly
declare that their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow
of all existing social conditions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a
Communistic revolution. The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains.
They have a world to win.


Working Men of All Countries, Unite!



 
(1)
The party then represented in Parliament by Ledru-Rollin,
in literature by Louis Blanc, in the daily press by the Réforme.
The name of Social-Democracy signifies, with these its inventors, a section
of the Democratic or Republican Party more or less tinged with socialism. [Engels, English Edition 1888]

* * *

The famous final phrase of the Manifesto, “Working Men of All Countries, Unite!”, in the original German is: “Proletarier aller Länder, vereinigt euch!” Thus, a more correct translation would be “Proletarians of all countries, Unite!”

“Workers of the World, Unite. You have nothing to lose but your chains!” is a popularisation of the last three sentences, and is not found in any official translation. Since this English translation was approved by Engels, we have kept the original intact.


Photograph of a page of the Manifesto in Marx’s handwriting
Table of Contents: Manifesto of the Communist Party |
Marx/Engels Library






==========

## Introduction





Wage Labour and Capital - Introduction







Karl Marx
Wage Labour and Capital

Introduction to 
Karl Marx’s
Wage Labour and Capital
by Frederick Engels 

This pamphlet first appeared in the form of a series of leading articles in
the Neue
Rheinische Zeitung, beginning on April 4th, 1849. The text is made up of
from lectures delivered by Marx before the German Workingmen’s Club of
Brussels in 1847. The series was never completed. The promise “to be
continued,” at the end of the editorial in Number 269 of the newspaper,
remained unfulfilled in consequence of the precipitous events of that time: the
invasion of Hungary by the Russians [Tsarist troops
invaded Hungary in 1849 to keep the Austrian Hapsburg dynasty in power],
and the uprisings in Dresden, Iserlohn, Elberfeld, the Palatinate, and in Baden
[Spontaneous uprisings in Germany in May-July 1849,
supporting the Imperial Constitution which were crushed in mid-July],
which led to the suppression of the paper on May 19th, 1849. And among the
papers left by Marx no manuscript of any continuation of these articles has
been found.
“Wage-labour and Capital” has appeared as an independent
publication in several editions, the last of which was issued by the Swiss
Co-operative Printing Association, in Hottingen-Zurich, in 1884. Hitherto, the
several editions have contained the exact wording of the original articles. But
since at least 10,000 copies of the present edition are to be circulated as a
propaganda tract, the question necessarily forced itself upon me, would Marx
himself, under these circumstance, have approved of an unaltered literal
reproduction of the original?
Marx, in the ’40s, had not yet completed his criticism of political
economy. This was not done until toward the end of the fifties. Consequently,
such of his writings as were published before the first installment of his Critique of Political
Economy was finished, deviate in some points from those written after 1859,
and contain expressions and whole sentences which, viewed from the standpoint
of his later writings, appear inexact, and even incorrect. Now, it goes without
saying that in ordinary editions, intended for the public in general, this
earlier standpoint, as a part of the intellectual development of the author,
has its place; that the author as well as the public, has an indisputable right
to an unaltered reprint of these older writings. In such a case, I would not
have dreamed of changing a single word in it. But it is otherwise when the
edition is destined almost exclusively for the purpose of propaganda. In such a
case, Marx himself would unquestionably have brought the old work, dating from
1849, into harmony with his new point of view, and I feel sure that I am acting
in his spirit when I insert in this edition the few changes and additions which
are necessary in order to attain this object in all essential point.
Therefore, I say to the reader at once: this pamphlet is not as Marx wrote
it in 1849, but approximately as Marx would have written it in 1891. Moreover,
so many copies of the original text are in circulation, that these will suffice
until I can publish it again unaltered in a complete edition of Marx’s
works, to appear at some future time.
My alterations centre about one point. According to the original reading,
the worker sells his labour for wages, which he receives from the
capitalist; according to the present text, he sells his labour-power.
And for this change, I must render an explanation: to the workers, in order
that they may understand that we are not quibbling or word-juggling, but are
dealing here with one of the most important points in the whole range of
political economy; to the bourgeois, in order that they may convince themselves
how greatly the uneducated workers, who can be easily made to grasp the most
difficult economic analyses, excel our supercilious “cultured" folk, for
whom such ticklish problems remain insoluble their whole life long. 

Classical political economy[1]
borrowed from the industrial practice the current notion of the manufacturer,
that he buys and pays for the labour of his employees. This conception had been
quite serviceable for the business purposes of the manufacturer, his
bookkeeping and price calculation. But naively carried over into political
economy, it there produced truly wonderful errors and confusions. 
Political economy finds it an established fact that the prices of all
commodities, among them the price of the commodity which it calls
“labour,” continually change; that they rise and fall in
consequence of the most diverse circumstances, which often have no connection
whatsoever with the production of the commodities themselves, so that prices
appear to be determined, as a rule, by pure chance. As soon, therefore, as
political economy stepped forth as a science, it was one of its first tasks to
search for the law that hid itself behind this chance, which apparently
determined the prices of commodities, and which in reality controlled this very
chance. Among the prices of commodities, fluctuating and oscillating, now
upward, now downward, the fixed central point was searched for around which
these fluctuations and oscillations were taking place. In short, starting from
the price of commodities, political economy sought for the value of commodities
as the regulating law, by means of which all price fluctuations could be
explained, and to which they could all be reduced in the last resort.
And so, classical political economy found that the value of a commodity was
determined by the labour incorporated in it and requisite to its production.
With this explanation, it was satisfied. And we, too, may, for the present,
stop at this point. But, to avoid misconceptions, I will remind the reader that
today this explanation has become wholly inadequate. Marx was the first to
investigate thoroughly into the value-forming quality of labour and to discover
that not all labour which is apparently, or even really, necessary to the
production of a commodity, imparts under all circumstances to this commodity a
magnitude of value corresponding to the quantity of labour used up. If,
therefore, we say today in short, with economists like Ricardo, that the value
of a commodity is determined by the labour necessary to its production, we
always imply the reservations and restrictions made by Marx. Thus much for our
present purpose; further information can be found in Marx’s Critique
of Political Economy, which appeared in 1859, and in the first volume of
Capital.
But, as soon as the economists applied this determination of value by labour
to the commodity “labour", they fell from one contradiction into another.
How is the value of “labour” determined? By the necessary labour
embodied in it. But how much labour is embodied in the labour of a labourer of
a day a week, a month, a year. If labour is the measure of all values, we can
express the “value of labour” only in labour. But we know
absolutely nothing about the value of an hour’s labour, if all that we
know about it is that it is equal to one hour’s labour. So, thereby, we
have not advanced one hair’s breadth nearer our goal; we are constantly
turning about in a circle.
Classical economics, therefore, essayed another turn. It said: the value of
a commodity is equal to its cost of production. But, what is the cost of
production of “labour"? In order to answer this question, the economists
are forced to strain logic just a little. Instead of investigating the cost of
production of labour itself, which, unfortunately, cannot be ascertained, they
now investigate the cost of production of the labourer. And this
latter can be ascertained. It changes according to time and circumstances, but
for a given condition of society, in a given locality, and in a given branch of
production, it, too, is given, at least within quite narrow limits. We live
today under the regime of capitalist production, under which a large and
steadily growing class of the population can live only on the condition that it
works for the owners of the means of production – tools, machines, raw
materials, and means of subsistence – in return for wages. On the basis
of this mode of production, the labourer’s cost of production consists of
the sum of the means of subsistence (or their price in money) which on the
average are requisite to enable him to work, to maintain in him this capacity
for work, and to replace him at his departure, by reason of age, sickness, or
death, with another labourer – that is to say, to propagate the working
class in required numbers.
Let us assume that the money price of these means of subsistence averages 3
shillings a day. Our labourer gets, therefore, a daily wage of 3 shillings from
his employer. For this, the capitalist lets him work, say, 12 hours a day. Our
capitalist, moreover, calculates somewhat in the following fashion: Let us
assume that our labourer (a machinist) has to make a part of a machine which he
finishes in one day. The raw material (iron and brass in the necessary prepared
form) costs 20 shillings. The consumption of coal by the steam-engine, the
wear-and-tear of this engine itself, of the turning-lathe, and of the other
tools with which our labourer works, represent, for one day and one labourer, a
value of 1 shilling. The wages for one day are, according to our assumption, 3
shillings. This makes a total of 24 shillings for our piece of a machine.
But, the capitalist calculates that, on an average, he will receive for it a
price of 27 shillings from his customers, or 3 shillings over and above his
outlay.
Whence do they 3 shillings pocketed by the capitalist come? According to the
assertion of classical political economy, commodities are in the long run sold
at their values, that is, they are sold at prices which correspond to the
necessary quantities of labour contained in them. The average price of our part
of a machine – 27 shillings – would therefore equal its value,
i.e., equal the amount of labour embodied in it. But, of these 27 shillings, 21
shillings were values were values already existing before the machinist began
to work; 20 shillings were contained in the raw material, 1 shilling in the
fuel consumed during the work and in the machines and tools used in the process
and reduced in their efficiency to the value of this amount. There remains 6
shillings, which have been added to the value of the raw material. But,
according to the supposition of our economists, themselves, these 6 shillings
can arise only from the labour added to the raw material by the labourer. His
12 hours’ labour has created, according to this, a new value of 6
shillings. Therefore, the value of his 12 hours’ labour would be
equivalent to 6 shillings. So we have at last discovered what the “value
of labour” is.
“Hold on there!” cries our machinist. “Six shillings? But
I have received only 3 shillings! My capitalist swears high and day that the
value of my 12 hours’ labour is no more than 3 shillings, and if I were
to demand 6, he’d laugh at me. What kind of a story is that?"
If before this we got with our value of labour into a vicious circle, we now
surely have driven straight into an insoluble contradiction. We searched for
the value of labour, and we found more than we can use. For the labourer, the
value of the 12 hours’ labour is 3 shillings; for the capitalist, it is 6
shillings, of which he pays the workingman 3 shillings as wages, and pockets
the remaining 3 shilling himself. According to this, labour has not one but two
values, and, moreover, two very different values!
As soon as we reduce the values, now expressed in money, to labour-time, the
contradiction becomes even more absurd. By the 12 hours’ labour, a new
value of 6 shillings is created. Therefore, in 6 hours, the new value created
equals 3 shillings – the amount which the labourer receives for 12
hours’ labour. For 12 hours’ labour, the workingman receives, as an
equivalent, the product of 6 hours’ labour. We are, thus, forced to one
of two conclusions: either labour has two values, one of which is twice as
large as the other, or 12 equals 6! In both cases, we get pure absurdities.
Turn and twist as we may, we will not get out of this contradiction as long as
we speak of the buying and selling of “labour” and of the
“value of labour.” And just so it happened to the political
economists. The last offshoot of classical political economy – the
Ricardian school – was largely wrecked on the insolubility of this
contradiction. Classical political economy had run itself into a blind alley.
The man who discovered the way out of this blind alley was Karl Marx.
What the economists had considered as the cost of production of
“labour” was really the cost of production, not of
“labour,” but of the living labourer himself. And what this
labourer sold to the capitalist was not his labour.
“So soon as his labour really begins,” says
Marx, “it ceases to belong to him, and therefore can no longer be sold by
him.” 
At the most, he could sell his future labour – i.e., assume
the obligation of executing a certain piece of work in a certain time. But, in
this way, he does not sell labour (which would first have to be performed), but
not for a stipulated payment he places his labour-power at the disposal of the
capitalist for a certain time (in case of time-wages), or for the performance
of a certain task (in case of piece-wages). He hires out or sells his
labour-power. But this labour-power has grown up with his person and
is inseparable from it. Its cost of production, therefore, coincides with his
own cost of production; what the economist called the cost of production of
labour is really the cost of production of the labourer, and therewith of his
labour-power. And, thus, we can also go back from the cost of production of
labour-power to the value of labour-power, and determine the quantity of social
labour that is required for the production of a labour-power of a given
quantity, as Marx has done in the chapter on “The Buying and Selling of
labour Power.” [Capital, Vol.I]
Now what takes place after the worker has sold his labour-power, i.e., after
he has placed his labour-power at the disposal of the capitalist for
stipulated-wages – whether time-wages or piece-wages? The capitalist
takes the labourer into his workshop or factory, where all the articles
required for the work can be found – raw materials, auxiliary materials
(coal, dyestuffs, etc.), tools, and machines. Here, the worker begins to work.
His daily wages are, as above, 3 shillings, and it makes no difference whether
he earns them as day-wages or piece-wages. We again assume that in 12 hours the
worker adds by his labour a new value of 6 shillings to the value of the raw
materials consumed, which new value the capitalist realizes by the sale of the
finished piece of work. Out of this new value, he pays the worker his 3
shillings, and the remaining 3 shillings he keeps for himself. If, now, the
labourer creates in 12 hours a value of 6 shillings, in 6 hours he creates a
value of 3 shillings. Consequently, after working 6 hours for the capitalist,
the labourer has returned to him the equivalent of the 3 shillings received as
wages. After 6 hours’ work, both are quits, neither one owing a penny to
the other.
“Hold on there!” now cries out the capitalist. “I have
hired the labourer for a whole day, for 12 hours. But 6 hours are only
half-a-day. So work along lively there until the other 6 hours are at an end
– only then will we be even.” And, in fact, the labourer has to
submit to the conditions of the contract upon which he entered of “his
own free will", and according to which he bound himself to work 12 whole hours
for a product of labour which cost only 6 hours’ labour.
Similarly with piece-wages. Let us suppose that in 12 hours our worker makes
12 commodities. Each of these costs a shilling in raw materials and
wear-and-tear, and is sold for 2.5 shillings. On our former assumption, the
capitalist gives the labourer .25 of a shilling for each piece, which makes a
total of 3 shillings for 12 pieces. To earn this, the worker requires 12 hours.
The capitalist receives 30 shillings for the 12 pieces; deducting 24 shillings
for raw materials and wear-and-tear, there remains 6 shillings, of which he
pays 3 shillings in wages and pockets the remaining 3. Just as before! Here,
also, the worker labours 6 hours for himself – i.e., to replace his wages
(half-an-hour in each of the 12 hours), and 6 hours for the capitalist.
The rock upon which the best economists were stranded, as long as they
started out from the value of labour, vanishes as soon as we make our
starting-point the value of labour-power. Labour-power is, in our
present-day capitalist society, a commodity like every other commodity, but yet
a very peculiar commodity. It has, namely, the peculiarity of being a
value-creating force, the source of value, and, moreover, when properly
treated, the source of more value than it possesses itself. In the present
state of production, human labour-power not only produces in a day a greater
value than it itself possesses and costs; but with each new scientific
discovery, with each new technical invention, there also rises the surplus of
its daily production over its daily cost, while as a consequence there
diminishes that part of the working-day in which the labourer produces the
equivalent of his day’s wages, and, on the other hand, lengthens that
part of the working-day in which he must present labour gratis to the
capitalist.
And this is the economic constitution of our entire modern society: the
working class alone produces all values. For value is only another expression
for labour, that expression, namely, by which is designated, in our capitalist
society of today, the amount of socially necessary labour embodied in a
particular commodity. But, these values produced by the workers do not belong
to the workers. They belong to the owners of the raw materials, machines,
tools, and money, which enable them to buy the labour-power of the working
class. Hence, the working class gets back only a part of the entire mass of
products produced by it. And, as we have just seen, the other portion, which
the capitalist class retains, and which it has to share, at most, only with the
landlord class, is increasing with every new discovery and invention, while the
share which falls to the working class (per capita) rises but little and very
slowly, or not at all, and under certain conditions it may even fall.
But, these discoveries and inventions which supplant one another with
ever-increasing speed, this productiveness of human labour which increases from
day to day to unheard-of proportions, at last gives rise to a conflict, in
which present capitalistic economy must go to ruin. On the one hand,
immeasurable wealth and a superfluidity of products with which the buyers
cannot cope. On the other hand, the great mass of society proletarianized,
transformed into wage-labourers, and thereby disabled from appropriating to
themselves that superfluidity of products. The splitting up of society into a
small class, immoderately rich, and a large class of wage-labourers devoid of
all property, brings it about that this society smothers in its own
superfluidity, while the great majority of its members are scarcely, or not at
all, protected from extreme want.
This condition becomes every day more absurd and more unnecessary. It
must be gotten rid of; it can be gotten rid of. A new social order is
possible, in which the class differences of today will have disappeared, and in
which – perhaps after a short transition period, which, though somewhat
deficient in other respects, will in any case be very useful morally –
there will be the means of life, of the enjoyment of life, and of the
development and activity of all bodily and mental faculties, through the
systematic use and further development of the enormous productive powers of
society, which exists with us even now, with equal obligation upon all to work.
And that the workers are growing ever more determined to achieve this new
social order will be proven on both sides of the ocean on this dawning May Day,
and on Sunday, May 3rd. [Engels is referring to the May
Day celebrations of 1891] 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
London, April 30, 1891.

Footnotes 
1. “By classical
political economy, I understand that economy which, since the time of W. Petty,
has investigated the real relations of production in bourgeois society, in
contradistinction to vulgar economy, which deals with appearances only,
ruminates without ceasing on the materials long since provided by scientific
economy, and there seeks plausible explanations of the most obtrusive phenomena
for bourgeois daily use, but for the rest confines itself to systematizing in a
pedantic way, and proclaiming for everlasting truths, trite ideas held by the
self-complacent bourgeoisie with regard to their own world, to them the best of
all possible worlds.” 
(Karl Marx, Capital,
Vol.I, p.93f.) 

Preliminary
Wage Labour and Capital Index




==========

## Wage Labor and Capital









Wage Labour and Capital



Works of Karl Marx 1847

Wage Labour and Capital




Delivered: December 1847;
Source: Wage Labour and Capital, the original 1891 pamphlet;
Edited/Translated: Frederick Engels;
First Published (in German): Neue Rheinische Zeitung, April 5-8 and 11, 1849;
Online Version: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 1993, 1999;
Transcription/Markup: Zodiac and Brian Baggins;
Proofed: and corrected by Alek Blain, 2006.


Table of Contents:


Introduction

Preliminary

What are wages?

By what is the price of a commodity determined?

By what are wages determined?

The nature and growth of capital

Relation of wage-labor to capital

The general law that determines the rise and fall of wages and profit

The interests of capital and wage-labor are diametrically opposed

Effect of capitalist competition on the capitalist class, middle class and working class





Study Guide
1847 Index |
1840s Index |
Marx-Engels Archive




==========

## Preface to the Third German Edition



Preface to The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte by Engels 1885





Works of Frederick Engels 1885
Preface to the Third German Edition of
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte[39]


Source: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels Selected Works, Progress Publishers, 1968;
Translated: from the German written in 1885;
First Published: in: Karl Marx. Der Achtzente Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte, Hamburg, 1885;
Transcribed: by Mike Bessler.

The fact that a new edition of The Eighteenth Brumaire has become necessary, thirty-three years after its first appearance, proves that even today this little book has lost none of its value.
It was in truth a work of genius. Immediately after the event that struck the whole political world like a thunderbolt from the blue, that was condemned by some with loud cries of moral indignation and accepted by others as salvation from the revolution and as punishment for its errors, but was only wondered at by all and understood by none-immediately after this event Marx came out with a concise, epigrammatic exposition that laid bare the whole course of French history since the February days in its inner interconnection, reduced the miracle of December 2[40] to a natural, necessary result of this interconnection and in so doing did not even need to treat the hero of the coup d'état otherwise than with the contempt he so well deserved. And the picture was drawn with such a master hand that every fresh disclosure since made has only provided fresh proofs of how faithfully it reflected reality. This eminent understanding of the living history of the day, this clear-sighted appreciation of events at the moment of happening, is indeed without parallel.
But for this, Marx’s thorough knowledge of French history was needed. France is the land where, more than anywhere else, the historical class struggles were each time fought out to a decision, and where, consequently, the changing political forms within which they move and in which their results are summarised have been stamped in the sharpest outlines. The centre of feudalism in the Middle Ages, the model country of unified monarchy, resting on estates, since the Renaissance,[41] France demolished feudalism in the Great Revolution and established the unalloyed rule of the bourgeoisie in a classical purity unequalled by any other European land. And the struggle of the upward-striving proletariat against the ruling bourgeoisie appeared here in an acute form unknown elsewhere. This was the reason why Marx not only studied the past history of France with particular predilection, but also followed her current history in every detail, stored up the material for future use and, consequently, events never took him by surprise.
In addition, however, there was still another circumstance. It was precisely Marx who had first discovered the great law of motion of history, the law according to which all historical struggles, whether they proceed in the political, religious, philosophical or some other ideological domain, are in fact only the more or less clear expression of struggles of social classes, and that the existence and thereby the collisions, too, between these classes are in turn conditioned by the degree of development of their economic position, by the mode of their production and of their exchange determined by it. This law, which has the same significance for history as the law of the transformation of energy has for natural science - this law gave him here, too, the key to an understanding of the history of the Second French Republic.[42] He put his law to the test on these historical events, and even after thirty-three years we must still say that it has stood the test brilliantly.
Frederick Engels

Footnotes
39 This work, written on the basis of a concrete analysis of the revolutionary events in France from 1848 to 1851, is one of the most important Marxist writings. In it Marx gives a further elaboration of all the basic tenets of historical materialism-the theory of the class struggle and proletarian revolution, the state and the dictatorship of the proletariat. Of extremely great importance is the conclusion which Marx arrived at on the question of the attitude of the proletariat to the bourgeois state. He says, “All revolutions perfected this machine instead of smashing it” (see p. 171 of this volume). Lenin described it as one of the most important propositions in the Marxist teaching on the state.
In The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Marx continued his analysis of the question of the peasantry, as a potential ally of the working class in the imminent revolution, outlined the role of the political parties in the life of society and exposed for what they were the essential features of Bonapartism. — 95, 97
40 On December 2, 1851 a counter-revolutionary coup d'état in France was carried out by Louis Bonaparte and his adherents. — 95, 99, 120, 254, 264, 287, 393, 653.
41 Renaissance-a period in the cultural and ideological development of a number of countries in Western and Central Europe called forth by the emergence of capitalist relations, which covers the second half of the fifteenth and the sixteenth century. This period is usually associated with a rapid development in the arts and sciences and the revival of interest in the culture of classical Greece and Rome (hence the name of the period). For Engels’s description of the Renaissance see his “Introduction to Dialectics of Nature” (pp. 342-44) of this volume. — 95, 628
42 The Second Republic existed in France from 1848 to 1852. For Marx’s description of this period see The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 and The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. — 96
 


1885 Works |
18th Brumaire





==========

## I. 









18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. Karl Marx 1852



The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. Karl Marx 1852
I
Hegel remarks somewhere[*] that
all great world-historic facts and personages appear, so to speak, twice. He
forgot to add: the first time as tragedy, the second time as farce. Caussidière
for Danton, Louis Blanc for Robespierre, the Montagne of 1848 to 1851[66] for the Montagne of 1793
to 1795, the nephew for the uncle. And the same caricature occurs in the
circumstances of the second edition of the Eighteenth Brumaire.
Men make their own history, but they do not make it as they please; they do
not make it under self-selected circumstances, but under circumstances existing
already, given and transmitted from the past. The tradition of all dead
generations weighs like a nightmare on the brains of the living. And just as
they seem to be occupied with revolutionizing themselves and things, creating
something that did not exist before, precisely in such epochs of revolutionary
crisis they anxiously conjure up the spirits of the past to their service,
borrowing from them names, battle slogans, and costumes in order to present
this new scene in world history in time-honored disguise and borrowed language.
Thus Luther put on the mask of the Apostle Paul, the Revolution of 1789-1814
draped itself alternately in the guise of the Roman Republic and the Roman
Empire, and the Revolution of 1848 knew nothing better to do than to parody,
now 1789, now the revolutionary tradition of 1793-95. In like manner, the
beginner who has learned a new language always translates it back into his
mother tongue, but he assimilates the spirit of the new language and expresses
himself freely in it only when he moves in it without recalling the old and
when he forgets his native tongue.
When we think about this conjuring up of the dead of world history, a
salient difference reveals itself. Camille Desmoulins, Danton, Robespierre, St.
Just, Napoleon, the heroes as well as the parties and the masses of the old
French Revolution, performed the task of their time – that of unchaining
and establishing modern bourgeois society – in Roman costumes and with
Roman phrases. The first one destroyed the feudal foundation and cut off the
feudal heads that had grown on it. The other created inside France the only
conditions under which free competition could be developed, parceled-out land
properly used, and the unfettered productive power of the nation employed; and
beyond the French borders it swept away feudal institutions everywhere, to
provide, as far as necessary, bourgeois society in France with an appropriate
up-to-date environment on the European continent. Once the new social formation
was established, the antediluvian colossi disappeared and with them also the
resurrected Romanism – the Brutuses, the Gracchi, the publicolas, the
tribunes, the senators, and Caesar himself. Bourgeois society in its sober
reality bred its own true interpreters and spokesmen in the Says, Cousins,
Royer-Collards, Benjamin Constants, and Guizots; its real military leaders sat
behind the office desk and the hog-headed Louis XVIII was its political chief.
Entirely absorbed in the production of wealth and in peaceful competitive
struggle, it no longer remembered that the ghosts of the Roman period had
watched over its cradle.
 But unheroic though bourgeois society is, it
nevertheless needed heroism, sacrifice, terror, civil war, and national wars to
bring it into being. And in the austere classical traditions of the Roman
Republic the bourgeois gladiators found the ideals and the art forms, the
self-deceptions, that they needed to conceal from themselves the
bourgeois-limited content of their struggles and to keep their passion on the
high plane of great historic tragedy. Similarly, at another stage of
development a century earlier, Cromwell and the English people had borrowed
from the Old Testament the speech, emotions, and illusions for their bourgeois
revolution. When the real goal had been achieved and the bourgeois
transformation of English society had been accomplished, Locke supplanted
Habakkuk. 
Thus the awakening of the dead in those revolutions served the purpose of
glorifying the new struggles, not of parodying the old; of magnifying the given
task in the imagination, not recoiling from its solution in reality; of finding
once more the spirit of revolution, not making its ghost walk again. 

From 1848 to 1851, only the ghost of the old revolution circulated - from
Marrast, the républicain en gants jaunes [Republican in yellow gloves], who disguised himself as
old Bailly, down to the adventurer who hides his trivial and repulsive features
behind the iron death mask of Napoleon. A whole nation, which thought it had
acquired an accelerated power of motion by means of a revolution, suddenly
finds itself set back into a defunct epoch, and to remove any doubt about the
relapse, the old dates arise again – the old chronology, the old names,
the old edicts, which had long since become a subject of antiquarian
scholarship, and the old minions of the law who had seemed long dead. The
nation feels like the mad Englishman in Bedlam [1] who thinks he is living in the time of the old Pharaohs
and daily bewails the hard labor he must perform in the Ethiopian gold mines,
immured in this subterranean prison, a pale lamp fastened to his head, the
overseer of the slaves behind him with a long whip, and at the exits a confused
welter of barbarian war slaves who understand neither the forced laborers nor
each other, since they speak no common language. “And all this,”
sighs the mad Englishman, “is expected of me, a freeborn Briton, in order
to make gold for the Pharaohs.” “In order to pay the debts of the
Bonaparte family,” sighs the French nation. The Englishman, so long as he
was not in his right mind, could not get rid of his idée fixé of mining
gold. The French, so long as they were engaged in revolution, could not get rid
of the memory of Napoleon, as the election of December 10 [1848, when Louis Bonaparte was elected President of the French
Republic by plebiscite.] was proved. They longed to return from the
perils of revolution to the fleshpots of Egypt [2], and December 2, 1851 [The date
of the coup d’état by Louis Bonaparte], was the answer. Now they
have not only a caricature of the old Napoleon, but the old Napoleon himself,
caricatured as he would have to be in the middle of the nineteenth century. 
The social revolution of the nineteenth century cannot take its poetry from
the past but only from the future. It cannot begin with itself before it has
stripped away all superstition about the past. The former revolutions required
recollections of past world history in order to smother their own content. The
revolution of the nineteenth century must let the dead bury their dead in order
to arrive at its own content. There the phrase went beyond the content –
here the content goes beyond the phrase. 
The February Revolution was a surprise attack, a seizing of the old society
unaware, and the people proclaimed this unexpected stroke a deed of world
importance, ushering in a new epoch. On December 2 the February Revolution is
conjured away as a cardsharp’s trick, and what seems overthrown is no
longer the monarchy but the liberal concessions that had been wrung from it
through centuries of struggle. Instead of society having conquered a new
content for itself, it seems that the state has only returned to its oldest
form, to a shamelessly simple rule by the sword and the monk’s cowl. This
is the answer to the coup de main [unexpected
stroke] of February, 1848, given by the coup de tête [rash act] of December, 1851. Easy come, easy go.
Meantime, the interval did not pass unused. During 1848-51 French society, by
an abbreviated revolutionary method, caught up with the studies and experiences
which in a regular, so to speak, textbook course of development would have
preceded the February Revolution, if the latter were to be more than a mere
ruffling of the surface. Society seems now to have retreated to behind its
starting point; in truth, it has first to create for itself the revolutionary
point of departure – the situation, the relations, the conditions under
which alone modern revolution becomes serious. 

Bourgeois revolutions, like those of the eighteenth century, storm more
swiftly from success to success, their dramatic effects outdo each other, men
and things seem set in sparkling diamonds, ecstasy is the order of the day
– but they are short-lived, soon they have reached their zenith, and a
long Katzenjammer [cat’s winge] takes hold
of society before it learns to assimilate the results of its storm-and-stress
period soberly. On the other hand, proletarian revolutions, like those of the
nineteenth century, constantly criticize themselves, constantly interrupt
themselves in their own course, return to the apparently accomplished, in order
to begin anew; they deride with cruel thoroughness the half-measures,
weaknesses, and paltriness of their first attempts, seem to throw down their
opponents only so the latter may draw new strength from the earth and rise
before them again more gigantic than ever, recoil constantly from the
indefinite colossalness of their own goals – until a situation is created
which makes all turning back impossible, and the conditions themselves call
out:  
Hic Rhodus, hic salta!
[Here is the rose, here dance!] [NOTE] 

For the rest, every fair observer, even if he had not followed the course of
French developments step by step, must have had a presentiment of the imminence
of an unheard-of disgrace for the revolution. It was enough to hear the
complacent yelps of victory with which the democrats congratulated each other
on the expectedly gracious consequences of the second Sunday in May, 1852.
[day of elections – Louis Bonaparte’s term
was expired] In their minds that second Sunday of May had become a
certain idea, a dogma, like the day of Christ’s reappearance and the
beginning of the millennium in the minds of the Chiliasts [4]. As always, weakness had taken refuge in a belief in
miracles, believed the enemy to be overcome when he was only conjured away in
imagination, and lost all understanding of the present in an inactive
glorification of the future that was in store for it and the deeds it had in
mind but did not want to carry out yet. Those heroes who seek to disprove their
demonstrated incapacity – by offering each other their sympathy and
getting together in a crowd – had tied up their bundles, collected their
laurel wreaths in advance, and occupied themselves with discounting on the
exchange market the republics in partibus [i.e.,
in name only] for which they had already providently organized the
government personnel with all the calm of their unassuming disposition.
December 2 struck them like a thunderbolt from a clear sky, and those who in
periods of petty depression gladly let their inner fears be drowned by the
loudest renters will perhaps have convinced themselves that the times are past
when the cackle of geese could save the Capitol. [5] 
The constitution, the National Assembly, the dynastic parties, the blue and
red republicans, the heroes of Africa, the thunder from the platform, the sheet
lightning of the daily press, the entire literature, the political names and
the intellectual reputations, the civil law and the penal code, liberté,
egalité, fraternité, and the second Sunday in May, 1852 – all have
vanished like a phantasmagoria before the spell of a man whom even his enemies
do not make out to be a sorcerer. Universal suffrage seems to have survived
only for the moment, so that with its own hand it may make its last will and
testament before the eyes of all the world and declare in the name of the
people itself: “All that exists deserves to perish.” [From Goethe’s Faust, Part One.]
It is not enough to say, as the French do, that their nation was taken
unawares. Nations and women are not forgiven the unguarded hour in which the
first adventurer who came along could violate them. Such turns of speech do not
solve the riddle but only formulate it differently. It remains to be explained
how a nation of thirty-six millions can be surprised and delivered without
resistance into captivity by three knights of industry. 
Let us recapitulate in general outline the phases that the French Revolution
went through from February 24, 1848, to December, 1851. 
Three main periods are unmistakable: the February period; the period of the
constitution of the republic or the Constituent National Assembly - May 1848 to
May 28 1849; and the period of the constitutional republic or the Legislative
National Assembly – May 28 1849 to December 2 1851. 
The first period – from February 24, the
overthrow of Louis Philippe, to May 4, 1848, the meeting of the Constituent
Assembly – the February period proper, may be designated as the prologue
of the revolution. Its character was officially expressed in the fact that the
government it improvised itself declared that it was provisional, and like the
government, everything that was mentioned, attempted, or enunciated during this
period proclaimed itself to be only provisional. Nobody and nothing ventured to
lay any claim to the right of existence and of real action. All the elements
that had prepared or determined the revolution – the dynastic opposition,
the republican bourgeoisie, the democratic-republican petty bourgeoisie, and
the social-democratic workers, provisionally found their place in the February
government. 
It could not be otherwise. The February days originally intended an
electoral reform by which the circle of the politically privileged among the
possessing class itself was to be widened and the exclusive domination of the
aristocracy of finance overthrown. When it came to the actual conflict, however
– when the people mounted the barricades, the National Guard maintained a
passive attitude, the army offered no serious resistance, and the monarchy ran
away – the republic appeared to be a matter of course. Every party
construed it in its own way. Having secured it arms in hand, the proletariat
impressed its stamp upon it and proclaimed it to be a social republic. There
was thus indicated the general content of the modern revolution, a content
which was in most singular contradiction to everything that, with the material
available, with the degree of education attained by the masses, under the given
circumstances and relations, could be immediately realized in practice. On the
other hand, the claims of all the remaining elements that had collaborated in
the February Revolution were recognized by the lion’s share they obtained
in the government. In no period, therefore, do we find a more confused mixture
of high-flown phrases and actual uncertainty and clumsiness, of more
enthusiastic striving for innovation and more deeply rooted domination of the
old routine, of more apparent harmony of the whole of society; and more
profound estrangement of its elements. While the Paris proletariat still
reveled in the vision of the wide prospects that had opened before it and
indulged in seriously meant discussions of social problems, the old powers of
society had grouped themselves, assembled, reflected, and found unexpected
support in the mass of the nation, the peasants and petty bourgeois, who all at
once stormed onto the political stage after the barriers of the July Monarchy
had fallen. 
The second period, from May 4, 1848, to the end of May, 1849, is
the period of the constitution, the foundation, of the bourgeois republic.
Immediately after the February days not only had the dynastic opposition been
surprised by the republicans and the republicans by the socialists, but all
France by Paris. The National Assembly, which met on May 4, 1848, had emerged
from the national elections and represented the nation. It was a living protest
against the pretensions of the February days and was to reduce the results of
the revolution to the bourgeois scale. In vain the Paris proletariat, which
immediately grasped the character of this National Assembly, attempted on May
15, a few days after it met, to negate its existence forcibly, to dissolve it,
to disintegrate again into its constituent parts the organic form in which the
proletariat was threatened by the reacting spirit of the nation. As is known,
May 15 had no other result but that of removing Blanqui and his comrades
– that is, the real leaders of the proletarian party – from the
public stage for the entire duration of the cycle we are considering. 
The bourgeois monarchy of Louis Philippe can be followed only by a bourgeois
republic; that is to say, whereas a limited section of the bourgeoisie ruled in
the name of the king, the whole of the bourgeoisie will now rule in the name of
the people. The demands of the Paris proletariat are utopian nonsense, to which
an end must be put. To this declaration of the Constituent National Assembly
the Paris proletariat replied with the June insurrection, the most colossal
event in the history of European civil wars. The bourgeois republic triumphed.
On its side stood the aristocracy of finance, the industrial bourgeoisie, the
middle class, the petty bourgeois, the army, the lumpen proletariat organized
as the Mobile Guard, the intellectual lights, the clergy, and the rural
population. On the side of the Paris proletariat stood none but itself. More
than three thousand insurgents were butchered after the victory, and fifteen
thousand were deported without trial. With this defeat the proletariat passes
into the background on the revolutionary stage. It attempts to press forward
again on every occasion, as soon as the movement appears to make a fresh start,
but with ever decreased expenditure of strength and always slighter results. As
soon as one of the social strata above it gets into revolutionary ferment, the
proletariat enters into an alliance with it and so shares all the defeats that
the different parties suffer, one after another. But these subsequent blows
become the weaker, the greater the surface of society over which they are
distributed. The more important leaders of the proletariat in the Assembly and
in the press successively fall victim to the courts, and ever more equivocal
figures come to head it. In part it throws itself into doctrinaire experiments,
exchange banks and workers’ associations, hence into a movement in which
it renounces the revolutionizing of the old world by means of the
latter’s own great, combined resources, and seeks, rather, to achieve its
salvation behind society’s back, in private fashion, within its limited
conditions of existence, and hence necessarily suffers shipwreck. It seems to
be unable either to rediscover revolutionary greatness in itself or to win new
energy from the connections newly entered into, until all classes with which it
contended in June themselves lie prostrate beside it. But at least it succumbs
with the honors of the great, world-historic struggle; not only France, but all
Europe trembles at the June earthquake, while the ensuing defeats of the upper
classes are so cheaply bought that they require barefaced exaggeration by the
victorious party to be able to pass for events at all, and become the more
ignominious the further the defeated party is removed from the proletarian
party. 
The defeat of the June insurgents, to be sure, had now prepared, had leveled
the ground on which the bourgeois republic could be founded and built, but it
had shown at the same time that in Europe the questions at issue are other than
that of “republic or monarchy.” It had revealed that here
“bourgeois republic” signifies the unlimited despotism of one class
over other classes. It had proved that in countries with an old civilization,
with a developed formation of classes, with modern conditions of production,
and with an intellectual consciousness in which all traditional ideas have been
dissolved by the work of centuries, the republic signifies in general only the
political form of revolution of bourgeois society and not its conservative form
of life – as, for example, in the United States of North America, where,
though classes already exist, they have not yet become fixed, but continually
change and interchange their elements in constant flux, where the modern means
of production, instead of coinciding with a stagnant surplus population, rather
compensate for the relative deficiency of heads and hands, and where, finally,
the feverish, youthful movement of material production, which has to make a new
world of its own, has neither time nor opportunity left for abolishing the old
world of ghosts. 
During the June days all classes and parties had united in the party of
Order against the proletarian class as the party of anarchy, of socialism, of
communism. They had “saved” society from “the enemies of
society.” They had given out the watchwords of the old society,
“property, family, religion, order,” to their army as passwords and
had proclaimed to the counterrevolutionary crusaders: “In this sign thou
shalt conquer!” From that moment, as soon as one of the numerous parties
which gathered under this sign against the June insurgents seeks to hold the
revolutionary battlefield in its own class interest, it goes down before the
cry: “property, family, religion, order.” Society is saved just as
often as the circle of its rulers contracts, as a more exclusive interest is
maintained against a wider one. Every demand of the simplest bourgeois
financial reform, of the most ordinary liberalism, of the most formal
republicanism, of the most shallow democracy, is simultaneously castigated as
an “attempt on society” and stigmatized as “socialism.”
And finally the high priests of “religion and order” themselves are
driven with kicks from their Pythian tripods, hauled out of their beds in the
darkness of night, put in prison vans, thrown into dungeons or sent into exile;
their temple is razed to the ground, their mouths are sealed, their pens
broken, their law torn to pieces in the name of religion, of property, of the
family, of order. Bourgeois fanatics for order are shot down on their balconies
by mobs of drunken soldiers, their domestic sanctuaries profaned, their houses
bombarded for amusement – in the name of property, of the family, of
religion, and of order. Finally, the scum of bourgeois society forms the holy
phalanx of order and the hero Crapulinski [a character
from Heine’s poem “The Two Knights,” a dissolute
aristocrat.] installs himself in the Tuileries as the “savior of
society.”

Footnotes
1.
Bedlam was an infamous lunatic asylum in England.
2.
The expression, "to sigh for the flesh-pots of Egypt" is taken from
the biblical legend, according to which during the exodus of the Israelites
from Egypt the faint-hearted among them wished that they had died when they sat
by the flesh-pots of Egypt, rather than undergo their present trials through
the desert.
3.Hic Rhodus, hic salta. See [MIA Encyclopedia]
for clarification.
4.
Chiliasts (from the Greek word chilias – a thousand):
preachers of a mystical religious doctrine concerning the second coming of
Christ and the establishment of the millennium when justice, universal equality
and prosperity would be triumphant. 
5.
Capitol: A hill in Rome, a fortified citadel where the temples of
Jupiter, Juno and other gods were built. According to a legend, Rome was saved
in 390 B.C.E. from an invasion of the Gauls, due to the cackling of geese from
Juno’s temple which awakened the sleeping guards of the Capitol. 
 

Preface | Chapter 2
Contents




==========

## II. 









18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. II



The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. Karl Marx 1852
II

Let us pick up the threads of the development once more.


The history of the Constituent National Assembly since the June days is
the history of the domination and the disintegration of the republican
faction of the bourgeoisie, of the faction known by the names of
tricolor republicans, pure republicans, political republicans,
formalist republicans, etc.


Under the bourgeois monarchy of Louis Philippe it had formed the
official republican opposition and consequently a recognized component
part of the political world of the day. It had its representatives in
the Chambers and a considerable sphere of influence in the press. Its
Paris organ, the National, was considered just as respectable in its
way as the Journal des Débats. Its character corresponded to this
position under the constitutional monarchy. It was not a faction of the
bourgeoisie held together by great common interests and marked off by
specific conditions of production. It was a clique of republican-minded
bourgeois, writers, lawyers, officers, and officials that owed its
influence to the personal antipathies of the country to Louis Philippe,
to memories of the old republic, to the republican faith of a number of
enthusiasts, above all, however, to French nationalism, whose hatred of
the Vienna treaties[79] and of the alliance with England it stirred up
perpetually. A large part of the following the National had under Louis
Philippe was due to this concealed imperialism, which could
consequently confront it later, under the republic, as a deadly rival
in the person of Louis Bonaparte. It fought the aristocracy of finance,
as did all the rest of the bourgeois opposition. Polemics against the
budget, which in France were closely connected with fighting the
aristocracy of finance, procured popularity too cheaply and material
for puritanical leading articles too plentifully not to be exploited.
The industrial bourgeoisie was grateful to it for its slavish defense
of the French protectionist system, which it accepted, however, more on
national grounds than on grounds of national economy; the bourgeoisie
as a whole, for its vicious denunciation of communism and socialism.
For the rest, the party of the National was purely republican; that is,
it demanded a republican instead of a monarchist form of bourgeois rule
and, above all, the lion’s share of this rule. About the conditions of
this transformation it was by no means clear in its own mind. On the
other hand, what was clear as daylight to it, and was publicly
acknowledged at the reform banquets in the last days of Louis Philippe,
was its unpopularity with the democratic petty bourgeois, and in
particular with the revolutionary proletariat. These pure republicans,
as is indeed the way with pure republicans, were already at the point
of contenting themselves in the first instance with a regency of the
Duchess of Orleans[80] when the February Revolution broke out and assigned
their best-known representatives a place in the Provisional Government.
From the start they naturally had the confidence of the bourgeoisie and
a majority in the Constituent National Assembly. The socialist elements
of the Provisional Government were excluded forthwith from the
Executive Commission which the National Assembly formed when it met,
and the party of the National took advantage of the outbreak of the
June insurrection to discharge the Executive Commission[81] also, and
therewith to get rid of its closest rivals, the petty-bourgeois, or
democratic, republicans (Ledru-Rollin, etc.). Cavaignac, the general of
the bourgeois-republican part who commanded the June massacre, took the
place of the Executive Commission with a sort of dictatorial power.
Marrast, former editor in chief of the National, became the perpetual
president of the Constituent National Assembly, and the ministries, as
well as all other important posts, fell to the portion of the pure
republicans.


The republican bourgeois faction, which had long regarded itself as the
legitimate heir of the July Monarchy, thus found its fondest hopes
exceeded; it attained power, however, not as it had dreamed under Louis
Philippe, through a liberal revolt of the bourgeoisie against the
throne, but through a rising of the proletariat against capital, a
rising laid low with grapeshot. What it had conceived as the most
revolutionary event turned out in reality to be the most
counterrevolutionary. The fruit fell into its lap, but it fell from the
tree of knowledge, not from the tree of life.


The exclusive rule of the bourgeois republicans lasted only from June
24 to December 10, 1848. It is summed up in the drafting of a
republican constitution and in the state of siege of Paris.


The new constitution was at bottom only the republicanized edition of
the constitutional Charter of 1830.[82] The narrow electoral qualification
of the July Monarchy, which excluded even a large part of the
bourgeoisie from political rule, was incompatible with the existence of
the bourgeois republic. In lieu of this qualification, the February
Revolution had at once proclaimed direct universal suffrage. The
bourgeois republicans could not undo this event. They had to content
themselves with adding the limiting proviso of a six months’ residence
in the constituency. The old organization of the administration, the
municipal system, the judicial system, the army, etc., continued to
exist inviolate, or, where the constitution changed them, the change
concerned the table of contents, not the contents; the name, not the
subject matter.


The inevitable general staff of the liberties of 1848, personal
liberty, liberty of the press, of speech, of association, of assembly,
of education and religion, etc., received a constitutional uniform
which made them invulnerable. For each of these liberties is proclaimed
as the absolute right of the French citoyen, but always with the
marginal note that it is unlimited so far as it is not limited by the
“equal rights of others and the public safety” or by “laws” which are
intended to mediate just this harmony of the individual liberties with
one another and with the public safety. For example:

 “The citizens have
the right of association, of peaceful and unarmed assembly, of petition
and of expressing their opinions, whether in the press or in any other
way. The enjoyment of these rights has no limit save the equal rights
of others and the public safety.” 

 “Education is free. Freedom of education shall be enjoyed under the conditions
fixed by law and under the supreme control of the state.” 

 “The home of every citizen is inviolable except in the forms prescribed by law.” 

The constitution, therefore, constantly refers to future organic laws which are to put
into affect those marginal notes and regulate the enjoyment of these
unrestricted liberties in such manner that they will collide neither
with one another nor with the public safety. And later these organic
laws were brought into being by the friends of order and all those
liberties regulated in such manner that the bourgeoisie in its
enjoyment of them finds itself unhindered by the equal rights of the
other classes. Where it forbids these liberties entirely to “the
others,” or permits enjoyment of them under conditions that are just so
many police traps, this always happens solely in the interest of
 “public safety” – that is, the safety of the bourgeoisie – as the
constitution prescribes. In the sequel, both sides accordingly appeal
with complete justice to the constitution: the friends of order, who
abrogated all these liberties, as well as the democrats, who demanded
all of them. For each paragraph of the constitution contains its own
antithesis, its own upper and lower house, namely, liberty in the
general phrase, abrogation of liberty in the marginal note. Thus so
long as the name of freedom was respected and only its actual
realization prevented, of course in a legal way, the constitutional
existence of liberty remained intact, inviolate, however mortal the
blows dealt to its existence in actual life.


This constitution, made inviolable in so ingenious a manner, was
nevertheless, like Achilles, vulnerable in one point – not in the
heel, but in the head, or rather in the two heads it wound up with: the
Legislative Assembly on the one hand, the President on the other.
Glance through the constitution and you will find that only the
paragraphs in which the relationship of the President to the
Legislative Assembly is defined are absolute, positive,
noncontradictory, and cannot be distorted. For here it was a question
of the bourgeois republicans safeguarding themselves. Articles 45-70 of
the Constitution are so worded that the National Assembly can remove
the President constitutionally, whereas the President can remove the
National Assembly only unconstitutionally, only by setting aside the
constitution itself. Here, therefore, it challenges its forcible
destruction. It not only sanctifies the division of powers, like the
Charter of 1830, it widens it into an intolerable contradiction. The
play of the constitutional powers, as Guizot termed the parliamentary
squabble between the legislative and executive power, is in the
constitution of 1848 continually played va-banque
[staking all]. On
one side are seven hundred and fifty representatives of the people,
elected by universal suffrage and eligible for re-election; they form an
uncontrollable, indissoluble, indivisible National Assembly, a National
Assembly that enjoys legislative omnipotence, decides in the last
instance on war, peace, and commercial treaties, alone possesses the
right of amnesty, and, by its permanence, perpetually holds the front
of the stage. On the other side is the President, with all the
attributes of royal power, with authority to appoint and dismiss his
ministers independently of the National Assembly, with all the
resources of the executive power in his hands, bestowing all posts and
disposing thereby in France of the livelihoods of at least a million
and a half people, for so many depend on the five hundred thousand
officials and officers of every rank. He has the whole of the armed
forces behind him. He enjoys the privilege of pardoning individual
criminals, of suspending National Guards, of discharging, with the
concurrence of the Council of State, general, cantonal, and municipal
councils elected by the citizens themselves. Initiative and direction
are reserved to him in all treaties with foreign countries. While the
Assembly constantly performs on the boards and is exposed to daily
public criticism, he leads a secluded life in the Elysian Fields, and
that with Article 45 of the constitution before his eyes and in his
heart, crying to him daily: “Frere, il faut mourir!” 
[‘Brother, one must die!’][83]
Your power ceases on the second Sunday of the lovely month
of May in the fourth year after your election! Then your glory is at an
end, the piece is not played twice, and if you have debts, look to it
quickly that you pay them off with the 600,000 francs granted you by
the constitution, unless, perchance, you prefer to go to Clichy[84] on the
second Monday of the lovely month of May! Thus, whereas the
constitution assigns power to the President, it seeks to secure moral
power for the National Assembly. Apart from the fact that it is
impossible to create a moral power by paragraphs of law, the
constitution here abrogates itself once more by having the President
elected by all Frenchmen through direct suffrage. While the votes of
France are split up among the seven hundred and fifty members of the
National Assembly, they are here, on the contrary, concentrated on a
single individual. While each separate representative of the people
represents only this or that party, this or that town, this or that
bridgehead, or even only the mere necessity of electing someone as the
seven hundred and fiftieth, without examining too closely either the
cause or the man, he is the elect of the nation and the act of his
election is the trump that the sovereign people plays once every four
years. The elected National Assembly stands in a metaphysical relation,
but the elected President in a personal relation, to the nation. The
National Assembly, indeed, exhibits in its individual representatives
the manifold aspects of the national spirit, but in the President this
national spirit finds its incarnation. As against the Assembly, he
possesses a sort of divine right; he is President by the grace of the
people.


Thetis, the sea goddess, prophesied to Achilles that he would die in
the bloom of youth. The constitution, which, like Achilles, had its
weak spot, also had, like Achilles, a presentiment that it must go to
an early death. It was sufficient for the constitution-making pure
republicans to cast a glance from the lofty heaven of their ideal
republic at the profane world to perceive how the arrogance of the
royalists, the Bonapartists, the democrats, the communists, as well as
their own discredit, grew daily in the same measure as they approached
the completion of their great legislative work of art, without Thetis
on this account having to leave the sea and communicate the secret to
them. They sought to cheat destiny by a catch in the constitution,
through Article III according to which every motion for a revision of
the constitution must be supported by at least three-quarters of the
votes, cast in three successive debates with an entire month between
each, with the added proviso that not less than five hundred members of
the National Assembly must vote. Thereby they merely made the impotent
attempt to continue exercising a power – when only a parliamentary
minority, as which they already saw themselves prophetically in their
mind’s eye – a power which at that time, when they commanded a
parliamentary majority and all the resources of governmental authority,
was daily slipping more and more from their feeble hands.


Finally the constitution, in a melodramatic paragraph, entrusts itself
 “to the vigilance and the patriotism of the whole French people and
every single Frenchman,” after it has previously entrusted in another
paragraph the “vigilant” and “patriotic” to the tender, most
painstaking care of the High Court of Justice, the haute cour it
invented for the purpose.


Such was the Constitution of 1848, which on December 2, 1851, was not
overthrown by a head, but fell down at the touch of a mere hat; this
hat, to be sure, was a three-cornered Napoleonic hat.


While the bourgeois republicans in the Assembly were busy devising,
discussing, and voting this constitution, Cavaignac outside the
Assembly maintained the state of siege of Paris. The state of siege of
Paris was the midwife of the Constituent Assembly in its travail of
republican creation. If the constitution is subsequently put out of
existence by bayonets, it must not be forgotten that it was likewise by
bayonets, and these turned against the people, that it had to be
protected in its mother’s womb and by bayonets that it had to be
brought into existence. The forefathers of the “respectable
republicans” had sent their symbol, the tricolor, on a tour around
Europe. They themselves in turn produced an invention that of itself
made its way over the whole Continent, but returned to France with ever
renewed love until it has now become naturalized in half her
departments – the state of siege. A splendid invention, periodically
employed in every ensuing crisis in the course of the French
Revolution. But barrack and bivouac, which were thus periodically laid
on French society’s head to compress its brain and render it quiet;
saber and musket, which were periodically allowed to act as judges and
administrators, as guardians and censors, to play policeman and do
night watchman’s duty; mustache and uniform, which were periodically
trumpeted forth as the highest wisdom of society and as its rector -
were not barrack and bivouac, saber and musket, mustache and uniform
finally bound to hit upon the idea of instead saving society once and
for all by proclaiming their own regime as the highest and freeing
civil society completely from the trouble of governing itself? Barrack
and bivouac, saber and musket, mustache and uniform were bound to hit
upon this idea all the more as they might then also expect better cash
payment for their higher services, whereas from the merely periodic
state of siege and the transient rescues of society at the bidding of
this or that bourgeois faction, little of substance was gleaned save
some killed and wounded and some friendly bourgeois grimaces. Should
not the military at last one day play state of siege in their own
interest and for their own benefit, and at the same time besiege the
citizens’ purses? Moreover, be it noted in passing, one must not forget
that Colonel Bernard, the same military commission president who under
Cavaignac had fifteen thousand insurgents deported without trial, is at
this moment again at the head of the military commissions active in
Paris.


Whereas with the state of siege in Paris, the respectable, the pure
republicans planted the nursery in which the praetorians of December 2,
1851, were to grow up, they on the other hand deserve praise for the
reason that, instead of exaggerating the national sentiment as under
Louis Philippe, they now, when they had command of the national power,
crawled before foreign countries, and instead of setting Italy free,
let her be reconquered by Austrians and Neapolitans.[85] Louis Bonaparte’s
election as President on December 10, 1848, put an end to the
dictatorship of Cavaignac and to the Constituent Assembly.


In Article 44 of the Constitution it is stated:

 “The President of the French Republic must never have lost his status of French citizen.” 

The first President of the French Republic, L. N. Bonaparte, had not merely
lost his status of French citizen, had not only been an English special
constable, he was even a naturalized Swiss.[86]


I have worked out elsewhere the significance of the election of
December 10. I will not revert to it here. It is sufficient to remark
here that it was a reaction of the peasants, who had had to pay the
costs of the February Revolution, against the remaining classes of the
nation; a reaction of the country against the town. It met with great
approval in the army, for which the republicans of the National had
provided neither glory nor additional pay; among the big bourgeoisie,
which hailed Bonaparte as a bridge to monarchy, among the proletarians
and petty bourgeois, who hailed him as a scourge for Cavaignac. I shall
have an opportunity later of going more closely into the relationship
of the peasants to the French Revolution.


The period from December 20, 1848, until the dissolution of the
Constituent Assembly in May, 1849, comprises the history of the
downfall of the bourgeois republicans. After having founded a republic
for the bourgeoisie, driven the revolutionary proletariat out of the
field, and reduced the democratic petty bourgeoisie to silence for the
time being, they are themselves thrust aside by the mass of the
bourgeoisie, which justly impounds this republic as its property. This
bourgeois mass was, however, royalist. One section of it, the large
landowners, had ruled during the Restoration and was accordingly
Legitimist. The other, the aristocrats of finance and big
industrialists, had ruled during the July Monarchy and was consequently
Orleanist. The high dignitaries of the army, the university, the
church, the bar, the academy, and the press were to be found on either
side, though in various proportions. Here, in the bourgeois republic,
which bore neither the name Bourbon nor the name Orleans, but the name
capital, they had found the form of state in which they could rule
conjointly. The June insurrection had already united them in the party
of Order. Now it was necessary, in the first place, to remove the
coterie of bourgeois republicans who still occupied the seats of the
National Assembly. Just as brutal as these pure republicans had been in
their misuse of physical force against the people, just as cowardly,
mealy-mouthed, broken-spirited, and incapable of fighting were they now
in their retreat, when it was a question of maintaining their
republicanism and their legislative rights against the executive power
and the royalists. I need not relate here the ignominious history of
their dissolution. They did not succumb; they passed out of existence.
Their history has come to an end forever, and, both inside and outside
the Assembly, they figure in the following period only as memories,
memories that seem to regain life whenever the mere name republic is
once more the issue and as often as the revolutionary conflict
threatens to sink down to the lowest level. I may remark in passing
that the journal which gave its name to this party, the National, was
converted to socialism in the following period.


Before we finish with this period we must still cast a retrospective
glance at the two powers, one of which annihilated the other on
December 2, 1851, whereas from December 20, 1848, until the exit of the
Constituent Assembly, they had lived in conjugal relations. We mean
Louis Bonaparte, on the one hand, and the part of the coalesced
royalists, the party of Order, of the big bourgeoisie, on the other. On
acceding to the presidency, Bonaparte at once formed a ministry of the
party of Order, at the head of which he placed Odilon Barrot, the old
leader, nota bene, of the most liberal faction of the parliamentary
bourgeoisie. M. Barrot had at last secured the ministerial portfolio
whose image had haunted him since 1830, and what is more, the
premiership in the ministry; but not, as he had imagined under Louis
Philippe, as the most advanced leader of the parliamentary opposition,
but with the task of putting a parliament to death, and as the
confederate of all his archenemies, Jesuits and Legitimists. He brought
the bride home at last, but only after she had been prostituted.
Bonaparte seemed to efface himself completely. This party acted for him.


The very first meeting of the council of ministers resolved on the
expedition to Rome, which, it was agreed, should be undertaken behind
the back of the National Assembly and the means for which were to be
wrested from it under false pretenses. Thus they began by swindling the
National Assembly and secretly conspiring with the absolutist powers
abroad against the revolutionary Roman republic.


In the same manner and with the same maneuvers Bonaparte prepared his
coup of December 2 against the royalist Legislative Assembly and its
constitutional republic. Let us not forget that the same party which
formed Bonaparte’s ministry on December 20, 1848, formed the majority
of the Legislative National Assembly on December 2, 1851.


In August the Constituent Assembly had decided to dissolve only after
it had worked out and promulgated a whole series of organic laws that
were to supplement the constitution. On January 6, 1849, the party of
Order had a deputy named Rateau move that the Assembly should let the
organic laws go and rather decide on its own dissolution. Not only the
ministry, with Odilon Barrot at its head, but all the royalist members
of the National Assembly told it in bullying accents then that its
dissolution was necessary for the restoration of credit, for the
consolidation of order, for putting an end to the indefinite
provisional arrangements and establishing a definitive state of
affairs; that it hampered the productivity of the new government and
sought to prolong its existence merely out of malice; that the country
was tired of it. Bonaparte took note of all this invective against the
legislative power, learned it by heart, and proved to the parliamentary
royalists, on December 2, 1851, that he had learned from them. He
repeated their own catchwords against them.


The Barrot Ministry and the party of Order went further. They caused
petitions to the National Assembly to be made throughout France, in
which this body was politely requested to decamp. They thus led the
unorganized popular masses into the fire of battle against the National
Assembly, the constitutionally organized expression of the people. They
taught Bonaparte to appeal against the parliamentary assemblies to the
people. At length, on January 29, 1849, the day had come on which the
Constituent Assembly was to decide concerning its own dissolution. The
National Assembly found the building where its sessions were held
occupied by the military; Changarnier, the general of the party of
Order, in whose hands the supreme command of the National Guard and
troops of the line had been united, held a great military review in
Paris, as if a battle were impending, and the royalists in coalition
threateningly declared to the Constituent Assembly that force would be
employed if it should prove unwilling. It was willing, and only
bargained for a very short extra term of life. What was January 29 but
the coup d’etat of December 2, 1851, only carried out by the royalists
with Bonaparte against the republican National Assembly? The gentlemen
did not observe, or did not wish to observe, that Bonaparte availed
himself of January 29, 1849, to have a portion of the troops march past
him in front of the Tuileries, and seized with avidity on just this
first public summoning of the military power against the parliamentary
power to foreshadow Caligula. They, to be sure, saw only their
Changarnier.


A motive that particularly actuated the party of Order in forcibly
cutting short the duration of the Constituent Assembly’s life was the
organic laws supplementing the constitution, such as the law on
education, the law on religious worship, etc. To the royalists in
coalition it was most important that they themselves should make these
laws and not let them be made by the republicans, who had grown
mistrustful. Among these organic laws, however, was also a law on the
responsibility of the President of the Republic. In 1851 the
Legislative Assembly was occupied with the drafting of just such a law,
when Bonaparte anticipated this coup with the coup of December 2. What
would the royalists in coalition not have given in their winter
election campaign of 1851 to have found the Responsibility Law ready to
hand, and drawn up, at that, by a mistrustful, hostile, republican
Assembly!


After the Constituent Assembly had itself shattered its last weapon on
January 29, 1849, the Barrot Ministry and the friends of order hounded
it to death, left nothing undone that could humiliate it, and wrested
from the impotent, self-despairing Assembly laws that cost it the last
remnant of respect in the eyes of the public. Bonaparte, occupied with
his fixed Napoleonic idea,[87] was brazen enough to exploit publicly this
degradation of the parliamentary power. For when on May 8, 1849, the
National Assembly passed a vote of censure of the ministry because of
the occupation of Civitavecchia by Oudinot, and ordered it to bring
back the Roman expedition to its alleged purpose,[88] Bonaparte published
the same evening in the Moniteur a letter to Oudinot in which he
congratulated him on his heroic exploits and, in contrast to the
ink-slinging parliamentarians, already posed as the generous protector
of the army. The royalists smiled at this. They regarded him simply as
their dupe. Finally, when Marrast, the President of the Constituent
Assembly, believed for a moment that the safety of the National
Assembly was endangered and, relying on the constitution, requisitioned
a colonel and his regiment, the colonel declined, cited discipline in
his support, and referred Marrast to Changarnier, who scornfully
refused him with the remark that he did not like
baionnettes intelligentes [intellectual bayonets].
In November, 1851, when the
royalists in coalition wanted to begin the decisive struggle with
Bonaparte, they sought to put through in their notorious Quaestors’
Bill the principle of the direct requisition of troops by the President
of the National Assembly.[89] One of their generals, Le Flo, had signed the
bill. In vain did Changarnier vote for it and Thiers pay homage to the
farsighted wisdom of the former Constituent Assembly. The War Minister,
Saint-Arnaud, answered him as Changarnier had answered Marrast – and
to the acclamation of the Montagne!


Thus the party of Order, when it was not yet the National Assembly,
when it was still only the ministry, had itself stigmatized the
parliamentary regime. And it makes an outcry when December 2, 1851,
banishes this regime from France!


We wish it a happy journey.




Chapter One | Chapter Three
Contents




==========

## III. 









18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. III



The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. Karl Marx 1852
III

On May 28, 1849, the Legislative National Assembly met. On December 2,
1851, it was dispersed. This period covers the span of life of the
constitutional, or parliamentary, republic.


In the first French Revolution the rule of the Constitutionalists is
followed by the rule of the Girondists and the rule of the Girondists
by the rule of the Jacobins. Each of these parties relies on the more
progressive party for support. As soon as it has brought the revolution
far enough to be unable to follow it further, still less to go ahead of
it, it is thrust aside by the bolder ally that stands behind it and
sent to the guillotine. The revolution thus moves along an ascending
line.


It is the reverse with the Revolution of 1848. The proletarian party
appears as an appendage of the petty-bourgeois-democratic party. It is
betrayed and dropped by the latter on April 16, May 15,[90] and in the June
days. The democratic party, in its turn, leans on the shoulders of the
bourgeois-republican party. The bourgeois republicans no sooner believe
themselves well established than they shake off the troublesome comrade
and support themselves on the shoulders of the party of Order. The
party of Order hunches its shoulders, lets the bourgeois republicans
tumble, and throws itself on the shoulders of armed force. It fancies
it is still sitting on those shoulders when one fine morning it
perceives that the shoulders have transformed themselves into bayonets.
Each party kicks from behind at the one driving forward, and leans over
in front toward the party which presses backward. No wonder that in
this ridiculous posture it loses its balance and, having made the
inevitable grimaces, collapses with curious gyrations. The revolution
thus moves in a descending line. It finds itself in this state of
retrogressive motion before the last February barricade has been
cleared away and the first revolutionary authority constituted.


The period that we have before us comprises the most motley mixture of
crying contradictions: constitutionalists who conspire openly against
the constitution; revolutionists who are confessedly constitutional; a
National Assembly that wants to be omnipotent and always remains
parliamentary; a Montagne that finds its vocation in patience and
counters its present defeats by prophesying future victories; royalists
who form the patres conscripti [elders]
of the republic and are forced
by the situation to keep the hostile royal houses they adhere to
abroad, and the republic, which they hate, in France; an executive
power that finds its strength in its very weakness and its
respectability in the contempt that it calls forth; a republic that is
nothing but the combined infamy of two monarchies, the Restoration and
the July Monarchy, with an imperial label – alliances whose first
proviso is separation; struggles whose first law is indecision; wild,
inane agitation in the name of tranquillity, most solemn preaching of
tranquillity in the name of revolution – passions without truth, truths
without passion; heroes without heroic deeds, history without events;
development, whose sole driving force seems to be the calendar,
wearying with constant repetition of the same tensions and relaxations;
antagonisms that periodically seem to work themselves up to a climax
only to lose their sharpness and fall away without being able to
resolve themselves; pretentiously paraded exertions and philistine
terror at the danger of the world’s coming to an end, and at the same
time the pettiest intrigues and court comedies played by the world
redeemers, who in their laisser aller [letting things go] 
remind us less of the Day of Judgment than of the times of the
Fronde [An anti-royalist movement of 1648-53][91] – the official
collective genius of France brought to naught by the artful stupidity
of a single individual; the collective will of the nation, as often as
it speaks through universal suffrage, seeking its appropriate
expression through the inveterate enemies of the interests of the
masses, until at length it finds it in the self-will of a filibuster.
If any section of history has been painted gray on gray, it is this.
Men and events appear as reverse Schlemihls, as shadows that have lost
their bodies.[91a] The revolution itself paralyzes its own bearers and
endows only its adversaries with passionate forcefulness. When the “red
specter,” continually conjured up and exercised by the
counterrevolutionaries[92] finally appears, it appears not with the
Phrygian cap of anarchy on its head, but in the uniform of order, in
red breeches.


We have seen that the ministry which Bonaparte installed on December
20, 1848, on his Ascension Day, was a ministry of the party of Order,
of the Legitimist and Orleanist coalition. This Barrot-Falloux Ministry
had outlived the republican Constituent Assembly, whose term of life it
had more or less violently cut short, and found itself still at the
helm. Changarnier, the general of the allied royalists, continued to
unite in his person the general command of the First Army Division and
of the National Guard of Paris. Finally, the general elections had
secured the party of Order a large majority in the National Assembly.
Here the deputies and peers of Louis Philippe encountered a hallowed
host of Legitimists, for whom many of the nation’s ballots had become
transformed into admission cards to the political stage. The
Bonapartist representatives of the people were too sparse to be able to
form an independent parliamentary party. They appeared merely as the
mauvaise queue [evil appendage]
of the party of Order. Thus the party
of Order was in possession of the governmental power, the army and the
legislative body, in short, of the whole of the state power; it had
been morally strengthened by the general elections, which made its rule
appear as the will of the people, and by the simultaneous triumph of
the counterrevolution on the whole continent of Europe.


Never did a party open its campaign with greater resources or under
more favorable auspices.


The shipwrecked pure republicans found that they had melted down to a
clique of about fifty men in the Legislative National Assembly, the
African generals Cavaignac, Lamoriciere, and Bedeau at their head. The
great opposition party, however, was formed by the Montagne. The
social-democratic party had given itself this parliamentary baptismal
name. It commanded more than two hundred of the seven hundred and fifty
votes of the National Assembly and was consequently at least as
powerful as any one of the three factions of the party of Order taken
by itself. Its numerical inferiority compared with the entire royalist
coalition seemed compensated by special circumstances. Not only did the
elections in the departments show that it had gained a considerable
following among the rural population. It counted in its ranks almost
all the deputies from Paris; the army had made a confession of
democratic faith by the election of three noncommissioned officers; and
the leader of the Montagne, Ledru-Rollin, in contradistinction to all
the representatives of the party of Order, had been raised to the
parliamentary peerage by five departments, which had pooled their votes
for him. In view of the inevitable clashes of the royalists among
themselves and of the whole party of Order with Bonaparte, the Montagne
thus seemed to have all the elements of success before it on May 28,
1849. A fortnight later it had lost everything, honor included.


Before we pursue parliamentary history further, some remarks are
necessary to avoid common misconceptions regarding the whole character
of the epoch that lies before us. Looked at with the eyes of democrats,
the period of the Legislative National Assembly is concerned with what
the period of the Constituent Assembly was concerned with: the simple
struggle between republicans and royalists. The movement itself,
however, they sum up in the one shibboleth: “reaction” – night, in
which all cats are gray and which permits them to reel off their night
watchman’s commonplaces. And to be sure, at first sight the party of
Order reveals a maze of different royalist factions which not only
intrigue against each other – each seeking to elevate its own
pretender to the throne and exclude the pretender of the opposing
faction – but also all unite in common hatred of, and common
onslaughts on, the “republic.” In opposition to this royalist
conspiracy the Montagne, for its part, appears as the representative of
the “republic.” The party of Order appears to be perpetually engaged in
a “reaction,” directed against press, association, and the like,
neither more nor less than in Prussia, and, as in Prussia, carried out
in the form of brutal police intervention by the bureaucracy, the
gendarmerie, and the law courts. The Montagne, for its part, is just as
continually occupied in warding off these attacks and thus defending
the “eternal rights of man” as every so-called people’s party has done,
more or less, for a century and a half. If one looks at the situation
and the parties more closely, however, this superficial appearance,
which veils the class struggle and the peculiar physiognomy of this
period, disappears.


Legitimists and Orleanists, as we have said, formed the two great
factions of the party of Order. Was what held these factions fast to
their pretenders and kept them apart from each other nothing but
fleur-de-lis and tricolor, House of Bourbon and House of Orleans,
different shades of royalism – was it at all the confession of faith
of royalism? Under the Bourbons, big landed property had governed, with
its priests and lackeys; under Orleans, high finance, large-scale
industry, large-scale trade, that is, capital, with its retinue of
lawyers, professors, and smooth-tongued orators. The Legitimate
Monarchy was merely the political expression of the hereditary rule of
the lords of the soil, as the July Monarchy was only the political
expression of the usurped rule of the bourgeois parvenus. What kept the
two factions apart, therefore, was not any so-called principles, it was
their material conditions of existence, two different kinds of
property; it was the old contrast between town and country, the rivalry
between capital and landed property. That at the same time old
memories, personal enmities, fears and hopes, prejudices and illusions,
sympathies and antipathies, convictions, articles of faith and
principles bound them to one or the other royal house, who denies this?
Upon the different forms of property, upon the social conditions of
existence, rises an entire superstructure of distinct and peculiarly
formed sentiments, illusions, modes of thought, and views of life. The
entire class creates and forms them out of its material foundations and
out of the corresponding social relations. The single individual, who
derives them through tradition and upbringing, may imagine that they
form the real motives and the starting point of his activity. While
each faction, Orleanists and Legitimists, sought to make itself and the
other believe that it was loyalty to the two royal houses which
separated them, facts later proved that it was rather their divided
interests which forbade the uniting of the two royal houses. And as in
private life one differentiates between what a man thinks and says of
himself and what he really is and does, so in historical struggles one
must distinguish still more the phrases and fancies of parties from
their real organism and their real interests, their conception of
themselves from their reality. Orleanists and Legitimists found
themselves side by side in the republic, with equal claims. If each
side wished to effect the restoration of its own royal house against
the other, that merely signified that each of the two great interests
into which the bourgeoisie is split – landed property and capital -
sought to restore its own supremacy and the subordination of the other.
We speak of two interests of the bourgeoisie, for large landed
property, despite its feudal coquetry and pride of race, has been
rendered thoroughly bourgeois by the development of modern society.
Thus the Tories in England long imagined that they were enthusiastic
about monarchy, the church, and the beauties of the old English
Constitution, until the day of danger wrung from them the confession
that they are enthusiastic only about ground rent.


The royalists in coalition carried on their intrigues against one
another in the press, in Ems, in Claremont,[93] outside parliament. Behind
the scenes they donned their old Orleanist and Legitimist liveries
again and once more engaged in their old tourneys. But on the public
stage, in their grand performances of state[94] as a great parliamentary
party, they put off their respective royal houses with mere obeisances
and adjourn the restoration of the monarchy in infinitum. They do their
real business as the party of Order, that is, under a social, not under
a political title; as representatives of the bourgeois world order, not
as knights of errant princesses; as the bourgeois class against other
classes, not as royalists against the republicans. And as the party of
Order they exercised more unrestricted and sterner domination over the
other classes of society than ever previously under the Restoration or
under the July Monarchy, a domination which, in general, was possible
only under the form of the parliamentary republic, for only under this
form could the two great divisions of the French bourgeoisie unite, and
thus put the rule of their class instead of the regime of a privileged
faction of it on the order of the day. If they nevertheless, as the
party of Order, also insulted the republic and expressed their
repugnance to it, this happened not merely from royalist memories. 
Instinct taught them that the republic, true enough, makes their
political rule complete, but at the same time undermines its social
foundation, since they must now confront the subjugated classes and
contend against them without mediation, without the concealment
afforded by the crown, without being able to divert the national
interest by their subordinate struggles among themselves and with the
monarchy. It was a feeling of weakness that caused them to recoil from
the pure conditions of their own class rule and to yearn for the former
more incomplete, more undeveloped, and precisely on that account less
dangerous forms of this rule. On the other hand, every time the
royalists in coalition come in conflict with the pretender who
confronts them, with Bonaparte, every time they believe their
parliamentary omnipotence endangered by the executive power – every
time, therefore, that they must produce their political title to their
rule – they come forward as republicans and not as royalists, from the
Orleanist Thiers, who warns the National Assembly that the republic
divides them least, to the Legitimist Berryer, who on December 2, 1851,
as a tribune swathed in a tricolored sash, harangues the people
assembled before the town hall of the Tenth Arrondissement in the name
of the republic. To be sure, a mocking echo calls back to him: Henry V!
Henry V!


As against the coalesced bourgeoisie, a coalition between petty
bourgeois and workers had been formed, the so-called Social-Democratic
party. The petty bourgeois saw that they were badly rewarded after the
June days of 1848, that their material interests were imperiled, and
that the democratic guarantees which were to insure the effectuation of
these interests were called in question by the counterrevolution.
Accordingly they came closer to the workers. On the other hand, their
parliamentary representation, the Montagne, thrust aside during the
dictatorship of the bourgeois republicans, had in the last half of the
life of the Constituent Assembly reconquered its lost popularity
through the struggle with Bonaparte and the royalist ministers. It had
concluded an alliance with the socialist leaders. In February, 1849,
banquets celebrated the reconciliation. A joint program was drafted,
joint election committees were set up and joint candidates put forward.
The revolutionary point was broken off and a democratic turn given to
the social demands of the proletariat; the purely political form was
stripped off the democratic claims of the petty bourgeoisie and their
socialist point thrust forward. Thus arose social-democracy. The new
Montagne, the result of this combination, contained, apart from some
supernumeraries from the working class and some socialist sectarians,
the same elements as the old Montagne, but numerically stronger.
However, in the course of development it had changed with the class
that it represented. The peculiar character of social-democracy is
epitomized in the fact that democratic-republican institutions are
demanded as a means, not of doing away with two extremes, capital and
wage labor, but of weakening their antagonism and transforming it into
harmony. However different the means proposed for the attainment of
this end may be, however much it may be trimmed with more or less
revolutionary notions, the content remains the same. This content is
the transformation of society in a democratic way, but a transformation
within the bounds of the petty bourgeoisie. Only one must not get the
narrow-minded notion that the petty bourgeoisie, on principle, wishes
to enforce an egoistic class interest. Rather, it believes that the
special conditions of its emancipation are the general conditions
within whose frame alone modern society can be saved and the class
struggle avoided. Just as little must one imagine that the democratic
representatives are indeed all shopkeepers or enthusiastic champions of
shopkeepers. According to their education and their individual position
they may be as far apart as heaven and earth. What makes them
representatives of the petty bourgeoisie is the fact that in their
minds they do not get beyond the limits which the latter do not get
beyond in life, that they are consequently driven, theoretically, to
the same problems and solutions to which material interest and social
position drive the latter practically. This is, in general, the
relationship between the political and literary representatives of a
class and the class they represent.


After this analysis it is obvious that if the Montagne continually
contends with the party of Order for the republic and the so-called
rights of man, neither the republic nor the rights of man are its final
end, any more than an army which one wants to deprive of its weapons
and which resists has taken the field in order to remain in possession
of its own weapons.


Immediately, as soon as the National Assembly met, the party of Order
provoked the Montagne. The bourgeoisie now felt the necessity of making
an end of the democratic petty bourgeois, just as a year before it had
realized the necessity of settling with the revolutionary proletariat.
But the situation of the adversary was different. The strength of the
proletarian party lay in the streets, that of the petty bourgeois in
the National Assembly itself. It was therefore a question of decoying
them out of the National Assembly into the streets and causing them to
smash their parliamentary power themselves, before time and
circumstances could consolidate it. The Montagne rushed headlong into
the trap.


The bombardment of Rome by the French troops was the bait that was
thrown. It violated Article 5 of the constitution, which forbids the
French Republic to employ its military forces against the freedom of
another people.[95] In addition to this, Article 54 prohibited any
declaration of war by the executive power without the assent of the
National Assembly, and by its resolution of May 8 the Constituent
Assembly had disapproved of the Roman expedition. On these grounds
Ledru-Rollin brought in a bill of impeachment against Bonaparte and his
ministers on June 11, 1849. Exasperated by the wasp stings of Thiers,
he actually let himself be carried away to the point of threatening
that he would defend the constitution by every means, even with arms in
hand. The Montagne rose to a man and repeated this call to arms. On
June 12 the National Assembly rejected the bill of impeachment, and the
Montagne left the parliament. The events of June 13 are known: the
proclamation issued by a section of the Montagne declaring Bonaparte
and his ministers “outside the constitution”; the street procession of
the democratic National Guard, who, unarmed as they were, dispersed on
encountering the troops of Changarnier, etc., etc. A part of the
Montagne fled abroad; another part was arraigned before the High Court
at Bourges;[96] and a parliamentary regulation subjected the remainder to
the schoolmasterly surveillance of the President of the National
Assembly. Paris was again declared in a state of siege and the
democratic part of its National Guard dissolved. Thus the influence of
the Montagne in parliament and the power of the petty bourgeois in
Paris were broken.


Lyon, where June 13 had given the signal for a bloody insurrection of
the workers,[97] was, along with the five surrounding departments, likewise
declared in a state of siege, a condition that has continued up to the
present moment.


The bulk of the Montagne had left its vanguard in the lurch, having
refused to subscribe to its proclamation. The press had deserted, only
two journals having dared to publish the pronunciamento. The petty
bourgeois betrayed their representatives in that the National Guard
either stayed away or, where they appeared, hindered the building of
barricades. The representatives had duped the petty bourgeois in that
the alleged allies from the army were nowhere to be seen. Finally,
instead of gaining an accession of strength from it, the democratic
party had infected the proletariat with its own weakness and, as usual
with the great deeds of democrats, the leaders had the satisfaction of
being able to charge their “people” with desertion, and the people the
satisfaction of being able to charge its leaders with humbugging it.


Seldom had an action been announced with more noise than the impending
campaign of the Montagne, seldom had an event been trumpeted with
greater certainty or longer in advance than the inevitable victory of
the democracy. Most assuredly the democrats believe in the trumpets
before whose blasts the walls of Jericho fell down. And as often as
they stand before the ramparts of despotism, they seek to imitate the
miracle. If the Montagne wished to triumph in parliament it should not
have called to arms. If it called to arms in parliament it should not
have acted in parliamentary fashion in the streets. If the peaceful
demonstration was meant seriously, then it was folly not to foresee
that it would be given a warlike reception. If a real struggle was
intended, then it was a queer idea to lay down the weapons with which
it would have to be waged. But the revolutionary threats of the petty
bourgeois and their democratic representatives are mere attempts to
intimidate the antagonist. And when they have run into a blind alley,
when they have sufficiently compromised themselves to make it necessary
to activate their threats, then this is done in an ambiguous fashion
that avoids nothing so much as the means to the end and tries to find
excuses for succumbing. The blaring overture that announced the contest
dies away in a pusillanimous snarl as soon as the struggle has to
begin, the actors cease to take themselves au sorieux, and the action
collapses completely, like a pricked bubble.


No party exaggerates its means more than the democratic, none deludes
itself more light-mindedly over the situation. Since a section of the
army had voted for it, the Montagne was now convinced that the army
would revolt for it. And on what occasion? On an occasion which, from
the standpoint of the troops, had no other meaning than that the
revolutionists took the side of the Roman soldiers against the French
soldiers. On the other hand, the recollections of June, 1848, were
still too fresh to allow of anything but a profound aversion on the
part of the proletariat toward the National Guard and a thoroughgoing
mistrust of the democratic chiefs on the part of the chiefs of the
secret societies. To iron out these differences, it was necessary for
great common interests to be at stake. The violation of an abstract
paragraph of the constitution could not provide these interests. Had
not the constitution been repeatedly violated, according to the
assurance of the democrats themselves? Had not the most popular
journals branded it as counterrevolutionary botchwork? But the
democrat, because he represents the petty bourgeoisie – that is, a
transition class, in which the interests of two classes are
simultaneously mutually blunted – imagines himself elevated above
class antagonism generally. The democrats concede that a privileged
class confronts them, but they, along with all the rest of the nation,
form the people. What they represent is the people’s rights; what
interests them is the people’s interests. Accordingly, when a struggle
is impending they do not need to examine the interests and positions of
the different classes. They do not need to weigh their own resources
too critically. They have merely to give the signal and the people,
with all its inexhaustible resources, will fall upon the oppressors.
Now if in the performance their interests prove to be uninteresting and
their potency impotence, then either the fault lies with pernicious
sophists, who split the indivisible people into different hostile
camps, or the army was too brutalized and blinded to comprehend that
the pure aims of democracy are the best thing for it, or the whole
thing has been wrecked by a detail in its execution, or else an
unforeseen accident has this time spoiled the game. In any case, the
democrat comes out of the most disgraceful defeat just as immaculate as
he was innocent when he went into it, with the newly won conviction
that he is bound to win, not that he himself and his party have to give
up the old standpoint, but, on the contrary, that conditions have to
ripen to suit him.


Therefore one must not imagine the Montagne, decimated and broken
though it was, and humiliated by the new parliamentary regulation, as
being particularly miserable. If June 13 had removed its chiefs, it
made room, on the other hand, for men of lesser caliber, whom this new
position flattered. If their impotence in parliament could no longer be
doubted, they were entitled now to confine their actions to outbursts
of moral indignation and blustering declamation. If the party of Order
affected to see embodied in them, as the last official representatives
of the revolution, all the terrors of anarchy, they could in reality be
all the more insipid and modest. They consoled themselves, however, for
June 13 with the profound utterance: but if they dare to attack
universal suffrage, well then – then we’ll show them what we are made
of! Nous verrons! [We shall see!]


So far as the Montagnards who fled abroad are concerned, it is
sufficient to remark here that Ledru-Rollin, because in barely a
fortnight he had succeeded in ruining irretrievably the powerful party
at whose head he stood, now found himself called upon to form a French
government in partibus; that to the extent that the level of the
revolution sank and the official bigwigs of official France became more
dwarf-like, his figure in the distance, removed from the scene of
action, seemed to grow in stature; that he could figure as the
republican pretender for 1852, and that he issued periodical circulars
to the Wallachians and other peoples in which the despots of the
Continent were threatened with the deeds of himself and his
confederates. Was Proudhon altogether wrong when he cried to these
gentlemen: “Vous n’etes que des blagueurs” 
["you are nothing but windbags"]?


On June 13 the party of Order had not only broken the Montagne, it had
effected the subordination of the constitution to the majority
decisions of the National Assembly. And it understood the republic
thus: that the bourgeoisie rules here in parliamentary forms, without,
as in a monarchy, encountering any barrier such as the veto power of
the executive or the right to dissolve parliament. This was a
parliamentary republic, as Thiers termed it. But whereas on June 13 the
bourgeoisie secured its omnipotence within the house of parliament, did
it not afflict parliament itself, as against the executive authority
and the people, with incurable weakness by expelling its most popular
part? By surrendering numerous deputies without further ado on the
demand of the courts, it abolished its own parliamentary immunity. The
humiliating regulations to which it subjected the Montagne exalted the
President of the Republic in the same measure as it degraded the
individual representatives of the people. By branding an insurrection
for the protection of the constitutional charter an anarchic act aiming
at the subversion of society, it precluded the possibility of its
appealing to insurrection should the executive authority violate the
constitution in relation to it. And by the irony of history, the
general who on Bonaparte’s instructions bombarded Rome and thus
provided the immediate occasion for the constitutional revolt of June
13, that very Oudinot had to be the man offered by the party of Order
imploringly and unfailingly to the people as general on behalf of the
constitution against Bonaparte on December 2, 1851. Another hero of
June 13, Vieyra, who was lauded from the tribune of the National
Assembly for the brutalities he committed in the democratic newspaper
offices at the head of a gang of National Guards belonging to high
finance circles – this same Vieyra had been initiated into Bonaparte’s
conspiracy and he contributed substantially to depriving the National
Assembly in the hour of its death of any protection by the National
Guard.


June 13 had still another meaning. The Montagne had wanted to force the
impeachment of Bonaparte. Its defeat was therefore a direct victory for
Bonaparte, his personal triumph over his democratic enemies. The party
of Order gained the victory; Bonaparte had only to cash in on it. He
did so. On June 14 a proclamation could be read on the walls of Paris
in which the President, reluctantly, against his will, compelled as it
were by the sheer force of events, comes forth from his cloistered
seclusion and, posing as misunderstood virtue, complains of the
calumnies of his opponents and, while he seems to identify his person
with the cause of order, rather identifies the cause of order with his
person. Moreover, the National Assembly had, it is true, subsequently
approved the expedition against Rome, but Bonaparte had taken the
initiative in the matter. After having reinstalled the High Priest
Samuel in the Vatican, he could hope to enter the Tuileries as King
David.[98] He had won the priests over to his side.


The revolt of June 13 was confined, as we have seen, to a peaceful
street procession. No war laurels were therefore to be won against it.
Nevertheless, at a time as poor as this in heroes and events, the party
of Order transformed this bloodless battle into a second Austerlitz.[99]
Platform and press praised the army as the power of order, in contrast
to the popular masses representing the impotence of anarchy, and
extolled Changarnier as the “bulwark of society,” a deception in which
he himself finally came to believe. Surreptitiously, however, the
corps that seemed doubtful were transferred from Paris, the regiments
which had shown the most democratic sentiments in the elections were
banished from France to Algiers; the turbulent spirits among the troops
were relegated to penal detachments; and finally the isolation of the
press from the barracks and of the barracks from bourgeois society was
systematically carried out.


Here we have reached the decisive turning point in the history of the
French National Guard. In 1830 it was decisive in the overthrow of the
Restoration. Under Louis Philippe every rebellion miscarried in which
the National Guard stood on the side of the troops. When in the
February days of 1848 it evinced a passive attitude toward the
insurrection and an equivocal one toward Louis Philippe, he gave
himself up for lost and actually was lost. Thus the conviction took
root that the revolution could not be victorious without the National
Guard, nor the army against it. This was the superstition of the army
in regard to civilian omnipotence. The June days of 1848, when the
entire National Guard, with the troops of the line, put down the
insurrection, had strengthened the superstition. After Bonaparte’s
assumption of office, the position of the National Guard was to some
extent weakened by the unconstitutional union, in the person of
Changarnier, of the command of its forces with the command of the First
Army Division.


Just as the command of the National Guard appeared here as an attribute
of the military commander in chief, so the National Guard itself
appeared as only an appendage of the troops of the line. Finally, on
June 13 its power was broken, and not only by its partial disbandment,
which from this time on was periodically repeated all over France,
until mere fragments of it were left behind. The demonstration of June
13 was, above all, a demonstration of the democratic National Guards.
They had not, to be sure, borne their arms, but had worn their uniforms
against the army; precisely in this uniform, however, lay the talisman.
The army convinced itself that this uniform was a piece of woolen cloth
like any other. The spell was broken. In the June days of 1848,
bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie had united as the National Guard with
the army against the proletariat; on June 13, 1849, the bourgeoisie let
the petty-bourgeois National Guard be dispersed by the army; on
December 2, 1851, the National Guard of the bourgeoisie itself had
vanished, and Bonaparte merely registered this fact when he
subsequently signed the decree for its disbandment, Thus the
bourgeoisie had itself smashed its last weapon against the army; the
moment the petty bourgeoisie no longer stood behind it as a vassal, but
before it as a rebel, it had to smash it as in general it was bound to
destroy all its means of defense against absolutism with its own hand
as soon as it had itself become absolute.


Meanwhile, the party of Order celebrated the reconquest of a power that
seemed lost in 1848 only to be found again, freed from its restraints,
in 1849, celebrated by means of invectives against the republic and the
constitution, of curses on all future, present, and past revolutions,
including that which its own leaders had made, and in laws by which the
press was muzzled, association destroyed, and the state of siege
regulated as an organic institution. The National Assembly then
adjourned from the middle of August to the middle of October, after
having appointed a permanent commission for the period of its absence. 
During this recess the Legitimists intrigued with Ems, the Orleanists
with Claremont, Bonaparte by means of princely tours, and the
Departmental Councils in deliberations on a revision of the
constitution: incidents which regularly recur in the periodic recesses
of the National Assembly and which I propose to discuss only when they
become events. Here it may merely be remarked, in addition, that it was
impolitic for the National Assembly to disappear from the stage for
considerable intervals and leave only a single, albeit a sorry, figure
to be seen at the head of the republic, that of Louis Bonaparte, while
to the scandal of the public the party of Order fell asunder into its
royalist component parts and followed its conflicting desires for
restoration. As often as the confused noise of parliament grew silent
during these recesses and its body dissolved into the nation, it became
unmistakably clear that only one thing was still lacking to complete
the true form of this republic: to make the former’s recess permanent
and replace the latter’s inscription, Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité,
with the unambiguous words: infantry, cavalry, artillery!




Chapter Two | Chapter Four
Contents





==========

## IV. 









18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. IV



The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. 1852
IV

In the middle of October, 1849, the National Assembly met once more. On
November 1 Bonaparte surprised it with a message in which he announced
the dismissal of the Barrot-Falloux Ministry and the formation of a new
ministry. No one has ever sacked lackeys with less ceremony than
Bonaparte his ministers. The kicks that were intended for the National
Assembly were given in the meantime to Barrot & Co.


The Barrot Ministry, as we have seen, had been composed of Legitimists
and Orleanists; it was a ministry of the party of Order. Bonaparte had
needed it to dissolve the republican Constituent Assembly, to bring
about the expedition against Rome, and to break the Democratic party.
Behind this ministry he had seemingly effaced himself, surrendered
governmental power into the hands of the party of Order, and donned the
modest character mask that the responsible editor of a newspaper wore
under Louis Philippe, the mask of the homme de paille
[straw man]. He
now threw off a mask which was no longer the light veil behind which he
could hide his physiognomy, but an iron mask which prevented him from
displaying a physiognomy of his own. He had appointed the Barrot
Ministry in order to blast the republican National Assembly in the name
of the party of Order; he dismissed it in order to declare his own name
independent of the National Assembly of the party of Order.


Plausible pretexts for this dismissal were not lacking. The Barrot
Ministry neglected even the decencies that would have let the President
of the Republic appear as a power side by side with the National
Assembly. During the recess of the National Assembly Bonaparte
published a letter to Edgar Ney in which he seemed to disapprove of the
illiberal attitude of the Pope, just as in opposition to the
Constituent Assembly he had published a letter in which he commended
Oudinot for the attack on the Roman republic. When the National
Assembly now voted the budget for the Roman expedition, Victor Hugo,
out of alleged liberalism, brought up this letter for discussion. The
party of Order with scornfully incredulous outcries stifled the idea
that Bonaparte's ideas could have any political importance. Not one of
the ministers took up the gauntlet for him. On another occasion Barrot,
with his well-known hollow rhetoric, let fall from the platform words
of indignation concerning the "abominable intrigues" that, according to
his assertion, went on in the immediate entourage of the President.
Finally, while the ministry obtained from the National Assembly a
widow's pension for the Duchess of Orleans it rejected any proposal to
increase the Civil List of the President. And in Bonaparte the imperial
pretender was so intimately bound up with the adventurer down on his
luck that the one great idea, that he was called to restore the empire,
was always supplemented by the other, that it was the mission of the
French people to pay his debts.


The Barrot-Falloux Ministry was the first and last parliamentary
ministry that Bonaparte brought into being. Its dismissal forms,
accordingly, a decisive turning point. With it the party of Order lost,
never to reconquer it, an indispensable position for the maintenance of
the parliamentary regime, the lever of executive power. It is
immediately obvious that in a country like France, where the executive
power commands an army of officials numbering more than half a million
individuals and therefore constantly maintains an immense mass of
interests and livelihoods in the most absolute dependence; where the
state enmeshes, controls, regulates, superintends, and tutors civil
society from its most comprehensive manifestations of life down to its
most insignificant stirrings, from its most general modes of being to
the private existence of individuals; where through the most
extraordinary centralization this parasitic body acquires a ubiquity,
an omniscience, a capacity for accelerated mobility, and an elasticity
which finds a counterpart only in the helpless dependence, the loose
shapelessness of the actual body politic — it is obvious that in such
a country the National Assembly forfeits all real influence when it
loses command of the ministerial posts, if it does not at the same time
simplify the administration of the state, reduce the army of officials
as far as possible, and, finally, let civil society and public opinion
create organs of their own, independent of the governmental power. But
it is precisely with the maintenance of that extensive state machine in
its numerous ramifications that the material interests of the French
bourgeoisie are interwoven in the closest fashion. Here it finds posts
for its surplus population and makes up in the form of state salaries
for what it cannot pocket in the form of profit, interest, rents, and
honorariums. On the other hand, its political interests compelled it to
increase daily the repressive measures and therefore the resources and
the personnel of the state power, while at the same time it had to wage
an uninterrupted war against public opinion and mistrustfully mutilate,
cripple, the independent organs of the social movement, where it did
not succeed in amputating them entirely. Thus the French bourgeoisie
was compelled by its class position to annihilate, on the one hand, the
vital conditions of all parliamentary power, and therefore, likewise,
of its own, and to render irresistible, on the other hand, the
executive power hostile to it.


The new ministry was called the Hautpoul Ministry. Not in the sense
that General Hautpoul had received the rank of Prime Minister. Rather,
simultaneously with Barrot's dismissal, Bonaparte abolished this
dignity, which, true enough, condemned the President of the Republic to
the status of the legal nonentity of a constitutional monarch, but of a
constitutional monarch without throne or crown, without scepter or
sword, without freedom from responsibility, without imprescriptible
possession of the highest state dignity, and worst of all, without a
Civil List. The Hautpoul Ministry contained only one man of
parliamentary standing, the moneylender Fould, one of the most
notorious of the high financiers. To his lot fell the Ministry of
Finance. Look up the quotations on the Paris Bourse and you will find
that from November 1, 1849, onward the French fonds
[government securities]
rise and fall with the rise and fall of Bonapartist stocks.
While Bonaparte had thus found his ally in the Bourse, he at the same
time took possession of the police by appointing Carlier police prefect
of Paris.


Only in the course of development, however, could the consequences of
the change of ministers come to light. To begin with, Bonaparte had
taken a step forward only to be driven backward all the more
conspicuously. His brusque message was followed by the most servile
declaration of allegiance to the National Assembly. As often as the
ministers dared to make a diffident attempt to introduce his personal
fads as legislative proposals, they themselves seemed to carry out,
against their will and compelled by their position, comical commissions
whose fruitlessness they were persuaded of in advance. As often as
Bonaparte blurted out his intentions behind the ministers' backs and
played with his “idees napoleoniennes,”
[100] his own ministers disavowed him
from the tribune of the National Assembly. His usurpatory longings
seemed to make themselves heard only in order that the malicious
laughter of his opponents might not be muted. He behaved like an
unrecognized genius, whom all the world takes for a simpleton. Never
did he enjoy the contempt of all classes in fuller measure than during
this period. Never did the bourgeoisie rule more absolutely, never did
it display more ostentatiously the insignia of domination.


I need not write here the history of its legislative activity, which is
summarized during this period in two laws: in the law reestablishing
the wine tax and the education law abolishing unbelief.[101] If wine
drinking was made harder for the French, they were presented all the
more plentifully with the water of true life. If in the law on the
wine tax the bourgeoisie declared the old, hateful French tax system to
be inviolable, it sought through the education law to insure among the
masses the old state of mind that put up with the tax system. One is
astonished to see the Orleanists, the liberal bourgeois, these old
apostles of Voltaireanism and eclectic philosophy, entrust to their
hereditary enemies, the Jesuits, the superintendence of the French
mind. However Orleanists and Legitimists could part company in regard
to the pretenders to the throne, they understood that securing their
united rule necessitated the uniting of the means of repression of two
epochs, that the means of subjugation of the July Monarchy had to be
supplemented and strengthened by the means of subjugation of the
Restoration.


The peasants, disappointed in all their hopes, crushed more than ever
by the low level of grain prices on the one hand, and by the growing
burden of taxes and mortgage debts on the other, began to bestir
themselves in the departments. They were answered by a drive against
the schoolmasters, who were made subject to the clergy, by a drive
against the mayors, made subject to the prefects, and by a system of
espionage to which all were made subject. In Paris and the large towns
reaction itself has the physiognomy of its epoch and challenges more
than it strikes down. In the countryside it becomes dull, coarse,
petty, tiresome, and vexatious, in a word, the gendarme. One
comprehends how three years of the regime of the gendarme, consecrated
by the regime of the priest, were bound to demoralize immature masses.


Whatever amount of passion and declamation might be employed by the
party of Order against the minority from the tribune of the National
Assembly, its speech remained as monosyllabic as that of the
Christians, whose words were to be: Yea, yea; nay, nay! As monosyllabic
on the platform as in the press. Flat as a riddle whose answer is known
in advance. Whether it was a question of the right of petition or the
tax on wine, freedom of the press or free trade, the clubs or the
municipal charter, protection of personal liberty or regulation of the
state budget, the watchword constantly recurs, the theme remains always
the same, the verdict is ever ready and invariably reads: "Socialism!"
Even bourgeois liberalism is declared socialistic, bourgeois
enlightenment socialistic, bourgeois financial reform socialistic. It
was socialistic to build a railway where a canal already existed, and
it was socialistic to defend oneself with a cane when one was attacked
with a rapier.


This was not merely a figure of speech, fashion, or party tactics. The
bourgeoisie had a true insight into the fact that all the weapons it
had forged against feudalism turned their points against itself, that
all the means of education it had produced rebelled against its own
civilization, that all the gods it had created had fallen away from it.
It understood that all the so-called bourgeois liberties and organs of
progress attacked and menaced its class rule at its social foundation
and its political summit simultaneously, and had therefore become
"socialistic." In this menace and this attack it rightly discerned the
secret of socialism, whose import and tendency it judges more correctly
than so-called socialism knows how to judge itself; the latter can,
accordingly, not comprehend why the bourgeoisie callously hardens its
heart against it, whether it sentimentally bewails the sufferings of
mankind, or in Christian spirit prophesies the millennium and universal
brotherly love, or in humanistic style twaddles about mind, education,
and freedom, or in doctrinaire fashion invents a system for the
conciliation and welfare of all classes. What the bourgeoisie did not
grasp, however, was the logical conclusion that its own parliamentary
regime, its political rule in general, was now also bound to meet with
the general verdict of condemnation as being socialistic. As long as
the rule of the bourgeois class had not been completely organized, as
long as it had not acquired its pure political expression, the
antagonism of the other classes likewise could not appear in its pure
form, and where it did appear could not take the dangerous turn that
transforms every struggle against the state power into a struggle
against capital. If in every stirring of life in society it saw
"tranquillity" imperiled, how could it want to maintain at the head of
society a regime of unrest, its own regime, the parliamentary regime,
this regime that, according to the expression of one of its spokesmen,
lives in struggle and by struggle? The parliamentary regime lives by
discussion, how shall it forbid discussion? Every interest, every
social institution, is here transformed into general ideas, debated as
ideas; how shall any interest, any institution, sustain itself above
thought and impose itself as an article of faith? The struggle of the
orators on the platform evokes the struggle of the scribblers of the
press; the debating club in parliament is necessarily supplemented by
debating clubs in the salons and the bistros; the representatives, who
constantly appeal to public opinion, give public opinion the right to
speak its real mind in petitions. The parliamentary regime leaves
everything to the decision of majorities; how shall the great
majorities outside parliament not want to decide? When you play the
fiddle at the top of the state, what else is to be expected but that
those down below dance?


Thus by now stigmatizing as "socialistic" what it had previously
extolled as "liberal," the bourgeoisie confesses that its own interests
dictate that it should be delivered from the danger of its own rule;
that to restore tranquillity in the country its bourgeois parliament
must, first of all, be given its quietus; that to preserve its social
power intact its political power must be broken; that the individual
bourgeois can continue to exploit the other classes and to enjoy
undisturbed property, family, religion, and order only on condition
that their class be condemned along with the other classes to like
political nullity; that in order to save its purse it must forfeit the
crown, and the sword that is to safeguard it must at the same time be
hung over its own head as a sword of Damocles.


In the domain of the interests of the general citizenry, the National
Assembly showed itself so unproductive that, for example, the
discussions on the Paris-Avignon railway, which began in the winter of
1850, were still not ripe for conclusion on December 2, 1851. Where it
did not repress or pursue a reactionary course it was stricken with
incurable barrenness.


While Bonaparte's ministry partly took the initiative in framing laws
in the spirit of the party of Order, and partly even outdid that
party's harshness in their execution and administration, he, on the
other hand, sought by childishly silly proposals to win popularity, to
bring out his opposition to the National Assembly, and to hint at a
secret reserve that was only temporarily prevented by conditions from
making its hidden treasures available to the French people. Such was
the proposal to decree an increase in pay of four sous a day to the
noncommissioned officers. Such was the proposal of an honor-system loan
bank for the workers. Money as a gift and money as a loan, it was with
prospects such as these that he hoped to lure the masses. Donations and
loans — the financial science of the lumpen proletariat, whether of
high degree or low, is restricted to this. Such were the only springs
Bonaparte knew how to set in action. Never has a pretender speculated
more stupidly on the stupidity of the masses.


The National Assembly flared up repeatedly over these unmistakable
attempts to gain popularity at its expense, over the growing danger
that this adventurer, whom his debts spurred on and no established
reputation held back, would venture a desperate coup. The discord
between the party of Order and the President had taken on a threatening
character when an unexpected event threw him back repentant into its
arms. We mean the by-elections of March 10, 1850. These elections were
held for the purpose of filling the representatives' seats that after
June 13 had been rendered vacant by imprisonment or exile. Paris
elected only social-democratic candidates. It even concentrated most of
the votes on an insurgent of June, 1848, on De Flotte. Thus did the
Parisian petty bourgeoisie, in alliance with the proletariat, revenge
itself for its defeat on June 13, 1849. It seemed to have disappeared
from the battlefield at the moment of danger only to reappear there on
a more propitious occasion with more numerous fighting forces and with
a bolder battle cry. One circumstance seemed to heighten the peril of
this election victory. The army voted in Paris for the June insurgent
against La Hitte, a minister of Bonaparte's, and in the departments
largely for the Montagnards, who here too, though indeed not so
decisively as in Paris, maintained the ascendancy over their
adversaries.


Bonaparte saw himself suddenly confronted with revolution once more. As
on January 29, 1849, as on June 13, 1849, so on March 10, 1850, he
disappeared behind the party of Order. He made obeisance, he
pusillanimously begged pardon, he offered to appoint any ministry it
pleased at the behest of the parliamentary majority, he even implored
the Orleanist and Legitimist party leaders, the Thiers, the Berryers,
the Broglies, the Moles, in brief, the so-called burgraves,[102] to take
the helm of state themselves. The party of Order proved unable to take
advantage of this opportunity that would never return. Instead of
boldly possessing itself of the power offered, it did not even compel
Bonaparte to reinstate the ministry dismissed on November 1; it
contented itself with humiliating him by its forgiveness and adjoining
M. Baroche to the Hautpoul Ministry. As public prosecutor this Baroche
had stormed and raged before the High Court at Bourges, the first time
against the revolutionists of May 15,[103] the second time against the
democrats of June 13, both times because of an attempt on the life of
the National Assembly. None of Bonaparte's ministers subsequently
contributed more to the degradation of the National Assembly, and after
December 2, 1851, we meet him once more as the comfortably installed
and highly paid vice president of the Senate. He had spat in the
revolutionists' soup in order that Bonaparte might eat it up.


The social-democratic party, for its part, seemed only to look for
pretexts to put its own victory once again in doubt and to blunt its
point. Vidal, one of the newly elected representatives of Paris, had
been elected simultaneously in Strasbourg. He was induced to decline
the election for Paris and accept it for Strasbourg. And so, instead of
making its victory at the polls conclusive and thereby compelling the
party of Order to contest it in parliament at once, instead of thus
forcing the adversary to fight at the moment of popular enthusiasm and
favorable mood in the army, the democratic party wearied Paris during
the months of March and April with a new election campaign, let the
aroused popular passions wear themselves out in this repeated
provisional election game, let the revolutionary energy satiate itself
with constitutional successes, dissipate itself in petty intrigues,
hollow declamations, and sham movements, let the bourgeoisie rally and
make its preparations, and, lastly, weakened the significance of the
March elections by a sentimental commentary in the April by-election,
the election of Eugene Sue. In a word, it made an April Fool of March
10.


The parliamentary majority understood the weakness of its antagonist.
Its seventeen burgraves — for Bonaparte had left to it the direction
of and responsibility for the attack — drew up a new electoral law,
the introduction of which was entrusted to M. Faucher, who solicited
this honor for himself. On May 8 he introduced the law by which
universal suffrage was to be abolished, a residence of three years in
the locality of the election to be imposed as a condition on the
electors, and finally, the proof of this residence made dependent in
the case of workers on a certificate from their employers.


Just as the democrats had, in revolutionary fashion, raged and agitated
during the constitutional election contest, so now, when it was
requisite to prove the serious nature of that victory arms in hand, did
they in constitutional fashion preach order, calme majestueux, lawful
action, that is to say, blind subjection to the will of the
counterrevolution, which imposed itself as the law. During the debate
the "Mountain" put the party of Order to shame by asserting, against the
latter's revolutionary passion, the dispassionate attitude of the
philistine who keeps within the law, and by felling that party to earth
with the fearful reproach that it was proceeding in a revolutionary
manner. Even the newly elected deputies were at pains to prove by their
decorous and discreet action what a misconception it was to decry them
as anarchists and construe their election as a victory for revolution.
On May 31 the new electoral law went through. The Montagne contented
itself with smuggling a protest into the President's pocket. The
electoral law was followed by a new press law, by which the
revolutionary newspaper press was entirely suppressed.[104] It had deserved
its fate. The National and La Presse, two bourgeois organs, were left
after this deluge as the most advanced outposts of the revolution.


We have seen how during March and April the democratic leaders had done
everything to embroil the people of Paris in a sham fight, how after
May 8 they did everything to restrain them from a real fight. In
addition to this, we must not forget that the year 1850 was one of the
most splendid years of industrial and commercial prosperity, and the
Paris proletariat was therefore fully employed. But the election law of
May 31, 1850, excluded it from any participation in political power. It
cut the proletariat off from the very arena of the struggle. It threw
the workers back into the position of pariahs which they had occupied
before the February Revolution. By letting themselves be led by the
democrats in the face of such an event and forgetting the revolutionary
interests of their class for momentary case and comfort, they renounced
the honor of being a conquering power, surrendered to their fate,
proved that the defeat of June, 1848, had put them out of the fight for
years and that the historical process would for the present again have
to go on over their heads. As for the petty-bourgeois democracy, which
on June 13 had cried, "But if once universal suffrage is attacked, then
we'll show them," it now consoled itself with the contention that the
counterrevolutionary blow which had struck it was no blow and the law
of May 31 no law. On the second Sunday in May, 1852, every Frenchman
would appear at the polling place with ballot in one hand and sword in
the other. With this prophecy it rested content. Lastly, the army was
disciplined by its superior officers for the elections of March and
April, 1850, just as it had been disciplined for those of May 28, 1849.
This time, however, it said decidedly: "The revolution shall not dupe
us a third time."


The law of May 31, 1850, was the coup d'etat of the bourgeoisie. All
its conquests over the revolution hitherto had only a provisional
character and were endangered as soon as the existing National Assembly
retired from the stage. They depended on the hazards of a new general
election, and the history of elections since 1848 irrefutably proved
that the bourgeoisie's moral sway over the mass of the people was lost
in the same measure as its actual domination developed. On March 10
universal suffrage declared itself directly against the domination of
the bourgeoisie; the bourgeoisie answered by outlawing universal
suffrage. The law of May 31 was therefore one of the necessities of the
class struggle. On the other hand, the constitution required a minimum
of two million votes to make an election of the President of the
Republic valid. If none of the candidates for the presidency received
this minimum, the National Assembly was to choose the President from
among the three candidates to whom the largest number of votes would
fall. At the time when the Constituent Assembly made this law, ten
million electors were registered on the rolls of voters. In its view,
therefore, a fifth of the people entitled to vote was sufficient to
make the presidential election valid. The law of May 31 struck at least
three million votes off the electoral rolls, reduced the number of
people entitled to vote to seven million, and nevertheless retained the
legal minimum of two million for the presidential election. It
therefore raised the legal minimum from a fifth to nearly a third of
the effective votes; that is, it did everything to smuggle the election
of the President out of the hands of the people and into the hands of
the National Assembly. Thus through the electoral law of May 31 the
party of Order seemed to have made its rule doubly secure, by
surrendering the election of the National Assembly and that of the
President of the Republic to the stationary section of society.




Chapter Three | Chapter Five


Contents




==========

## V. 









18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. V



The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. 1852
V
As soon as the revolutionary crisis had been weathered and
universal suffrage abolished, the struggle between the National Assembly and
Bonaparte broke out again. 
The constitution had fixed Bonaparte's salary at 600,000 francs. Barely six
months after his installation he succeeded in increasing this sum to twice as
much, for Odilon Barrot wrung from the Constituent National Assembly an extra
allowance of 600,000 francs a year for so-called representation moneys. After
June 13 Bonaparte had caused similar requests to be voiced, this time without
eliciting response from Barrot. Now, after May 31, he at once availed himself
of the favorable moment and had his ministers propose a Civil List of three
millions in the National Assembly. A long life of adventurous vagabondage had
endowed him with the most developed antennae for feeling out the weak moments
when he might squeeze money from his bourgeois. He practiced chantage
[blackmail] regularly. The National Assembly had
violated the sovereignty of the people with his assistance and his cognizance.
He threatened to denounce its crime to the tribunal of the people unless it
loosened its purse strings and purchased his silence with three million a year.
It had robbed three million Frenchmen of their franchise. He demanded, for
every Frenchman out of circulation, a franc in circulation, precisely three
million francs. He, the elect of six millions, claimed damages for the votes
which he said he had retrospectively been cheated out of. The Commission of the
National Assembly refused the importunate man. The Bonapartist press
threatened. Could the National Assembly break with the President of the
Republic at a moment when in principle it had definitely broken with the mass
of the nation? It rejected the annual Civil List, it is true, but it granted,
for this once, an extra allowance of 2,160,000 francs. It thus rendered itself
guilty of the double weakness of granting the money and of showing at the same
time by its vexation that it granted it unwillingly. We shall see later for
what purpose Bonaparte needed the money. After this vexatious aftermath, which
followed on the heels of the abolition of universal suffrage and in which
Bonaparte exchanged his humble attitude during the crisis of March and April
for challenging impudence to the usurpatory parliament, the National Assembly
adjourned for three months, from August 11 to November 11. In its place it left
behind a Permanent Commission of twenty-eight members, which contained no
Bonapartists but did contain some moderate republicans. The Permanent
Commission of 1849 had included only Order men and Bonapartists. But at that
time the party of Order declared itself permanently against the revolution.
This time the parliamentary republic declared itself permanently against the
President. After the law of May 31, this was the only rival that still
confronted the party of Order. 
When the National Assembly met once more in November, 1850, it seemed that,
instead of the petty skirmishes it had hitherto had with the President, a great
and ruthless struggle, a life-and-death struggle between the two powers, had
become inevitable. 
As in 1849 so during this year's parliamentary recess — the party of
Order had broken up into its separate factions, each occupied with its own
restoration intrigues, which had obtained fresh nutriment through the death of
Louis Philippe. The Legitimist king, Henry V, had even nominated a formal
ministry which resided in Paris and in which members of the Permanent
Commission held seats. Bonaparte, in his turn, was therefore entitled to make
tours of the French departments, and according to the disposition of the town
he favored with his presence, now more or less covertly, now more or less
overtly, to divulge his own restoration plans and canvass votes for himself. On
these processions, which the great official Moniteur and the little private
Moniteurs of Bonaparte naturally had to celebrate as triumphal processions, he
was constantly accompanied by persons affiliated with the Society of December
10. This society dates from the year 1849. On the pretext of founding a
benevolent society, the lumpen proletariat of Paris had been organized into
secret sections, each section led by Bonapartist agents, with a Bonapartist
general at the head of the whole. Alongside decayed roués with dubious means of
subsistence and of dubious origin, alongside ruined and adventurous offshoots
of the bourgeoisie, were vagabonds, discharged soldiers, discharged jailbirds,
escaped galley slaves, swindlers, mountebanks, lazzaroni,[105] pickpockets, tricksters, gamblers,
maquereaux [pimps], brothel keepers,
porters, literati, organ grinders, ragpickers, knife grinders, tinkers, beggars
— in short, the whole indefinite, disintegrated mass, thrown hither and
thither, which the French call la bohème; from this kindred element
Bonaparte formed the core of the Society of December 10. A "benevolent society"
- insofar as, like Bonaparte, all its members felt the need of benefiting
themselves at the expense of the laboring nation. This Bonaparte, who
constitutes himself chief of the lumpenproletariat, who here alone
rediscovers in mass form the interests which he personally pursues, who
recognizes in this scum, offal, refuse of all classes the only class upon which
he can base himself unconditionally, is the real Bonaparte, the Bonaparte
sans phrase. An old, crafty roué, he conceives the historical
life of the nations and their performances of state as comedy in the most
vulgar sense, as a masquerade in which the grand costumes, words, and postures
merely serve to mask the pettiest knavery. Thus his expedition to Strasbourg,
where the trained Swiss vulture played the part of the Napoleonic eagle. For
his irruption into Boulogne he puts some London lackeys into French uniforms.
They represent the army.[107] In his Society of December 10 he
assembles ten thousand rascals who are to play the part of the people as Nick
Bottom [A character in Shakespeare's Midsummer Night's
Dream. - Ed.] that of the lion. At a moment when the bourgeoisie itself
played the most complete comedy, but in the most serious manner in the world,
without infringing any of the pedantic conditions of French dramatic etiquette,
and was itself half deceived, half convinced of the solemnity of its own
performance of state, the adventurer, who took the comedy as plain comedy, was
bound to win. Only when he has eliminated his solemn opponent, when he himself
now takes his imperial role seriously and under the Napoleonic mask imagines he
is the real Napoleon, does he become the victim of his own conception of the
world, the serious buffoon who no longer takes world history for a comedy but
his comedy for world history. What the national ateliers[108] were for the socialist
workers, what the Gardes mobile were for the bourgeois republicans,
the Society of December 10 was for Bonaparte, the party fighting force peculiar
to him. On his journeys the detachments of this society packing the railways
had to improvise a public for him, stage popular enthusiasm, roar Vive
l'Empereur, insult and thrash republicans, under police protection, of
course. On his return journeys to Paris they had to form the advance guard,
forestall counter-demonstrations or disperse them. The Society of December 10
belonged to him, it was his work, his very own idea. Whatever else he
appropriates is put into his hands by the force of circumstances; whatever else
he does, the circumstances do for him or he is content to copy from the deeds
of others. But Bonaparte with official phrases about order, religion, family,
and property in public, before the citizens, and with the secret society of the
Schufterles and Spiegelbergs[108a], the society of disorder, prostitution,
and theft, behind him — that is Bonaparte himself as the original author,
and the history of the Society of December 10 is his own history. 
Now it had happened by way of exception that people's representatives
belonging to the party of Order came under the cudgels of the Decembrists.
Still more. Yon, the police commissioner assigned to the National Assembly and
charged with watching over its safety, acting on the deposition of a certain
Allais, advised the Permanent Commission that a section of the Decembrists had
decided to assassinate General Changarnier and Dupin, the President of the
National Assembly, and had already designated the individuals who were to
perpetrate the deed. One comprehends the terror of M. Dupin. A parliamentary
inquiry into the Society of December 10 — that is, the profanation of the
Bonapartist secret world — seemed inevitable. Just before the meeting of
the National Assembly Bonaparte providently disbanded his society, naturally
only on paper, for in a detailed memoir at the end of 1851 Police Prefect
Carlier still sought in vain to move him to really break up the Decembrists.

The Society of December 10 was to remain the private army of Bonaparte until
he succeeded in transforming the public army into a Society of December 10.
Bonaparte made the first attempt at this shortly after the adjournment of the
National Assembly, and precisely with the money just wrested from it. As a
fatalist, he lives in the conviction that there are certain higher powers which
man, and the soldier in particular, cannot withstand. Among these powers he
counts, first and foremost, cigars and champagne, cold poultry and garlic
sausage. Accordingly, to begin with, he treats officers and non-commissioned
officers in his Elysée apartments to cigars and champagne, cold poultry and
garlic sausage. On October 3 he repeats this maneuver with the mass of the
troops at the St. Maur review, and on October 10 the same maneuver on a still
larger scale at the Satory army parade. The uncle remembered the campaigns of
Alexander in Asia, the nephew the triumphal marches of Bacchus in the same
land. Alexander was a demigod, to be sure, but Bacchus was a god and moreover
the tutelary deity of the Society of December 10. 
After the review of October 3, the Permanent Commission summoned War
Minister Hautpoul. He promised that these breaches of discipline would not
recur. We know how on October 10 Bonaparte kept Hautpoul's word. As commander
in chief of the Paris army, Changarnier had commanded at both reviews. At once
a member of the Permanent Commission, chief of the National Guard, the "savior"
of January 29 and June 13, the "bulwark of society," the candidate of the party
of Order for presidential honors, the suspected monk of two monarchies, he had
hitherto never acknowledged himself as the subordinate of the War Minister, had
always openly derided the republican constitution, and had pursued Bonaparte
with an ambiguous lordly protection. Now he was consumed with zeal for
discipline against the War Minister and for the constitution against Bonaparte.
While on October 10 a section of the cavalry raised the shout: "Vive
Napoléon! Vivent les saucissons!" [Hurrah for
Napoléon! Hurrah for the sausages!] Changarnier arranged that at least
the infantry marching past under the command of his friend Neumayer should
preserve an icy silence. As a punishment, the War Minister relieved General
Neumayer of his post in Paris at Bonaparte's instigation, on the pretext of
appointing him commanding general of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth divisions.
Neumayer refused this exchange of posts and so had to resign. Changarnier, for
his part, published an order of the day on November 2 in which he forbade the
troops to indulge in political outcries or demonstrations of any kind while
under arms. The Elysee newspapers attacked Changarnier; the papers of the party
of Order attacked Bonaparte; the Permanent Commission held repeated secret
sessions in which it was repeatedly proposed to declare the country in danger;
the army seemed divided into two hostile camps, with two hostile general
staffs, one in the Elysée, where Bonaparte resided, the other in the Tuileries,
the quarters of Changarnier. It seemed that only the meeting of the National
Assembly was needed to give the signal for battle. The French public judged
this friction between Bonaparte and Changarnier like the English journalist who
characterized it in these words:
"The political housemaids of France are sweeping away the
glowing lava of the revolution with old brooms and wrangle with one another
while they do their work." 
Meanwhile, Bonaparte hastened to remove the War Minister Hautpoul, to pack
him off in all haste to Algiers, and to appoint General Schramm War Minister in
his place. On November 12 he sent to the National Assembly a message of
American prolixity, overloaded with detail, redolent of order, desirous of
reconciliation, constitutionally acquiescent, treating of all and sundry, but
not of the questions brûlantes [burning
questions] of the moment. As if in passing, he made the remark that
according to the express provisions of the constitution the President alone
could dispose of the army. The message closed with the following words of great
solemnity: 
"Above all things, France demands tranquillity.... But
bound by an oath, I shall keep within the narrow limits that it has set for
me.... As far as I am concerned, elected by the people and owing my power
to it alone, I shall always bow to its lawfully expressed will. Should you
resolve at this session on a revision of the constitution, a Constituent
Assembly will regulate the position of the executive power. If not, then the
people will solemnly pronounce its decision in 1852. But whatever the solutions
of the future may be, let us come to an understanding, so that passion,
surprise, or violence may never decide the destiny of a great nation.... What
occupies my attention, above all, is not who will rule France in 1852, but how
to employ the time which remains at my disposal so that the intervening period
may pass by without agitation or disturbance. I have opened my heart to you
with sincerity; you will answer my frankness with your trust, my good endeavors
with your cooperation, and God will do the rest." 
The respectable, hypocritically moderate, virtuously commonplace language of
the bourgeoisie reveals its deepest meaning in the mouth of the autocrat of the
Society of December 10 and the picnic hero of St. Maur and Satory. 
The burgraves of the party of Order did not delude themselves for a moment
concerning the trust that this opening of the heart deserved. About oaths they
had long been blasé they numbered in their midst veterans and virtuosos of
political perjury. Nor had they failed to hear the passage about the army. They
observed with annoyance that in its discursive enumeration of lately enacted
laws the message passed over the most important law, the electoral law, in
studied silence, and moreover, in the event of there being no revision of the
constitution, left the election of the President in 1852 to the people. The
electoral law was the lead ball chained to the feet of the party of Order,
which prevented it from walking and so much the more from storming forward!
Moreover, by the official disbandment of the Society of December 10 and the
dismissal of War Minister Hautpoul, Bonaparte had with his own hand sacrificed
the scapegoats on the altar of the country. He had blunted the edge of the
expected collision. Finally, the party of Order itself anxiously sought to
avoid, to mitigate, to gloss over any decisive conflict with the executive
power. For fear of losing their conquests over the revolution, they allowed
their rival to carry off the fruits thereof. "Above all things, France demands
tranquillity." This was what the party of Order had cried to the revolution
since February [1848], this was what Bonaparte's message cried to the party of
Order. "Above all things, France demands tranquillity." Bonaparte committed
acts that aimed at usurpation, but the party of Order committed "unrest" if it
raised a row about these acts and construed them hypochondriacally. The
sausages of Satory were quiet as mice when no one spoke of them. "Above all
things, France demands tranquillity." Bonaparte demanded, therefore, that he be
left in peace to do as he liked and the parliamentary party was paralyzed by a
double fear, the fear of again evoking revolutionary unrest and the fear of
itself appearing as the instigator of unrest in the eyes of its own class, in
the eyes of the bourgeoisie. Consequently, since France demanded tranquillity
above all things, the party of Order dared not answer "war" after Bonaparte had
talked "peace" in his message. The public, which had anticipated scenes of
great scandal at the opening of the National Assembly, was cheated of its
expectations. The opposition deputies, who demanded the submission of the
Permanent Commission's minutes on the October events, were out-voted by the
majority. On principle, all debates that might cause excitement were eschewed.
The proceedings of the National Assembly during November and December, 1850,
were without interest. 
At last, toward the end of December, guerrilla warfare began over a number
of prerogatives of parliament. The movement got bogged down in petty squabbles
about the prerogatives of the two powers, since the bourgeoisie had done away
with the class struggle for the moment by abolishing universal suffrage. 
A judgment for debt had been obtained from the court against Mauguin, one of
the people's representatives. In answer to the inquiry of the president of the
court, the Minister of Justice, Rouher, declared that a capias should be
issued against the debtor without further ado. Mauguin was thus thrown into
debtors' prison. The National Assembly flared up when it learned of the
assault. Not only did it order his immediate release, but it even had him
fetched forcibly from Clichy the same evening, by its clerk. In order, however,
to confirm its faith in the sanctity of private property and with the idea at
the back of its mind of opening, in case of need, a place of safekeeping for
Montagnards who had become troublesome, it declared imprisonment of people's
representatives for debt permissible when its consent had been previously
obtained. It forgot to decree that the President might also be locked up for
debt. It destroyed the last semblance of the immunity that enveloped the
members of its own body. 
It will be remembered that, acting on the information given by a certain
Allais, Police Commissioner Yon had denounced a section of the Decembrists for
planning the murders of Dupin and Changarnier. In reference to this, at the
very first session the quaestors made the proposal that parliament should form
a police force of its own, paid out of the private budget of the National
Assembly and absolutely independent of the police prefect. The Minister of the
Interior, Baroche, protested against this invasion of his domain. A miserable
compromise on this matter was concluded, according to which, true, the police
commissioner of the Assembly was to be paid out of its private budget and to be
appointed and dismissed by its quaestors, but only after previous agreement
with the Minister of the Interior. Meanwhile the government had started
criminal proceedings against Alais, and here it was easy to represent his
information as a hoax and through the mouth of the public prosecutor to cast
ridicule upon Dupin, Changarnier, Yon, and the whole National Assembly.
Thereupon, on December 29, Minister Baroche writes a letter to Dupin in which
he demands Yon's dismissal. The bureau of the Assembly, alarmed by its violence
in the Mauguin affair and accustomed when it has ventured a blow at the
executive power to receive two blows from it in return, does not sanction this
decision. It dismisses Yon as a reward for his official zeal and robs itself of
a parliamentary prerogative indispensable against a man who does not decide by
night in order to execute by day, but decides by day and executes by night. 
We have seen how on great and striking occasions during the months of
November and December the National Assembly avoided or quashed the struggle
with the executive power. Now we see it compelled to take up the struggle on
the pettiest occasions. In the Mauguin affair it confirms the principle of
imprisoning people's representatives for debt, but reserves the right to have
it applied only to representatives obnoxious to itself and wrangles over this
infamous privilege with the Minister of Justice. Instead of availing itself of
the alleged murder plot to decree an inquiry into the Society of December 10
and irredeemably unmasking Bonaparte before France and Europe in his true
character of chief of the Paris lumpen proletariat, it lets the conflict be
degraded to a point where the only issue between it and the Minister of the
Interior is which of them has the authority to appoint and dismiss a police
commissioner. Thus during the whole of this period we see the party of Order
compelled by its equivocal position to dissipate and disintegrate its struggle
with the executive power in petty jurisdictional squabbles, pettifoggery,
legalistic hairsplitting, and delimitational disputes, and to make the most
ridiculous matters of form the substance of its activity. It does not dare take
up the conflict at the moment when this has significance from the standpoint of
principle, when the executive power has really exposed itself and the cause of
the National Assembly would be the cause of the nation. By so doing it would
give the nation its marching orders, and it fears nothing more than that the
nation should move. On such occasions it accordingly rejects the motions of the
Montagne and proceeds to the order of the day. The question at issue in its
large aspects having thus been dropped, the executive power calmly waits for
the time when it can again take up the same question on petty and insignificant
occasions, when this is, so to speak, of only local parliamentary interest.
Then the repressed rage of the party of Order breaks out, then it tears the
curtain away from the coulisses, then it denounces the President, then it
declares the republic in danger, but then, also, its fervor appears absurd and
the occasion for the struggle seems a hypocritical pretext or altogether not
worth fighting about. The parliamentary storm becomes a storm in a teacup, the
fight becomes an intrigue, the conflict a scandal. While the revolutionary
classes gloat with malicious joy over the humiliation of the National Assembly,
for they are just as enthusiastic about the parliamentary prerogatives of this
Assembly as the latter is about the public liberties, the bourgeoisie outside
parliament does not understand how the bourgeoisie inside parliament can waste
time over such petty squabbles and imperil tranquillity by such pitiful
rivalries with the President. It becomes confused by a strategy that makes
peace at the moment when all the world is expecting battles, and attacks at the
moment when all the world believes peace has been made. 
On December 20 Pascal Duprat interpellated the Minister of the Interior
concerning the Gold Bars Lottery. This lottery was a "daughter of Elysium."
Bonaparte with his faithful followers had brought her into the world and Police
Prefect Carlier had placed her under his official protection, although French
law forbids all lotteries except raffles for charitable purposes. Seven million
lottery tickets at a franc-a-piece, the profits ostensibly to be devoted to
shipping Parisian vagabonds to California. On the one hand, golden dreams were
to supplant the socialist dreams of the Paris proletariat, the seductive
prospect of the first prize the doctrinaire right to work. Naturally the Paris
workers did not recognize in the glitter of the California gold bars the
inconspicuous francs that were enticed out of their pockets. In the main,
however, the matter was nothing short of a downright swindle. The vagabonds who
wanted to open California gold mines without troubling to leave Paris were
Bonaparte himself and his debt-ridden Round Table. The three millions voted by
the National Assembly had been squandered in riotous living; in one way or
another coffers had to be replenished. In vain had Bonaparte opened a national
subscription for the building of so-called cites ouvrieres [workers' cities], and headed the list himself with a
considerable sum. The hard-hearted bourgeois waited mistrustfully for him to
pay up his share, and since this naturally did not ensue, the speculation in
socialist castles in the air immediately fell to the ground. The gold bars
proved a better draw. Bonaparte & Co. were not content to pocket part of
the excess of the seven millions over the bars to be allotted in prizes; they
manufactured false lottery tickets; they issued ten, fifteen, and even twenty
tickets with the same number — a financial operation in the spirit of the
Society of December 10! Here the National Assembly was confronted not with the
fictitious President of the Republic but with Bonaparte in the flesh. Here it
could catch him in the act, in conflict not with the constitution but with the
Code penal. If after Duprat's interpellation it proceeded to the order
of the day, this did not happen merely because Girardin's motion that it should
declare itself "satisfied" reminded the party of Order of its own systematic
corruption. The bourgeois, and above all the bourgeois inflated into a
statesman, supplements his practical meanness by theoretical extravagance. As a
statesman he becomes, like the state power that confronts him, a higher being
that can be fought only in a higher, consecrated fashion. 
Bonaparte, who precisely because he was a bohemian, a princely lumpen
proletarian, had the advantage over a rascally bourgeois in that he could
conduct the struggle meanly, now saw, after the Assembly guided him with its
own hand across the slippery ground of the military banquets, the reviews, the
Society of December 10, and finally the Code penal, that the moment had come
when he could pass from an apparent defensive to the offensive. The minor
defeats meanwhile sustained by the Minister of Justice, the Minister of War,
the Minister of the Navy, and the Minister of Finance, through which the
National Assembly signified its snarling displeasure, troubled him little. He
not only prevented the ministers from resigning and thus recognizing the
sovereignty of parliament over the executive power, but could now consummate
what he had begun during the recess of the National Assembly: the severance of
the military power from parliament, the removal of Changarnier. 
An Elysée paper published an order of the day alleged to have been addressed
during the month of May to the First Army Division, and therefore proceeding
from Changarnier, in which the officers were urged, in the event of an
insurrection, to give no quarter to the traitors in their own ranks, but to
shoot them immediately, and to refuse troops to the National Assembly if it
should requisition them. On January 3, 1851, the cabinet was interpellated
concerning this order of the day. For the investigation of this matter it
requests a breathing space, first of three months, then of a week, finally of
only twenty-four hours. The Assembly insists on an immediate explanation.
Changarnier rises and declares that there never was such an order of the day.
He adds that he will always hasten to comply with the demands of the National
Assembly and that in case of a clash it can count on him. It receives his
declaration with indescribable applause and passes a vote of confidence in him.
It abdicates, it decrees its own impotence and the omnipotence of the army by
placing itself under the private protection of a general; but the general
deceives himself when he puts at its command against Bonaparte a power that he
holds only as a fief from the same Bonaparte, and when, in his turn, he expects
to be protected by this parliament, his own protègé in need of protection.
Changarnier, however, believes in the mysterious power with which the
bourgeoisie has endowed him since January 29, 1849. He considers himself the
third power, existing side by side with both the other state powers. He shares
the fate of the rest of this epoch's heroes, or rather saints, whose greatness
consists precisely in the biased great opinion of them that their party creates
in its own interests and who shrink to everyday figures as soon as
circumstances call on them to perform miracles. Unbelief is, in general, the
mortal enemy of these reputed heroes who are really saints. Hence their
majestically moral indignation at the dearth of enthusiasm displayed by wits
and scoffers. 
That same evening the ministers were summoned to the Elysée. Bonaparte
insists on the dismissal of Changarnier; five ministers refuse to sign; the
Moniteur announces a ministerial crisis, and the press of the party of Order
threatens to form a parliamentary army under Changarnier's command. The party
of Order had constitutional authority to take this step. It merely had to
appoint Changarnier president of the National Assembly and requisition any
number of troops it pleased for its protection. It could do so all the more
safely as Changarnier still actually stood at the head of the army and the
Paris National Guard and was only waiting to be requisitioned together with the
army. The Bonapartist press did not as yet even dare to question the right of
the National Assembly to requisition troops directly, a legal scruple that in
the given circumstances did not look promising. That the army would have obeyed
the order of the National Assembly is probable when one bears in mind that
Bonaparte had to search all Paris for eight days in order, finally, to find two
generals — Baraguay d'Hilliers and Saint-Jean d'Angely — who
declared themselves ready to countersign Changarnier's dismissal. That the
party of Order, however, would have found in its own ranks and in parliament
the necessary number of votes for such a resolution is more than doubtful, when
one considers that eight days later two hundred and eighty-six votes detached
themselves from the party and that in December, 1851, at the last hour of
decision, the Montagne still rejected a similar proposal. Nevertheless, the
burgraves might, perhaps, still have succeeded in spurring the mass of their
party to a heroism that consisted in feeling themselves secure behind a forest
of bayonets and accepting the services of an army that had deserted to their
camp. Instead of this, on the evening of January 6, Messrs. the Burgraves
betook themselves to the Elysée to make Bonaparte desist from dismissing
Changarnier by using statesmanlike phrases and urging considerations of state.
Whomever one seeks to persuade, one acknowledges as master of the situation. On
January 12, Bonaparte, assured by this step, appoints a new ministry in which
the leaders of the old ministry, Fould and Baroche, remain. Saint-Jean D'Angely
becomes War Minister, the Moniteur publishes the decree dismissing Changarnier,
and his command is divided between Baraguay d'Hilliers, who receives the First
Army Division, and Perrot, who receives the National Guard. The bulwark of
society has been discharged, and while this does not cause any tiles to fall
from the roofs, quotations on the Bourse are, on the other hand, going up. 
By repulsing the army, which places itself in the person of Changarnier at
its disposal, and so surrendering the army irrevocably to the President, the
party of Order declares that the bourgeoisie has forfeited its vocation to
rule. A parliamentary ministry no longer existed. Having now indeed lost its
grip on the army and the National Guard, what forcible means remained to it
with which simultaneously to maintain the usurped authority of parliament over
the people and its constitutional authority against the President? None. Only
the appeal to impotent principles remained to it now, to principles that it had
itself always interpreted merely as general rules, which one prescribes for
others in order to be able to move all the more freely oneself. The dismissal
of Changarnier and the falling of the military power into Bonaparte's hands
closes the first part of the period we are considering, the period of struggle
between the party of Order and the executive power. War between the two powers
has now been openly declared, is openly waged, but only after the party of
Order has lost both arms and soldiers. Without the ministry, without the army,
without the people, without public opinion, after its electoral law of May 31
no longer the representative of the sovereign nation, sans eyes, sans ears,
sans teeth, sans everything, the National Assembly had undergone a gradual
transformation into an ancient French parliament[109] that has to leave action to the
government and content itself with growling remonstrances post festum
[belatedly]. 
The party of Order receives the new ministry with a storm of indignation.
General Bedeau recalls to mind the mildness of the Permanent Commission during
the recess, and the excessive consideration it showed by waiving the
publication of its minutes. The Minister of the Interior himself now insists on
the publication of these minutes, which by this time have naturally become as
dull as ditch water, disclose no fresh facts, and have not the slightest effect
on the blasé public. Upon Remusat's proposal the National Assembly retires into
its office and appoints a "Committee for Extraordinary Measures." Paris departs
the less from the rut of its everyday routine because at this moment trade is
prosperous, factories are busy, corn prices low, foodstuffs overflowing, and
the savings banks receiving fresh deposits daily. The "extraordinary measures"
that parliament has announced with so much noise fizzle out on January 18 in a
no-confidence vote against the ministry without General Changarnier ever being
mentioned. The party of Order was forced to frame its motion in this way to
secure the votes of the republicans, since of all the ministry's measures,
Changarnier's dismissal was precisely the only one the republicans approved of,
while the party of Order was in fact not in a position to Censure the other
ministerial acts, which it had itself dictated. 
The no-confidence vote of January 18 was passed by four hundred and fifteen
votes to two hundred and eighty-six. Thus, it was carried only by a coalition
of the extreme Legitimists and Orleanists with the pure republicans and the
Montagne. Thus it proved that the party of Order had lost in conflicts with
Bonaparte not only the ministry, not only the army, but also its independent
parliamentary majority; that a squad of representatives had deserted its camp,
out of fanaticism for conciliation, out of fear of the struggle, out of
lassitude, out of family regard for the state salaries so near and dear to
them, out of speculation about ministerial posts becoming vacant (Odilon
Barrot), out of sheer egoism, which makes the ordinary bourgeois always
inclined to sacrifice the general interest of his class for this or that
private motive. From the first, the Bonapartist representatives adhered to the
party of Order only in the struggle against revolution. The leader of the
Catholic party, Montalembert, had already at that time thrown his influence
into the Bonapartist scale, since he despaired of the parliamentary party's
prospects of life. Lastly, the leaders of this party, Thiers and Berryer, the
Orleanist and the Legitimist, were compelled openly to proclaim themselves
republicans, to confess that their hearts were royalist but their heads
republican, that the parliamentary republic was the sole possible form for the
rule of the bourgeoisie as a whole. Thus they were compelled, before the eyes
of the bourgeois class itself, to stigmatize the restoration plans, which they
continued indefatigably to pursue behind parliament's back, as an intrigue as
dangerous as it was brainless. 
The no-confidence vote of January 18 hit the ministers and not the
President. But it was not the ministry, it was the President who had dismissed
Changarnier. Should the party of Order impeach Bonaparte himself? Because of
his restoration desires? The latter merely supplemented their own. Because of
his conspiracy in connection with the military reviews and the Society of
December 10? They had buried these themes long since under routine orders of
the day. Because of the dismissal of the hero of January 29 and June 13, the
man who in May, 1850, threatened to set fire to all four corners of Paris in
the event of a rising? Their allies of the Montagne and Cavaignac did not even
allow them to raise the fallen bulwark of society by means of an official
attestation of sympathy. They themselves could not deny the President the
constitutional authority to dismiss a general. They only raged because he made
an unparliamentary use of his constitutional right. Had they not continually
made an unconstitutional use of their parliamentary prerogative, particularly
in regard to the abolition of universal suffrage? They were therefore reduced
to moving within strictly parliamentary limits. And it took that peculiar
malady which since 1848 has raged all over the Continent, parliamentary
cretinism, which holds those infected by it fast in an imaginary world and
robs them of all sense, all memory, all understanding of the rude external
world — it took this parliamentary cretinism for those who had destroyed
all the conditions of parliamentary power with their own hands, and were bound
to destroy them in their struggle with the other classes, still to regard their
parliamentary victories as victories and to believe they hit the President by
striking at his ministers. They merely gave him the opportunity to humiliate
the National Assembly afresh in the eyes of the nation. On January 20 the
Moniteur announced that the resignation of the entire ministry had been
accepted. On the pretext that no parliamentary party any longer had a majority
— as the vote of January 18, this fruit of the coalition between Montagne
and royalists, proved — and pending the formation of a new ministry, of
which not one member was an Assembly representative, all being absolutely
unknown and insignificant individuals; a ministry of mere clerks and copyists.
The party of Order could now work to exhaustion playing with these marionettes;
the executive power no longer thought it worth while to be seriously
represented in the National Assembly. The more his ministers were pure dummies,
the more obviously Bonaparte concentrated the whole executive power in his own
person and the more scope he had to exploit it for his own ends. 
In coalition with the Montagne, the party of Order revenged itself by
rejecting the grant to the President of 1,800,000 francs which the chief of the
Society of December 10 had compelled his ministerial clerks to propose. This
time a majority of only a hundred and two votes decided the matter; thus
twenty-seven fresh votes had fallen away since January 18; the dissolution of
the party of Order was progressing. At the same time, so there might not for a
moment be any mistake about the meaning of its coalition with the Montagne, it
scorned even to consider a proposal signed by a hundred and eighty-nine members
of the Montagne calling for a general amnesty of political offenders. It
sufficed for the Minister of the Interior, a certain Vaisse, to declare that
the tranquillity was only apparent, that in secret great agitation prevailed,
that in secret ubiquitous societies were being organized, the democratic papers
were preparing to come out again, the reports from the departments were
unfavorable, the Geneva refugees were directing a conspiracy spreading by way
of Lyon all over the South of France, France was on the verge of an industrial
and commercial crisis, the manufacturers of Roubaix had reduced working hours,
the prisoners of Belle Isle[110] were in revolt — it sufficed for
even a mere Vaisse to conjure up the red specter and the party of Order
rejected without discussion a motion that would certainly have won the National
Assembly immense popularity and thrown Bonaparte back into its arms. Instead of
letting itself be intimidated by the executive power with the prospect of fresh
disturbances, it ought rather to have allowed the class struggle a little elbow
room, so as to keep the executive power dependent on it. But it did not feel
equal to the task of playing with fire. 
Meanwhile the so-called transition ministry continued to vegetate until the
middle of April. Bonaparte wearied and befooled the National Assembly with
continual new ministerial combinations. Now he seemed to want to form a
republican ministry with Lamartine and Billault, now a parliamentary one with
the inevitable Odilon Barrot, whose name is never missing when a dupe is
necessary, then a Legitimist ministry with Vatimesnil and Benoit d'Azy, and
then again an Orleanist one with Maleville. While he thus kept the different
factions of the party of Order in tension against one another, and alarmed them
as a whole by the prospect of a republican ministry and the consequent
inevitable restoration of universal suffrage, he at the same time engendered in
the bourgeoisie the conviction that his honest efforts to form a parliamentary
ministry were being frustrated by the irreconcilability of the royalist
factions. The bourgeoisie, however, cried out all the louder for a "strong
government"; it found it all the more unpardonable to leave France "without
administration," the more a general commercial crisis seemed now to be
approaching, and won recruits for socialism in the towns just as the ruinously
low price of corn did in the countryside. Trade daily became slacker, the
number of unemployed increased perceptibly; ten thousand workers, at least,
were breadless in Paris, innumerable factories stood idle in Rouen, Mulhouse,
Lyon, Roubaix, Tourcoing, St. Ettienne, Elbeuf, etc. Under these circumstances
Bonaparte could venture, on April 11, to restore the ministry of January 18:
Messrs. Rouher, Fould, Baroche, etc., reinforced by M. Leon Faucher, whom the
Constituent Assembly during its last days had, with the exception of five votes
cast by ministers, unanimously stigmatized by a vote of no confidence for
sending out false telegrams. The National Assembly had therefore gained a
victory over the ministry on January 18, had struggled with Bonaparte for three
months, only to have Fould and Baroche on April 11 admit the puritan Faucher as
a third party into their ministerial alliance. 
In November, 1849, Bonaparte had contented himself with an unparliamentary
ministry, in January, 1851, with an extra-parliamentary one, and on April 11 he
felt strong enough to form an anti-parliamentary ministry, which harmoniously
combined in itself the no-confidence votes of both Assemblies, the Constituent
and the Legislative, the republican and the royalist. This gradation of
ministries was the thermometer with which parliament could measure the decrease
of its own vital heat. By the end of April the latter had fallen so low that
Persigny, in a personal interview, could urge Changarnier to go over to the
camp of the President. Bonaparte, he assured him, regarded the influence of the
National Assembly as completely destroyed, and the proclamation was already
prepared that was to be published after the coup d'etat, which was kept
steadily in view but was by chance again postponed. Changarnier informed the
leaders of the party of Order of the obituary notice, but who believes that
bedbug bites are fatal? And parliament, stricken, disintegrated, and
death-tainted as it was, could not prevail upon itself to see in its duel with
the grotesque chief of the Society of December 10 anything but a duel with a
bedbug. But Bonaparte answered the party of Order as Agesilaus did King Agis:
“I seem to thee an ant, but one day I shall be a lion.” [111] [Paraphrase of a story by the Greek writer Athenaeus
(ca. second century AD) in his book, Deipnosophistae. - Ed.] 


Chapter Four | Chapter Six 
Contents 




==========

## VI. 









18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. VI



The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. 1852
VI
The coalition with the Montagne and the pure republicans, to
which the party of Order saw itself condemned in its unavailing efforts to
maintain possession of the military power and to reconquer supreme control of
the executive power, proved incontrovertibly that it had forfeited its
independent parliamentary majority. On May 28 the mere power of the calendar,
of the hour hand of the clock, gave the signal for its complete disintegration.
With May 28, the last year of the life of the National Assembly began. It now
had to decide for continuing the constitution unaltered or for revising it. But
revision of the constitution — that implied not only rule of the
bourgeoisie or of the petty-bourgeois democracy, democracy or proletarian
anarchy, parliamentary republic or Bonaparte, it implied at the same time
Orleans or Bourbon! Thus fell in the midst of parliament the apple of discord
that was bound to inflame openly the conflict of interests which split the
party of Order into hostile factions. The party of Order was a combination of
heterogeneous social substances. The question of revision generated a political
temperature at which the product again decomposed into its original components.

The Bonapartists' interest in a revision was simple. For them it was above
all a question of abolishing Article 45, which forbade Bonaparte's reelection
and the prolongation of his authority. No less simple appeared the position of
the republicans. They unconditionally rejected any revision; they saw in it a
universal conspiracy against the republic. Since they commanded more than a
quarter of the votes in the National Assembly, and according to the
constitution three-quarters of the votes were required for a resolution for
revision to be legally valid and for the convocation of a revising Assembly,
they needed only to count their votes to be sure of victory. And they were sure
of victory. 
As against these clear positions, the party of Order found itself
inextricably caught in contradictions. If it should reject revision, it would
imperil the status quo, since it would leave Bonaparte only one way out, that
of force; and since on the second Sunday in May, 1852, at the decisive moment,
it would be surrendering France to revolutionary anarchy, with a President who
had lost his authority, with a parliament which for a long time had not
possessed it, and with a people that meant to reconquer it. If it voted for
constitutional revision, it knew that it voted in vain and would be bound to
fail constitutionally because of the republicans' veto. If it
unconstitutionally declared a simple majority vote to be binding, it could hope
to dominate the revolution only if it subordinated itself unconditionally to
the sovereignty of the executive power; then it would make Bonaparte master of
the constitution, of its revision, and of the party itself. A partial revision,
which would prolong the authority of the President, would pave the way for
imperial usurpation. A general revision, which would shorten the existence of
the republic, would bring the dynastic claims into unavoidable conflict, for
the conditions of a Bourbon and an Orleanist restoration were not only
different, they were mutually exclusive. 
The parliamentary republic was more than the neutral territory on which the
two factions of the French bourgeoisie, Legitimists and Orleanists, large
landed property and industry, could dwell side by side with equality of rights.
It was the unavoidable condition of their common rule, the sole form of state
in which their general class interest subjected to itself at the same time both
the claims of their particular factions and all the remaining classes of
society. As royalists they fell back into their old antagonism, into the
struggle for the supremacy of landed property or of money, and the highest
expression of this antagonism, its personification, was their kings themselves,
their dynasties. Hence the resistance of the party of Order to the recall of
the Bourbons. 
The Orleanist and people's representative Creton had in 1849, 1850, and 1851
periodically introduced a motion for the revocation of the decree exiling the
royal families. Just as regularly, parliament presented the spectacle of an
Assembly of royalists that obdurately barred the gates through which their
exiled kings might return home. Richard III murdered Henry VI, remarking that
he was too good for this world and belonged in heaven. The royalists declared
France too bad to possess her kings again. Constrained by force of
circumstances, they had become republicans and repeatedly sanctioned the
popular decision that banished their kings from France. 
A revision of the constitution — and circumstances compelled taking
that into consideration — called in question, along with the republic,
the common rule of the two bourgeois factions, and revived, with the
possibility of a monarchy, the rivalry of the interests which the monarchy had
predominantly represented by turns, the struggle for the supremacy of one
faction over the other. The diplomats of the party of Order believed they could
settle the struggle by an amalgamation of the two dynasties, by a so-called
fusion of the royalist parties and their royal houses. The real fusion of the
Restoration and the July Monarchy was the parliamentary republic, in which
Orleanist and Legitimist colors were obliterated and the various species of
bourgeois disappeared into the bourgeois as such, the bourgeois genus. Now,
however, Orleanist was to become Legitimist and Legitimist Orleanist. Royalty,
in which their antagonism was personified, was to embody their unity, the
expression of their exclusive factional interests was to become the expression
of their common class interest, the monarchy was to do what only the abolition
of two monarchies, the republic, could do and had done. This was the
philosopher's stone, to produce which the doctors of the party of Order racked
their brains. As if the Legitimist monarchy could ever become the monarchy of
the industrial bourgeois or the bourgeois monarchy ever become the monarchy of
the hereditary landed aristocracy. As if landed property and industry could
fraternize under one crown, when the crown could descend to only one head, the
head of the elder brother or of the younger. As if industry could come to terms
with landed property at all, so long as landed property itself does not decide
to become industrial. If Henry V should die tomorrow, the Count of Paris would
not on that account become the king of the Legitimists unless he ceased to be
the king of the Orleanists. The philosophers of fusion, however, who became
more vociferous in proportion as the question of revision came to the fore, who
had provided themselves with an official daily organ in the Assemblee
Nationale, and who are again at work even at this very moment (February,
1852), considered the whole difficulty to be due to the opposition and rivalry
of the two dynasties. The attempts to reconcile the Orleans family with Henry
V, begun since the death of Louis Philippe, but, like the dynastic intrigues
generally, played at only while the National Assembly was in recess, during the
entr'actes, behind the scenes — sentimental coquetry with the old
superstition rather than seriously meant business — now became grand
performances of state, enacted by the party of Order on the public stage,
instead of in amateur theatricals as before. The couriers sped from Paris to
Venice, from Venice to Claremont,[112] from Claremont to Paris. The Count of
Chambord issues a manifesto in which "with the help of all the members of his
family" he announces not his, but the "national" restoration. The Orleanist
Salvandy throws himself at the feet of Henry V. The Legitimist chiefs, Berryer,
Benoit d'Azy, Saint-Priest, travel to Claremont to persuade the Orleans set,
but in vain. The fusionists perceive too late that the interests of the two
bourgeois factions neither lose exclusiveness nor gain pliancy when they become
accentuated in the form of family interests, the interests of two royal houses.
If Henry V were to recognize the Count of Paris as his heir - the sole success
that the fusion could achieve at best — the House of Orleans would not
win any claim that the childlessness of Henry V had not already secured to it,
but it would lose all the claims it had gained through the July Revolution. It
would waive its original claims, all the titles it had wrested from the older
branch of the Bourbons in almost a hundred years of struggle; it would barter
away its historical prerogative, the prerogative of the modern kingdom, for the
prerogative of its genealogical tree. The fusion, therefore, would be nothing
but a voluntary abdication of the House of Orleans, its resignation to
Legitimacy, repentant withdrawal from the Protestant state church into the
Catholic. A withdrawal, moreover, that would not even bring it to the throne it
had lost, but to the steps of the throne where it had been born. The old
Orleanist ministers, Guizot, Duchatel, etc., who likewise hastened to Claremont
to advocate the fusion, in fact represented merely the Katzenjammer over the
July Revolution, the despair about the bourgeois kingdom and the kingliness of
the bourgeois, the superstitious belief in Legitimacy as the last charm against
anarchy. Imagining themselves mediators between Orleans and Bourbons, they were
in reality merely Orleanist renegades, and the Prince of Joinville received
them as such. On the other hand, the viable, bellicose section of the
Orleanists, Thiers, Baze, etc., convinced Louis Philippe's family all the more
easily that if any directly monarchist restoration presupposed the fusion of
the two dynasties, and if any such fusion presupposed abdication of the House
of Orleans, it was, on the contrary, wholly in accord with the tradition of
their forefathers to recognize the republic for the moment and wait until
events permitted the conversion of the presidential chair into a throne. Rumors
of Joinville's candidature were circulated, public curiosity was kept in
suspense, and a few months later, in September, after the rejection of
revision, his candidature was publicly proclaimed. 
The attempt at a royalist fusion of Orleanists with Legitimists had thus not
only failed; it had destroyed their parliamentary fusion, their common
republican form, and had broken up the party of Order into its original
component parts; but the more the estrangement between Claremont and Venice
grew, the more their settlement collapsed and the Joinville agitation gained
ground, so much the more eager and earnest became the negotiations between
Bonaparte's minister Faucher and the Legitimists. 
The disintegration of the party of Order did not stop at its original
elements. Each of the two great factions, in its turn, decomposed all over
again. It was as if all the old shadings that had formerly fought and jostled
one another within each of the two circles, whether Legitimist or Orleanist,
had thawed out again like dry Infusoria on contact with water, as if they had
acquired anew sufficient vital energy to form groups of their own and
independent antagonisms. The Legitimists dreamed they were back among the
controversies between the Tuileries and the Pavillon Marsan, between Villèle
and Polignac.[113] The
Orleanists relived the golden days of the tourney between Guizot, Mole,
Broglie, Thiers, and Odilon Barrot. 
The section of the party of Order that was eager for revision, but was
divided again on the limits to revisions — a section composed of the
Legitimists led by Berryer and Falloux, on the one hand, and by La
Rochejaquelein, on the other, and of the conflict-weary Orleanists led by Mole,
Broglie, Montalembert and Odilon Barrot — agreed with the Bonapartist
representatives on the following indefinite and broadly framed motion: "With
the object of restoring to the nation the full exercise of its sovereignty, the
undersigned representatives move that the constitution be revised." 
At the same time, however, they unanimously declared through their reporter
Tocqueville that the National Assembly had no right to move the abolition of
the republic, that this right was vested solely in the Revising Chamber.
For the rest, the constitution might be revised only in a "legal"
manner, hence only if the constitutionally prescribed three-quarters of
the number of votes were cast in favor of revision. On July 19, after six days
of stormy debate, revision was rejected, as was to be anticipated. Four hundred
and forty-six votes were cast for it, but two hundred and seventy-eight
against. The extreme Orleanists, Thiers, Changarnier, etc., voted with the
republicans and the Montagne. 
Thus the majority of parliament declared against the constitution, but this
constitution itself declared for the minority and that its vote was binding.
But had not the party of Order subordinated the constitution to the
parliamentary majority on May 31, 1850, and on June 13, 1849? Up to now, was
not its whole policy based on the subordination of the paragraphs of the
constitution to the decisions of the parliamentary majority? Had it not left to
the democrats the antediluvian superstitious belief in the letter of the law,
and castigated the democrats for it? At the present moment, however, revision
of the constitution meant nothing but continuation of the presidential
authority, just as continuation of the constitution meant nothing but
Bonaparte's deposition. Parliament had declared for him, but the constitution
declared against parliament. He therefore acted in the sense of parliament when
he tore up the constitution and acted in the sense of the constitution when he
adjourned parliament. 
Parliament had declared the constitution and, with the latter, its own rule
to be "beyond the majority"; by its vote it had abolished the constitution and
prolonged the term of presidential power, while declaring at the same time that
neither could the one die nor the other live so long as the Assembly itself
continued to exist. Those who were to bury it were standing at the door. While
it debated on revision, Bonaparte removed General Baraguay d'Hilliers, who had
proved irresolute, from the command of the First Army Division and appointed in
his place General Magnan, the victor of Lyons,[114] the hero of the December days, one of his
creatures, who under Louis Philippe had already more or less compromised
himself in Bonaparte's favor on the occasion of the Boulogne expedition. 
The party of Order proved by its decision on revision that it knew neither
how to rule nor how to serve; neither how to live nor how to die; neither how
to suffer the republic nor how to overthrow it; neither how to uphold the
constitution nor how to throw it overboard; neither how to cooperate with the
President nor how to break with him. To whom, then, did it look for the
solution of all the contradictions? To the calendar, to the course of events.
It ceased to presume to sway them. It therefore challenged events to assume
sway over it, and thereby challenged the power to which, in the struggle
against the people, it had surrendered one attribute after another until it
stood impotent before this power. In order that the head of the executive power
might be able the more undisturbedly to draw up his plan of campaign against
it, strengthen his means of attack, select his tools, and fortify his
positions, it resolved precisely at this critical moment to retire from the
stage and adjourn for three months, from August 10 to November 4. 
The parliamentary party was not only dissolved into its two great factions,
each of these factions was not only split up within itself, but the party of
Order in parliament had fallen out with the party of Order outside parliament.
The spokesmen and scribes of the bourgeoisie, its platform and its press
— in short, the ideologists of the bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie
itself, the representatives and the represented — faced one another in
estrangement and no longer understood one another. 
The Legitimists in the provinces, with their limited horizon and unlimited
enthusiasm, accused their parliamentary leaders, Berryer and Falloux, of
deserting to the Bonapartist camp and of defection from Henry V. Their
fleur-de-lis minds believed in the fall of man, but not in diplomacy. 
Far more fateful and decisive was the breach of the commercial bourgeoisie
with its politicians. It reproached them not as the Legitimists reproached
theirs, with having abandoned their principles, but on the contrary, with
clinging to principles that had become useless. 
I have indicated above that since Fould's entry into the ministry the
section of the commercial bourgeoisie which had held the lion's share of power
under Louis Philippe, namely, the aristocracy of finance, had become
Bonapartist. Fould not only represented Bonaparte's interests in the Bourse, he
represented at the same time the interests of the Bourse before Bonaparte. The
position of the aristocracy of finance is most strikingly depicted in a passage
from its European organ, the London Economist. In the issue of February
1, 1851, its Paris correspondent writes:
"Now we have it stated from numerous quarters that above all
things France demands tranquillity. The President declares it in his message to
the Legislative Assembly; it is echoed from the tribune; it is asserted in the
journals; it is announced from the pulpit, it is demonstrated by the
sensitiveness of the public funds at the least prospect of disturbance, and
their firmness the instant it is made manifest that the executive is
victorious." 
In its issue of November 29, 1851, the Economist declares in its own
name:
"The President is the guardian of order, and is now
recognized as such on every stock exchange of Europe." 
The aristocracy of finance, therefore, condemned the parliamentary struggle
of the party of Order with the executive power as a disturbance of order, and
celebrated every victory of the President over its ostensible representatives
as a victory of order. By the aristocracy of finance must here be understood
not merely the great loan promoters and speculators in public funds, in regard
to whom it is immediately obvious that their interests coincide with the
interests of the state power. All modern finance, the whole of the banking
business, is interwoven in the closest fashion with public credit. A part of
their business capital is necessarily invested and put out at interest in
quickly convertible public funds. Their deposits, the capital placed at their
disposal and distributed by them among merchants and industrialists, are partly
derived from the dividends of holders of government securities. If in every
epoch the stability of the state power signified Moses and the prophets to the
entire money market and to the priests of this money market, why not all the
more so today, when every deluge threatens to sweep away the old states, and
the old state debts with them? 
The industrial bourgeoisie too, in its fanaticism for order, was angered by
the squabbles of the parliamentary party of Order with the executive power.
After their vote of January 18 on the occasion of Changarnier's dismissal,
Thiers, Angles, Sainte-Beuve, etc., received from their constituents, in
precisely the industrial districts, public reproofs in which their coalition
with the Montagne was especially scourged as high treason to order. If, as we
have seen, the boastful taunts, the petty intrigues which marked the struggle
of the party of Order with the President merited no better reception, then on
the other hand this bourgeois party, which required its representatives to
allow the military power to pass from its own parliament to an adventurous
pretender without offering resistance, was not even worth the intrigues that
were squandered in its interests. It proved that the struggle to maintain its
public interests, its own class interests, its political power, only troubled
and upset it, as it disturbed private business. 
With barely an exception the bourgeois dignitaries of the departmental
towns, the municipal authorities, the judges of the commercial courts, etc.,
everywhere received Bonaparte on his tours in the most servile manner, even
when, as in Dijon, he made an unrestrained attack on the National Assembly, and
especially on the party of Order. 
When trade was good, as it still was at the beginning of 1851, the
commercial bourgeoisie raged against any parliamentary struggle, lest trade be
put out of humor. When trade was bad, as it continually was from the end of
February, 1851, the commercial bourgeoisie accused the parliamentary struggles
of being the cause of stagnation and cried out for them to stop so that trade
could start again. The revision debates came on just in this bad period. Since
the question here was whether the existing form of state was to be or not to
be, the bourgeoisie felt all the more justified in demanding from its
representatives the ending of this torturous provisional arrangement and at the
same time the maintenance of the status quo. There was no contradiction in
this. By the end of the provisional arrangement it understood precisely its
continuation, the postponement to a distant future of the moment when a
decision had to be reached. The status quo could be maintained in only two
ways: prolongation of Bonaparte's authority or his constitutional retirement
and the election of Cavaignac. A section of the bourgeoisie desired the latter
solution and knew no better advice to give its representatives than to keep
silent and leave the burning question untouched. They were of the opinion that
if their representatives did not speak, Bonaparte would not act. They wanted an
ostrich parliament that would hide its head in order to remain unseen. Another
section of the bourgeoisie desired, because Bonaparte was already in the
presidential chair, to leave him sitting in it, so that everything could remain
in the same old rut. They were indignant because their parliament did not
openly infringe the constitution and abdicate without ceremony. 
The Department Councils, those provincial representative bodies of the big
bourgeoisie, which met from August 25 on during the recess of the National
Assembly, declared almost unanimously for revision, and thus against parliament
and in favor of Bonaparte. 
Still more unequivocally than in its falling out with its parliamentary
representatives, the bourgeoisie displayed its wrath against its literary
representatives, its own press. The sentences to ruinous fines and shameless
terms of imprisonment, on the verdicts of bourgeois juries, for every attack of
bourgeois journalists on Bonaparte's usurpationist desires, for every attempt
of the press to defend the political rights of the bourgeoisie against the
executive power, astonished not merely France, but all Europe. 
While the parliamentary party of Order, by its clamor for tranquillity, as I
have shown, committed itself to quiescence, while it declared the political
rule of the bourgeoisie to be incompatible with the safety and existence of the
bourgeoisie — by destroying with its own hands, in the struggle against
the other classes of society, all the conditions for its own regime, the
parliamentary regime — the extraparliamentary mass of the bourgeoisie, on
the other hand, by its servility toward the President, by its vilification of
parliament, by its brutal maltreatment of its own press, invited Bonaparte to
suppress and annihilate its speaking and writing section, its politicians and
its literati, its platform and its press, so it would then be able to pursue
its private affairs with full confidence in the protection of a strong and
unrestricted government. It declared unequivocally that it longed to get rid of
its own political rule in order to get rid of the troubles and dangers of
ruling. 
And this extraparliamentary bourgeoisie, which had already rebelled against
the purely parliamentary and literary struggle for the rule of its own class,
and had betrayed the leaders of this struggle, now dares after the event to
indict the proletariat for not having risen in a bloody struggle, a
life-and-death struggle on its behalf! This bourgeoisie, which every moment
sacrificed its general class interests, that is, its political interests, to
the narrowest and most sordid private interests, and demanded a similar
sacrifice from its representatives, now moans that the proletariat has
sacrificed its ideal political interests to its material interests. It poses as
a lovely creature that has been misunderstood and deserted in the decisive hour
by the proletariat, misled by socialists. And it finds a general echo in the
bourgeois world. Naturally, I do not speak here of German shyster politicians
and riff-raff of the same persuasion. I refer, for example, to the already
quoted Economist, which as late as November 29, 1851, that is, four days prior
to the coup d'etat, declared Bonaparte to be the "guardian of order" but Thiers
and Berryer to be "anarchists," and on December 27, 1851, after Bonaparte had
quieted these "anarchists," is already vociferous about the treason to "the
skill, knowledge, discipline, spiritual insight, intellectual resources, and
moral weight of the middle and upper ranks" committed by the masses of
"ignorant, untrained, and stupid proletaires." The stupid, ignorant, and vulgar
mass was none other than the bourgeois mass itself. 
In the year 1851, France, to be sure, had passed through a kind of minor
trade crisis. The end of February showed a decline in exports compared with
1850; in March trade suffered and factories closed down; in April the position
of the industrial departments appeared as desperate as after the February days;
in May business had still not revived; as late as June 28 the holdings of the
Bank of France showed, by the enormous growth of deposits and the equally great
decrease in advances on bills of exchange, that production was at a standstill,
and it was not until the middle of October that a progressive improvement of
business again set in. The French bourgeoisie attributed this trade stagnation
to purely political causes, to the struggle between parliament and the
executive power, to the precariousness of a merely provisional form of state,
to the terrifying prospect of the second Sunday in May of 1852. I will not deny
that all these circumstances had a depressing effect on some branches of
industry in Paris and the departments. But in any case the influence of
political conditions was only local and inconsiderable. Does this require
further proof than the fact that the improvement of trade set in toward the
middle of October, at the very moment when the political situation grew worse,
the political horizon darkened, and a thunderbolt from Elysium was expected at
any moment? For the rest, the French bourgeois, whose "skill, knowledge,
spiritual insight, and intellectual resources" reach no further than his nose,
could throughout the period of the Industrial Exhibition in London[115] have found the cause of
his commercial misery right under his nose. While in France factories were
closed down, in England commercial bankruptcies broke out. While in April and
May the industrial panic reached a climax in France, in April and May the
commercial panic reached a climax in England. Like the French woolen industry,
the English woolen industry suffered, and as French silk manufacture, so did
English silk manufacture. True, the English cotton mills continued working, but
no longer at the same profits as in 1849 and 1850. The only difference was that
the crisis in France was industrial, in England commercial; that while in
France the factories stood idle, in England they extended operations, but under
less favorable conditions than in preceding years; that in France it was
exports, in England imports which were hardest hit. The common cause, which is
naturally not to be sought within the bounds of the French political horizon,
was obvious. The years 1849 and 1850 were years of the greatest material
prosperity and of an overproduction that appeared as such only in 1851. At the
beginning of this year it was given a further special impetus by the prospect
of the Industrial Exhibition. In addition there were the following special
circumstances: first, the partial failure of the cotton crop in 1850 and 1851,
then the certainty of a bigger cotton crop than had been expected; first the
rise, then the sudden fall — in short, the fluctuations in the price of
cotton. The crop of raw silk, in France at least, had turned out to be even
below the average yield. Woolen manufacture, finally, had expanded so much
since 1848 that the production of wool could not keep pace with it and the
price of raw wool rose out of all proportion to the price of woolen
manufactures. Here, then, in the raw material of three industries for the world
market, we already have three-fold material for a stagnation in trade. Apart
from these special circumstances, the apparent crisis of 1851 was nothing else
but the halt which overproduction and overspeculation invariably make in
completing the industrial cycle, before they summon all their strength in order
to rush feverishly through the final phase of this cycle and arrive once more
at their starting point, the general trade crisis. During such intervals in the
history of trade, commercial bankruptcies break out in England, while in France
industry itself is reduced to idleness, partly forced into retreat by the
competition, just then becoming intolerable, of the English in all markets, and
partly singled out for attack as a luxury industry by every business
stagnation. Thus besides the general crisis France goes through national trade
crises of her own, which are nevertheless determined and conditioned far more
by the general state of the world market than by French local influences. It
will not be without interest to contrast the judgment of the English bourgeois
with the prejudice of the French bourgeois. In its annual trade report for
1851, one of the largest Liverpool houses writes: 
"Few years have more thoroughly belied the anticipations
formed at their commencement than the one just closed; instead of the great
prosperity which was almost unanimously looked for it has proved one of the
most discouraging that has been seen for the last quarter of a century —
this, of course, refers to the mercantile, not to the manufacturing classes.
And yet there certainly were grounds for anticipating the reverse at the
beginning of the year — stocks of produce were moderate, money was
abundant, and food was cheap, a plentiful harvest well secured, unbroken peace
on the Continent, and no political or fiscal disturbances at home; indeed, the
wings of commerce were never more unfettered.... To what source, then, is this
disastrous result to be attributed? We believe to overtrading in both imports
and exports. Unless our merchants will put more stringent limits to their
freedom of action, nothing but a triennial panic can keep us in check." 
Now picture to yourself the French bourgeois, how in the throes of this
business panic his trade-crazy brain is tortured, set in a whirl, and stunned
by rumors of coups d'etat and the restoration of universal suffrage, by the
struggle between parliament and the executive power, by the Fronde war between
Orleanists and Legitimists, by the communist conspiracies in the south of
France, by alleged Jacqueries in the departments of Nievre and Cher, by the
advertisements of the different candidates for the presidency, by the cheapjack
solutions offered by the journals, by the threats of the republicans to uphold
the constitution and universal suffrage by force of arms, by the
gospel-preaching emigre heroes in partibus, who announced that the
world would come to an end on the second Sunday in May, 1852 — think of
all this and you will comprehend why in this unspeakable, deafening chaos of
fusion, revision, prorogation, constitution, conspiration, coalition,
emigration, usurpation, and revolution, the bourgeois madly snorts at his
parliamentary republic:
"Rather an end with terror than terror without end!" 
Bonaparte understood this cry. His power of comprehension was sharpened by
the growing turbulence of creditors, who with each sunset which brought
settling day, the second Sunday in May, 1852, nearer, saw a movement of the
stars protesting their earthly bills of exchange. They had become veritable
astrologers. The National Assembly had blighted Bonaparte's hopes of a
constitutional prolongation of his authority; the candidature of the Prince of
Joinville forbade further vacillation. 
If ever an event has, well in advance of its coming, cast its shadow before,
it was Bonaparte's coup d'etat. As early as January 29, 1849, barely a month
after his election, he had made a proposal about it to Changarnier. In the
summer of 1849 his own Prime Minister, Odilon Barrot, had covertly denounced
the policy of coups d'etat; in the winter of 1850 Thiers had openly done so. In
May, 1851, Persigny had sought once more to win Changarnier for the coup; the
Messager de l'Assemblee had published an account of these
negotiations. During every parliamentary storm the Bonapartist journals
threatened a coup d'etat, and the nearer the crisis drew, the louder their tone
became. In the orgies that Bonaparte kept up every night with men and women of
the "swell mob," as soon as the hour of midnight approached and copious
potations had loosened tongues and fired imaginations, the coup d'etat was
fixed for the following morning. Swords were drawn, glasses clinked, the
representatives were thrown out the window, the imperial mantle fell upon
Bonaparte's shoulders, until the following morning banished the ghost once more
and astonished Paris learned, from vestals of little reticence and from
indiscreet paladins, of the danger it had once again escaped. During the months
of September and October rumors of a coup d'etat followed fast, one after the
other. Simultaneously the shadow took on color, like a variegated
daguerreotype. Look up the September and October copies of the organs of the
European daily press and you will find, word for word, intimations like the
following: "Paris is full of rumors of a coup d'etat. The capital is to be
filled with troops during the night, and the next morning is to bring decrees
which will dissolve the National Assembly, declare the Department of the Seine
in a state of siege, restore universal suffrage, and appeal to the people.
Bonaparte is said to be seeking ministers for the execution of these illegal
decrees." The dispatches that bring these tidings always end with the fateful
word "postponed." The coup d'etat was ever the fixed idea of Bonaparte. With
this idea he had again set foot on French soil. He was so obsessed by it that
he continually betrayed it and blurted it out. He was so weak that, just as
continually, he gave it up again. The shadow of the coup d'etat had become so
familiar to the Parisians as a specter that they were not willing to believe in
it when it finally appeared in the flesh. What allowed the coup d'etat to
succeed was therefore neither the reticent reserve of the chief of the Society
of December 10 nor the fact that the National Assembly was caught unawares. If
it succeeded, it succeeded despite its indiscretion and with its foreknowledge,
a necessary, inevitable result of antecedent developments. 
On October 10 Bonaparte announced to his ministers his decision to restore
universal suffrage; on the sixteenth they handed in their resignations; on the
twenty-sixth Paris learned of the formation of the Thorigny Ministry. Police
Prefect Carlier was simultaneously replaced by Maupas; the head of the First
Military Division, Magnan, concentrated the most reliable regiments in the
capital. On November 4 the National Assembly resumed its sessions. It had
nothing better to do than to recapitulate in a short, succinct form the course
it had gone through and to prove that it was buried only after it had died. 
The first post it forfeited in the struggle with the executive power was the
ministry. It had solemnly to admit this loss by accepting at full value the
Thorigny Ministry, a mere shadow cabinet. The Permanent Commission had received
M. Giraud with laughter when he presented himself in the name of the new
ministers. Such a weak ministry for such strong measures as the restoration of
universal suffrage! Yet the precise object was to get nothing through in
parliament, but everything against parliament. 
On the very first day of its reopening, the National Assembly received the
message from Bonaparte in which he demanded the restoration of universal
suffrage and the abolition of the law of May 31, 1850. The same day his
ministers introduced a decree to this effect. The National Assembly at once
rejected the ministry's motion of urgency and rejected the law itself on
November 13 by three hundred and fifty-five votes to three hundred and
forty-eight. Thus, it tore up its mandate once more; it once more confirmed the
fact that it had transformed itself from the freely elected representatives of
the people into the usurpatory parliament of a class; it acknowledged once more
that it had itself cut in two the muscles which connected the parliamentary
head with the body of the nation. 
If by its motion to restore universal suffrage the executive power appealed
from the National Assembly to the people, the legislative power appealed by its
Quaestors' Bill from the people to the army. This Quaestors' Bill was to
establish its right of directly requisitioning troops, of forming a
parliamentary army. While it thus designated the army as the arbitrator between
itself and the people, between itself and Bonaparte, while it recognized the
army as the decisive state power, it had to confirm, on the other hand, the
fact that it had long given up its claim to dominate this power. By debating
its right to requisition troops, instead of requisitioning them at once, it
betrayed its doubts about its own powers. By rejecting the Quaestors' Bill, it
made public confession of its impotence. This bill was defeated, its proponents
lacking a hundred and eight votes of a majority. The Montagne thus decided the
issue. It found itself in the position of Buridan's ass — not, indeed,
between two bundles of hay with the problem of deciding which was the more
attractive, but between two showers of blows with the problem of deciding which
was the harder. On the one hand, there was the fear of Changarnier; on the
other, the fear of Bonaparte. It must be confessed that the position was not a
heroic one. 
On November 18 an amendment was moved to the law on municipal elections
introduced by the party of Order, to the effect that instead of three years',
one year's domicile should suffice for municipal electors. The amendment was
lost by a single vote, but this one vote immediately proved to be a mistake. By
splitting up into its hostile factions, the party of Order had long ago
forfeited its independent parliamentary majority. It showed now that there was
no longer any majority at all in parliament. The National Assembly had become
incapable of transacting business. Its atomic constituents were no longer held
together by any force of cohesion; it had drawn its last breath; it was dead.

Finally, a few days before the catastrophe, the extra-parliamentary mass of
the bourgeoisie was solemnly to confirm once more its breach with the
bourgeoisie in parliament. Thiers, as a parliamentary hero infected more than
the rest with the incurable disease of parliamentary cretinism, had, after the
death of parliament, hatched out, together with the Council of State, a new
parliamentary intrigue, a Responsibility Law by which the President was to be
firmly held within the limits of the constitution. Just as, on laying the
foundation stone of the new market halls in Paris on September 15, Bonaparte,
like a second Masaniello, had enchanted the dames des balles, the
fishwives - to be sure, one fishwife outweighed seventeen burgraves in real
power - just as after the introduction of the Quaestors' Bill he enraptured the
lieutenants whom he regaled in the Elysee, so now, on November 25, he swept off
their feet the industrial bourgeoisie, which had gathered at the circus to
receive at his hands prize medals for the London Industrial Exhibition. 
I shall give the significant portion of his speech as reported in the
Journal des Débats:
"'With such unhoped-for successes, I am justified in
reiterating how great the French Republic would be if it were permitted to
pursue its real interests and reform its institutions, instead of being
constantly disturbed by demagogues, on the one hand, and by monarchist
hallucinations, on the other.' (Loud, stormy and repeated applause from every
part of the amphitheater.) 'The monarchist hallucinations hinder all progress
and all important branches of industry. In place of progress nothing but
struggle. One sees men who were formerly the most zealous supporters of the
royal authority and prerogative become partisans of a Convention merely in
order to weaken the authority that has sprung from universal suffrage.' (Loud
and repeated applause.) 'We see men who have suffered most from the Revolution,
and have deplored it most, provoke a new one, and merely in order to fetter the
nation's will.... I promise you tranquillity for the future,' etc., etc.
(Bravo, bravo, a storm of bravos.) " 
Thus the industrial bourgeoisie applauds with servile bravos the coup d'etat
of December 2, the annihilation of parliament, the downfall of its own rule,
the dictatorship of Bonaparte. The thunder of applause on November 25 had its
answer in the thunder of cannon on December 4,[116] and it was on the house of Monsieur
Sallandrouze, who had clapped most, that they clapped most of the bombs. 
 Cromwell, when he dissolved the Long Parliament,
went alone into its midst, took out his watch so that it should not continue to
exist a minute after the time limit he had fixed, and drove out each one of the
members of Parliament with hilariously humorous taunts. Napoleon, smaller than
his prototype, at least betook himself on the eighteenth Brumaire to the
legislative body and read out to it, though in a faltering voice, its sentence
of death. The second Bonaparte, who, moreover, found himself in possession of
an executive power very different from that of Cromwell or Napoleon, sought his
model not in the annals of world history but in the annals of the Society of
December 10, in the annals of the criminal courts. He robs the Bank of France
of twenty-five million francs, buys General Magnan with a million, the soldiers
with fifteen francs apiece and liquor, comes together with his accomplices
secretly like a thief in the night, has the houses of the most dangerous
parliamentary leaders broken into, and Cavaignac, Lamoricière, Le Flô,
Changarnier, Charras, Thiers, Baze, etc., dragged from their beds and put in
prison, the chief squares of Paris and the parliamentary building occupied by
troops, and cheapjack placards posted early in the morning on all the walls,
proclaiming the dissolution of the National Assembly and the Council of State,
the restoration of universal suffrage, and the placing of the Seine Department
in a state of siege. In like manner he inserted a little later in the Moniteur
a false document which asserted that influential parliamentarians had grouped
themselves around him and formed a state consulta. 
The rump parliament, assembled in the mairie building of the Tenth
Arrondissement and consisting mainly of Legitimists and Orleanists, votes the
deposition of Bonaparte amid repeated cries of "Long live the Republic,"
unfailingly harangues the gaping crowds before the building, and is finally led
off in the custody of African sharpshooters, first to the d'Orsay barracks, and
later packed into prison vans and transported to the prisons of Mazas, Ham, and
Vincennes. Thus ended the party of Order, the Legislative Assembly, and the
February Revolution.

Before hastening to close, let us briefly summarize the latter's history:

1. First
period. From February 24 to May 4, 1848. February period.
Prologue. Universal-brotherhood swindle. 
2. Second
period. Period of constituting the republic and of the
Constituent National Assembly. 
a. May 4 to June 25,
1848. Struggle of all classes against the proletariat. Defeat of the
proletariat in the June days. 
b. June 25 to
December 10, 1848. Dictatorship of the pure bourgeois republicans.
Drafting of the constitution. Proclamation of a state of siege in Paris. The
bourgeois dictatorship set aside on December 10 by the election of Bonaparte as
President. 
c. December 20,
1848, to May 28, 1849. Struggle of the Constituent Assembly with
Bonaparte and with the party of Order in alliance with him. Passing of the
Constituent Assembly. Fall of the republican bourgeoisie. 
3. Third
period. Period of the constitutional republic and of the
Legislative National Assembly. 
a. May 28, 1849, to
June 13, 1849. Struggle of the petty bourgeoisie with the bourgeoisie
and with Bonaparte. Defeat of the petty-bourgeois democracy. 
b. June 13, 1849, to
May 31, 1850. Parliamentary dictatorship of the party of Order. It
completes its rule by abolishing universal suffrage, but loses the
parliamentary ministry. 
c. May 31, 1850, to
December 2, 1851. Struggle between the parliamentary bourgeoisie and
Bonaparte. 
(1) May 31, 1850, to
January 12, 1851. The Assembly loses the supreme command of the army. 
(2) January 12 to April
11, 1851. It is worsted in its attempts to regain the administrative power.
The party of Order loses its independent parliamentary majority. It forms a
coalition with the republicans and the Montagne. 
(3) April 11, 1851, to
October 9, 1851. Attempts at revision, fusion, prorogation. The party of
Order decomposes into its separate constituents. The breach between the
bourgeois parliament and press and the mass of the bourgeoisie becomes
definite. 
(4) October 9 to December
2, 1851. Open breach between parliament and the executive power. The
Assembly performs its dying act and succumbs, left in the lurch by its own
class, by the army, and by all the remaining classes. Passing of the
parliamentary regime and of bourgeois rule. Victory of Bonaparte. Parody of
restoration of empire. 


Chapter Five | Chapter Seven 
Contents 




==========

## VII. 









18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. VII



The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. Karl Marx 1852
VII

The social republic appeared as a phrase, as a prophecy, on the
threshold of the February Revolution. In the June days of 1848, it was
drowned in the blood of the Paris proletariat, but it haunts the
subsequent acts of the drama like a ghost. The democratic republic
announces its appearance. It is dissipated on June 13, 1849, together
with its deserting petty bourgeois, but in its flight it redoubles its
boastfulness. The parliamentary republic together with the bourgeoisie
takes possession of the entire state; it enjoys its existence to the
full, but December 2, 1851, buries it to the accompaniment of the
anguished cry of the coalesced royalists: “Long live the Republic!”


The French bourgeoisie balked at the domination of the working
proletariat; it has brought the lumpen proletariat to domination, with
the Chief of the Society of December 10 at the head. The bourgeoisie
kept France in breathless fear of the future terrors of red anarchy – 
Bonaparte discounted this future for it when, on December 4, he had the
eminent bourgeois of the Boulevard Montmartre and the Boulevard des
Italiens shot down at their windows by the drunken army of law and
order. The bourgeoisie apotheosized the sword; the sword rules it. It
destroyed the revolutionary press; its own press is destroyed. It
placed popular meetings under police surveillance; its salons are
placed under police supervision. It disbanded the democratic National
Guard, its own National Guard is disbanded. It imposed a state of
siege; a state of siege is imposed upon it. It supplanted the juries by
military commissions; its juries are supplanted by military
commissions. It subjected public education to the sway of the priests;
the priests subject it to their own education. It jailed people without
trial, it is being jailed without trial. It suppressed every stirring
in society by means of state power; every stirring in its society is
suppressed by means of state power. Out of enthusiasm for its moneybags
it rebelled against its own politicians and literary men; its
politicians and literary men are swept aside, but its moneybag is being
plundered now that its mouth has been gagged and its pen broken. The
bourgeoisie never tired of crying out to the revolution what St.
Arsenius cried out to the Christians: “Fuge, tace, quiesce!”
[“Flee, be silent, keep still!”]
Bonaparte cries to the bourgeoisie: “Fuge, tace, quiesce!"


The French bourgeoisie had long ago found the solution to Napoleon’s
dilemma: “In fifty years Europe will be republican or Cossack.” It
solved it in the “Cossack republic.” No Circe using black magic has
distorted that work of art, the bourgeois republic, into a monstrous
shape. That republic has lost nothing but the semblance of
respectability. Present-day France was already contained in the
parliamentary republic. It required only a bayonet thrust for the
bubble to burst and the monster to leap forth before our eyes.


Why did the Paris proletariat not rise in revolt after December 2?


The overthrow of the bourgeoisie had as yet been only decreed; the
decree was not carried out. Any serious insurrection of the proletariat
would at once have put new life into the bourgeoisie, reconciled it
with the army, and insured a second June defeat for the workers.


On December 4 the proletariat was incited by bourgeois and shopkeeper
to fight. On the evening of that day several legions of the National
Guard promised to appear, armed and uniformed, on the scene of battle.
For the bourgeois and the shopkeeper had learned that in one of his
decrees of December 2 Bonaparte had abolished the secret ballot and had
ordered them to put a “yes” or “no” after their names on the official
registers. The resistance of December 4 intimidated Bonaparte. During
the night he had placards posted on all the street corners of Paris
announcing the restoration of the secret ballot. The bourgeois and the
shopkeeper believed they had gained their objective. Those who failed
to appear next morning were the bourgeois and the shopkeeper.


By a coup de main the night of December 1-2 Bonaparte had robbed the
Paris proletariat of its leaders, the barricade commanders. An army
without officers, averse to fighting under the banner of the
Montagnards because of the memories of June, 1848 and 1849, and May,
1850, it left to its vanguard, the secret societies, the task of saving
the insurrectionary honor of Paris, which the bourgeoisie had
surrendered to the military so unresistingly that, subsequently,
Bonaparte could disarm the National Guard with the sneering motive of
his fear that its weapons would be turned against it by the anarchists!


"This is the complete and final triumph of socialism!” Thus Guizot
characterized December 2. But if the overthrow of the parliamentary
republic contains within itself the germ of the triumph of the
proletarian revolution, its immediate and obvious result was
Bonaparte’s victory over parliament, of the executive power over the
legislative power, of force without phrases over the force of phrases.
In parliament the nation made its general will the law; that is, it
made the law of the ruling class its general will. It renounces all
will of its own before the executive power and submits itself to the
superior command of an alien, of authority. The executive power, in
contrast to the legislative one, expresses the heteronomy of a nation
in contrast to its autonomy. France therefore seems to have escaped the
despotism of a class only to fall back under the despotism of an
individual, and what is more, under the authority of an individual
without authority. The struggle seems to be settled in such a way that
all classes, equally powerless and equally mute, fall on their knees
before the rifle butt.



But the revolution is thoroughgoing. It is still traveling through
purgatory. It does its work methodically. By December 2, 1851, it had
completed half of its preparatory work; now it is completing the other
half. It first completed the parliamentary power in order to be able to
overthrow it. Now that it has achieved this, it completes the executive
power, reduces it to its purest expression, isolates it, sets it up
against itself as the sole target, in order to concentrate all its
forces of destruction against it. And when it has accomplished this
second half of its preliminary work, Europe will leap from its seat and
exult: Well burrowed, old mole!
[paraphrase from Shakespeare’s
Hamlet, Act 1, Scene 5: “Well said, old mole!”, also cited by Hegel in his Philosophy of History]


The executive power with its enormous bureaucratic and military
organization, with its wide-ranging and ingenious state machinery, with
a host of officials numbering half a million, besides an army of
another half million – this terrifying parasitic body which enmeshes the
body of French society and chokes all its pores sprang up in the time
of the absolute monarchy, with the decay of the feudal system which it
had helped to hasten. The seignorial privileges of the landowners and
towns became transformed into so many attributes of the state power,
the feudal dignitaries into paid officials, and the motley patterns of
conflicting medieval plenary powers into the regulated plan of a state
authority whose work is divided and centralized as in a factory.


The first French Revolution, with its task of breaking all separate
local, territorial, urban, and provincial powers in order to create the
civil unity of the nation, was bound to develop what the monarchy had
begun, centralization, but at the same time the limits, the attributes,
and the agents of the governmental power. Napoleon completed this
state machinery. The Legitimate Monarchy and the July Monarchy added
nothing to it but a greater division of labor, increasing at the same
rate as the division of labor inside the bourgeois society created new
groups of interests, and therefore new material for the state
administration. Every common interest was immediately severed from the
society, countered by a higher, general interest, snatched from the
activities of society’s members themselves and made an object of
government activity – from a bridge, a schoolhouse, and the communal
property of a village community, to the railroads, the national wealth,
and the national University of France. Finally the parliamentary
republic, in its struggle against the revolution, found itself
compelled to strengthen the means and the centralization of
governmental power with repressive measures. All revolutions perfected
this machine instead of breaking it. The parties, which alternately
contended for domination, regarded the possession of this huge state
structure as the chief spoils of the victor.


But under the absolute monarchy, during the first Revolution, and under
Napoleon the bureaucracy was only the means of preparing the class rule
of the bourgeoisie. Under the Restoration, under Louis Philippe, under
the parliamentary republic, it was the instrument of the ruling class,
however much it strove for power of its own.


Only under the second Bonaparte does the state seem to have made itself
completely independent. The state machinery has so strengthened itself
vis-à-vis civil society that the Chief of the Society of December 10
suffices for its head – an adventurer dropped in from abroad, raised
on the shoulders of a drunken soldiery which he bought with whisky and
sausages and to which he has to keep throwing more sausages. Hence the
low-spirited despair, the feeling of monstrous humiliation and
degradation that oppresses the breast of France and makes her gasp. She
feels dishonored.


And yet the state power is not suspended in the air. Bonaparte
represented a class, and the most numerous class of French society at
that, the small-holding peasants.


Just as the Bourbons were the dynasty of the big landed property and
the Orleans the dynasty of money, so the Bonapartes are the dynasty of
the peasants, that is, the French masses. The chosen of the peasantry
is not the Bonaparte who submitted to the bourgeois parliament but the
Bonaparte who dismissed the bourgeois parliament. For three years the
towns had succeeded in falsifying the meaning of the December 10
election and in cheating the peasants out of the restoration of the
Empire. The election of December 10, 1848, has been consummated only by
the coup d’état of December 2, 1851.

 
The small-holding peasants form an enormous mass whose members live in
similar conditions but without entering into manifold relations with
each other. Their mode of production isolates them from one another
instead of bringing them into mutual intercourse. The isolation is
furthered by France’s poor means of communication and the poverty of
the peasants. Their field of production, the small holding, permits no
division of labor in its cultivation, no application of science, and
therefore no multifariousness of development, no diversity of talent,
no wealth of social relationships. Each individual peasant family is
almost self-sufficient, directly produces most of its consumer needs,
and thus acquires its means of life more through an exchange with
nature than in intercourse with society. A small holding, the peasant
and his family; beside it another small holding, another peasant and
another family. A few score of these constitute a village, and a few
score villages constitute a department. Thus the great mass of the
French nation is formed by the simple addition of homologous
magnitudes, much as potatoes in a sack form a sack of potatoes. Insofar
as millions of families live under conditions of existence that
separate their mode of life, their interests, and their culture from
those of the other classes, and put them in hostile opposition to the
latter, they form a class. Insofar as there is merely a local
interconnection among these small-holding peasants, and the identity of
their interests forms no community, no national bond, and no political
organization among them, they do not constitute a class. They are
therefore incapable of asserting their class interest in their own
name, whether through a parliament or a convention. They cannot
represent themselves, they must be represented. Their representative
must at the same time appear as their master, as an authority over
them, an unlimited governmental power which protects them from the
other classes and sends them rain and sunshine from above. The
political influence of the small-holding peasants, therefore, finds its
final expression in the executive power which subordinates society to
itself.


Historical tradition gave rise to the French peasants’ belief in the
miracle that a man named Napoleon would bring all glory back to them.
And there turned up an individual who claims to be that man because he
bears the name Napoleon, in consequence of the Code Napoleon, which
decrees: “Inquiry into paternity is forbidden.” After a twenty-year
vagabondage and a series of grotesque adventures the legend is
consummated, and the man becomes Emperor of the French. The fixed idea
of the nephew was realized because it coincided with the fixed idea of
the most numerous class of the French people.


But, it may be objected, what about the peasant uprisings in half of
France,[117] the raids of the army on the peasants, the mass incarceration
and transportation of the peasants?


Since Louis XIV, France has experienced no similar persecution of the
peasants “on account of demagogic agitation.” [118]


But let us not misunderstand. The Bonaparte dynasty represents not the
revolutionary, but the conservative peasant; not the peasant who
strikes out beyond the condition of his social existence, the small
holding, but rather one who wants to consolidate his holding; not the
countryfolk who in alliance with the towns want to overthrow the old
order through their own energies, but on the contrary those who, in
solid seclusion within this old order, want to see themselves and their
small holdings saved and favored by the ghost of the Empire. It
represents not the enlightenment but the superstition of the peasant;
not his judgment but his prejudice; not his future but his past; not
his modern Cevennes [A peasant uprising in the Cevennes mountains in 1702-1705] but his modern Vendée.[119] [A peasant-backed uprising against the French Revolution in the French province of Vendée, in 1793]


The three years’ stern rule of the parliamentary republic freed a part
of the French peasants from the Napoleonic illusion and revolutionized
them, even though superficially; but the bourgeoisie violently repulsed
them as often as they set themselves in motion. Under the parliamentary
republic the modern and the traditional consciousness of the French
peasant contended for mastery. The process took the form of an
incessant struggle between the schoolmasters and the priests. The
bourgeoisie struck down the schoolmasters. The peasants for the first
time made efforts to behave independently vis-à-vis the government.
This was shown in the continual conflict between the mayors and the
prefects. The bourgeoisie deposed the mayors. Finally, during the
period of the parliamentary republic, the peasants of different
localities rose against their own offspring, the army. The bourgeoisie
punished these peasants with sieges and executions. And this same
bourgeoisie now cries out against the stupidity of the masses, the vile
multitude that betrayed it to Bonaparte. The bourgeoisie itself has
violently strengthened the imperialism of the peasant class; it has
preserved the conditions that form the birthplaces of this species of
peasant religion. The bourgeoisie, in truth, is bound to fear the
stupidity of the masses so long as they remain conservative, and the
insight of the masses as soon as they become revolutionary.


In the uprisings after the coup d’état, a part of the French peasants
protested, arms in hand, against their own vote of December 10, 1848.
The school they had gone to since 1848 had sharpened their wits. But
they had inscribed themselves in the historical underworld; history
held them to their word, and the majority was still so implicated that
precisely in the reddest departments the peasant population voted
openly for Bonaparte. In their view, the National Assembly had hindered
his progress. He has now merely broken the fetters that the towns had
imposed on the will of the countryside. In some parts the peasants even
entertained the grotesque notion of a convention with Napoleon.


After the first Revolution had transformed the semi-feudal peasants
into freeholders, Napoleon confirmed and regulated the conditions in
which they could exploit undisturbed the soil of France which they had
only just acquired, and could slake their youthful passion for
property. But what is now ruining the French peasant is his small
holding itself, the division of the land and the soil, the property
form which Napoleon consolidated in France. It is exactly these
material conditions which made the feudal peasant a small-holding
peasant and Napoleon an emperor. Two generations sufficed to produce
the unavoidable result: progressive deterioration of agriculture and
progressive indebtedness of the agriculturist. The “Napoleonic”
property form, which at the beginning of the nineteenth century was the
condition of the emancipation and enrichment of the French countryfolk,
has developed in the course of this century into the law of their
enslavement and their pauperism. And just this law is the first of the
“Napoleonic ideas” which the second Bonaparte has to uphold. If he
still shares with the peasants the illusion that the cause of their
ruin is to be sought not in the small holdings themselves but outside
them – in the influence of secondary circumstances – his experiments
will shatter like soap bubbles when they come in contact with the
relations of production.


The economic development of small-holding property has radically
changed the peasants’ relations with the other social classes. Under
Napoleon the fragmentation of the land in the countryside supplemented
free competition and the beginning of big industry in the towns. The
peasant class was the ubiquitous protest against the recently
overthrown landed aristocracy. The roots that small-holding property
struck in French soil deprived feudalism of all nourishment. The
landmarks of this property formed the natural fortification of the
bourgeoisie against any surprise attack by its old overlords. But in
the course of the nineteenth century the urban usurer replaced the
feudal one, the mortgage replaced the feudal obligation, bourgeois
capital replaced aristocratic landed property. The peasant’s small
holding is now only the pretext that allows the capitalist to draw
profits, interest, and rent from the soil, while leaving it to the
agriculturist himself to see to it how he can extract his wages. The
mortgage debt burdening the soil of France imposes on the French
peasantry an amount of interest equal to the annual interest on the
entire British national debt. Small-holding property, in this
enslavement by capital toward which its development pushes it
unavoidably, has transformed the mass of the French nation into
troglodytes. Sixteen million peasants (including women and children)
dwell in caves, a large number of which have but one opening, others
only two and the most favored only three. Windows are to a house what
the five senses are to the head. The bourgeois order, which at the
beginning of the century set the state to stand guard over the newly
emerged small holdings and fertilized them with laurels, has become a
vampire that sucks the blood from their hearts and brains and casts
them into the alchemist’s caldron of capital. The Code Napoléon is now
nothing but the codex of distraints, of forced sales and compulsory
auctions. To the four million (including children, etc.) officially
recognized paupers, vagabonds, criminals, and prostitutes in France
must be added another five million who hover on the margin of existence
and either have their haunts in the countryside itself or, with their
rags and their children, continually desert the countryside for the
towns and the towns for the countryside. Therefore the interests of the
peasants are no longer, as under Napoleon, in accord with, but are now
in opposition to bourgeois interests, to capital. Hence they find their
natural ally and leader in the urban proletariat, whose task it is to
overthrow the bourgeois order. But “strong and unlimited government” -
and this is the second “Napoleonic idea” that the second Napoleon has
to carry out – is called upon to defend this “material order” by
force. This “material order” also serves, in all Bonaparte’s
proclamations, as the slogan against the rebellious peasants.


In addition to the mortgage which capital imposes on it, the small
holding is burdened by taxes. Taxes are the life source of the
bureaucracy, the army, the priests, and the court – in short, of the
entire apparatus of the executive power. Strong government and heavy
taxes are identical. By its very nature, small-holding property forms
a basis for an all-powerful and numberless bureaucracy. It creates a
uniform level of personal and economic relationships over the whole
extent of the country. Hence it also permits uniform action from a
supreme center on all points of this uniform mass. It destroys the
aristocratic intermediate steps between the mass of the people and the
power of the state. On all sides, therefore, it calls forth the direct
intrusion of this state power and the interposition of its immediate
organs. Finally, it produces an unemployed surplus population which can
find no place either on the land or in the towns and which perforce
reaches out for state offices as a sort of respectable alms, and
provokes the creation of additional state positions. By the new markets
which he opened with bayonets, and by the plundering of the Continent,
Napoleon repaid the compulsory taxes with interest. These taxes were a
spur to the industry of the peasant, whereas now they rob his industry
of its last resources and complete his defenselessness against
pauperism. An enormous bureaucracy, well gallooned and well fed, is the
“Napoleonic idea” which is most congenial to the second Bonaparte. How
could it be otherwise, considering that alongside the actual classes of
society, he is forced to create an artificial caste for which the
maintenance of his regime becomes a bread-and-butter question? Hence
one of his first financial operations was the raising of officials’
salaries to their old level and the creation of new sinecures.


Another “idée napoléonienne"
[Napoleonic idea] is the domination of the priests as an
instrument of government. But while at the time of their emergence the
small-holding owners, in their accord with society, in their dependence
on natural forces and submission to the authority which protected them
from above, were naturally religious, now that they are ruined by
debts, at odds with society and authority, and driven beyond their own
limitations, they have become naturally irreligious.


Heaven was quite a pleasing addition to the narrow strip of land just
won, especially as it makes the weather; it becomes an insult as soon
as it is thrust forward as a substitute for the small holding. The
priest then appears as only the anointed bloodhound of the earthly
police – another “idée napoléonienne.” The expedition against Rome will
take place in France itself next time, but in a sense opposite from
that of M. de Montalembert.[120]


Finally, the culminating “idée napoléonienne” is the ascendancy of the
army. The army was the “point d’ honneur” of the small-holding peasants,
it was they themselves transformed into heroes, defending their new
possessions against the outer world, glorifying their recently won
nationhood, plundering and revolutionizing the world. The uniform was
their own state costume; war was their poetry; the small holding,
enlarged and rounded off in imagination, was their fatherland, and
patriotism the ideal form of the sense of property. But the enemies
whom the French peasant now has to defend his property against are not
the Cossacks; they are the huissiers
[bailiffs] and the tax collectors.
The small holding no longer lies in the so-called fatherland but in the
registry of mortgages. The army itself is no longer the flower of the
peasant youth; it is the swamp flower of the peasant lumpen
proletariat. It consists largely of replacements, of substitutes, just
as the second Bonaparte is himself only a replacement, the substitute
for Napoleon. It now performs its deeds of valor by hounding the
peasants in masses like chamois, by doing gendarme duty; and if the
natural contradictions of his system chase the Chief of the Society of
December 10 across the French border, his army, after some acts of
brigandage, will reap, not laurels, but thrashings.


It is clear: All “idée napoléonienne” are ideas of the undeveloped small
holding in the freshness of its youth; they are a contradiction to the
outlived holdings. They are only the hallucinations of its death
struggle, words transformed into phrases, spirits transformed into
ghosts. But the parody of imperialism was necessary to free the mass of
the French nation from the weight of tradition and to work out in pure
form the opposition between state power and society. With the
progressive deterioration of small-holding property, the state
structure erected upon it collapses. The centralization of the state
that modern society requires arises only on the ruins of the
military-bureaucratic government machinery which was forged in
opposition to feudalism.


The condition of the French peasants provides us with the answer to the
riddle of the general elections of December 20 and 21, which bore the
second Bonaparte up Mount Sinai, not to receive laws but to give them.


Obviously the bourgeoisie now had no choice but to elect Bonaparte.
When the Puritans of the Council of Constance
[1414-18][121] complained of
the dissolute lives of the popes and wailed about the necessity for
moral reform, Cardinal Pierre d’Ailly thundered at them: “Only the
devil in person can still save the Catholic Church, and you ask for
angels.” Similarly, after the coup d’état the French bourgeoisie cried
out: Only the Chief of the Society of December 10 can still save
bourgeois society! Only theft can still save property; only perjury,
religion; bastardy, the family; disorder, order!


As the executive authority which has made itself independent, Bonaparte
feels it to be his task to safeguard “bourgeois order.” But the
strength of this bourgeois order lies in the middle class. He poses,
therefore, as the representative of the middle class and issues decrees
in this sense. Nevertheless, he is somebody solely because he has
broken the power of that middle class, and keeps on breaking it daily.
He poses, therefore, as the opponent of the political and literary
power of the middle class. But by protecting its material power he
revives its political power. Thus the cause must be kept alive, but
the effect, where it manifests itself, must be done away with. But this
cannot happen without small confusions of cause and effect, since in
their interaction both lose their distinguishing marks. New decrees
obliterate the border line. Bonaparte knows how to pose at the same
time as the representative of the peasants and of the people in
general, as a man who wants to make the lower classes happy within the
framework of bourgeois society. New decrees cheat the “true socialists”
[122]
of their governmental skill in advance. But above all, Bonaparte knows
how to pose as the Chief of the Society of December 10, as the
representative of the lumpen proletariat to which he himself, his
entourage, his government, and his army belong, and whose main object
is to benefit itself and draw California lottery prizes from the state
treasury. And he confirms himself as Chief of the Society of December
10 with decrees, without decrees, and despite decrees.


This contradictory task of the man explains the contradictions of his
government, the confused groping which tries now to win, now to
humiliate, first one class and then another, and uniformly arrays all
of them against him; whose uncertainty in practice forms a highly
comical contrast to the imperious, categorical style of the government
decrees, a style slavishly copied from the uncle.


Industry and commerce, hence the business affairs of the middle class,
are to prosper in hothouse fashion under the strong government: the
grant of innumerable railroad concessions. But the Bonapartist lumpen
proletariat is to enrich itself: those in the know play tripotage
[underhand dealings]
on the Exchange with the railroad concessions. But
no capital is forthcoming for the railroads: obligation of the Bank to
make advances on railroad shares. But at the same time the Bank is to
be exploited for personal gain and therefore must be cajoled: release
the Bank from the obligation to publish its report weekly; leonine
[from Aesop’s fable about the lion who made a contract in which one
partner got all the profits and the other all the disadvantages] agreement of the Bank with the government. The people are to be
given employment: initiation of public works. But the public works
increase the people’s tax obligations: hence reduction of taxes by an
attack on the rentiers, by conversion of the 5-percent bonds into 4½-percent. 
But the middle class must again receive a sweetening:
hence a doubling of the wine tax for the people, who buy wine retail,
and a halving of the wine tax for the middle class, which drinks it
wholesale; dissolution of the actual workers’ associations, but
promises of miraculous future associations. The peasants are to be
helped: mortgage banks which hasten their indebtedness and accelerate
the concentration of property. But these banks are to be used to make
money out of the confiscated estates of the House of Orleans; no
capitalist wants to agree to this condition, which is not in the
decree, and the mortgage bank remains a mere decree, etc., etc.


Bonaparte would like to appear as the patriarchal benefactor of all
classes. But he cannot give to one without taking from another. Just as
it was said of the Duke de Guise in the time of the Fronde that he was
the most obliging man in France because he gave all his estates to his
followers, with feudal obligations to him, so Bonaparte would like to
be the most obliging man in France and turn all the property and all
the labor of France into a personal obligation to himself. He would
like to steal all of France in order to make a present of it to France,
or rather in order to buy France anew with French money, for as the
Chief of the Society of December 10 he must buy what ought to belong to
him. And to the Institution of Purchase belong all the state
institutions, the Senate, the Council of State, the Assembly, the
Legion of Honor, the military medals, the public laundries, the public
works, the railroads, the general staff, the officers of the National
Guard, the confiscated estates of the House of Orleans. The means of
purchase is obtained by selling every place in the army and the
government machinery. But the most important feature of this process,
by which France is taken in order to give to her, are the percentages
that find their way into the pockets of the head and the members of the
Society of December 10 during the turnover. The witticism with which
Countess L., the mistress of M. de Morny, characterized the
confiscation of the Orleans estates – “It is the first vol [the word means both “flight” and “theft"] of the eagle” – is applicable to
every flight of this eagle, who is more like a raven.[123] He and his
follower; call out to one another like that Italian Carthusian
admonishing the miser who ostentatiously counted the goods on which he
could still live for years: “Tu fai conto sopra i beni, bisogna prima
far il conto sopra gli anni” [Thou countest thy goods, thou shouldst
first count thy years]. In order not to make a mistake in the years,
they count the minutes. At the court, in the ministries, at the head of
the administration and the army, a gang of blokes of whom the best that
can be said is that one does not know whence they come – these noisy,
disreputable, rapacious bohemians who crawl into gallooned coats with
the same grotesque dignity as the high dignitaries of Soulouque –
elbow their way forward. One can visualize clearly this upper stratum
of the Society of December 10 if one reflects that Veron-Crevel [A
dissolute philistine character in Balzac’s novel Cousin Bette]
is its preacher of morals and Granier de Cassagnac its thinker. When
Guizot, at the time of his ministry, turned this Granier of an obscure
newspaper into a dynastic opponent, he used to boast of him with the
quip: “C’est le roi des droles”
[He is the king of buffoons]. It
would be wrong to recall either the Regency[124] or Louis XV in connection
with Louis Bonaparte’s court and clique. For “often before France has
experienced a government of mistresses, but never before a government
of kept men.” [Quoted from Mme. de Girardin.]


Driven by the contradictory demands of his situation, and being at the
same time, like a juggler, under the necessity of keeping the public
gaze on himself, as Napoleon’s successor, by springing constant
surprises – that is to say, under the necessity of arranging a coup
d’état in miniature every day – Bonaparte throws the whole bourgeois
economy into confusion, violates everything that seemed inviolable to
the Revolution of 1848, makes some tolerant of revolution and makes
others lust for it, and produces anarchy in the name of order, while at
the same time stripping the entire state machinery of its halo,
profaning it and making it at once loathsome and ridiculous. The cult
of the Holy Tunic of Trier[125] [A Catholic relic, allegedly taken from
Christ when he was dying, preserved in the cathedral of Marx’s native
city] he duplicates in Paris in the cult of the Napoleonic
imperial mantle. But when the imperial mantle finally falls on the
shoulders of Louis Bonaparte, the bronze statue of Napoleon will come
crashing down from the top of the Vendôme Column.[126]




Contents
Marx/Engels Archive |
Contents




==========

## Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy









Economic Manuscripts: Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy



Karl Marx 1859
A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy
Preface


Source: K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1977, with some notes by  R. Rojas.



I examine the system of bourgeois economy in the following order: capital, landed property, wage-labour; the State, foreign trade, world market.
The economic conditions of existence of the three great
classes into which modern bourgeois society is divided are analysed
under the first three headings; the interconnection of the other three
headings is self-evident. The first part of the first book, dealing
with Capital, comprises the following chapters: 1. The commodity, 2.
Money or simple circulation; 3. Capital in general. The present part
consists of the first two chapters. The entire material lies before me
in the form of monographs, which were written not for publication but
for self-clarification at widely separated periods; their remoulding
into an integrated whole according to the plan I have indicated will
depend upon circumstances.


A general introduction, which I had drafted, is omitted, since on
further consideration it seems to me confusing to anticipate results
which still have to be substantiated, and the reader who really wishes
to follow me will have to decide to advance from the particular to the
general. A few brief remarks regarding the course of my study of
political economy are appropriate here.


Although I studied jurisprudence, I pursued it as a subject
subordinated to philosophy and history. In the year 1842-43, as editor
of the Rheinische Zeitung, I first found myself in the embarrassing
position of having to discuss what is known as material interests. The
deliberations of the Rhenish Landtag on forest thefts and the division
of landed property; the official polemic started by Herr von Schaper,
then Oberprasident of the Rhine Province, against the Rheinische
Zeitung about the condition of the Moselle peasantry, and finally the
debates on free trade and protective tariffs caused me in the first
instance to turn my attention to economic questions. On the other
hand, at that time when good intentions “to push forward” often took
the place of factual knowledge, an echo of French socialism and
communism, slightly tinged by philosophy, was noticeable in the
Rheinische Zeitung. I objected to this dilettantism, but at the same
time frankly admitted in a controversy with the Allgemeine Augsburger
Zeitung that my previous studies did not allow me to express any
opinion on the content of the French theories. When the publishers of
the Rheinische Zeitung conceived the illusion that by a more
compliant policy on the part of the paper it might be possible to
secure the abrogation of the death sentence passed upon it, I eagerly
grasped the opportunity to withdraw from the public stage to my study.



The first work which I undertook to dispel the doubts assailing me was
a critical re-examination of the Hegelian philosophy of law; the
introduction to this work being published in the Deutsch-Franzosische
Jahrbucher issued in Paris in 1844. My inquiry led me to the
conclusion that neither legal relations nor political forms could be
comprehended whether by themselves or on the basis of a so-called
general development of the human mind, but that on the contrary they
originate in the material conditions of life, the totality of which
Hegel, following the example of English and French thinkers of the
eighteenth century, embraces within the term “civil society”; that the
anatomy of this civil society, however, has to be sought in political
economy. The study of this, which I began in Paris, I continued in
Brussels, where I moved owing to an expulsion order issued by M.
Guizot. The general conclusion at which I arrived and which, once
reached, became the guiding principle of my studies can be summarised
as follows.  

In the social production of their existence, men inevitably
enter into definite relations, which are independent of their will,
namely relations of production appropriate to a given stage in the
development of their material forces of production. The totality of
these relations of production constitutes the economic structure of
society, the real foundation, on which arises a legal and political
superstructure and to which correspond definite forms of social
consciousness. The mode of production of material life conditions the
general process of social, political and intellectual life. It is not
the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but their
social existence that determines their consciousness. At a certain
stage of development, the material productive forces of society come
into conflict with the existing relations of production or – this
merely expresses the same thing in legal terms – with the property
relations within the framework of which they have operated hitherto. 
From forms of development of the productive forces these relations turn
into their fetters. Then begins an era of social revolution. The
changes in the economic foundation lead sooner or later to the
transformation of the whole immense superstructure.  

In studying such transformations it is always necessary to distinguish between the
material transformation of the economic conditions of production, which
can be determined with the precision of natural science, and the legal,
political, religious, artistic or philosophic – in short, ideological
forms in which men become conscious of this conflict and fight it out.
Just as one does not judge an individual by what he thinks about
himself, so one cannot judge such a period of transformation by its
consciousness, but, on the contrary, this consciousness must be
explained from the contradictions of material life, from the conflict
existing between the social forces of production and the relations of
production. No social order is ever destroyed before all the
productive forces for which it is sufficient have been developed, and
new superior relations of production never replace older ones before
the material conditions for their existence have matured within the
framework of the old society.  

Mankind thus inevitably sets itself only
such tasks as it is able to solve, since closer examination will always
show that the problem itself arises only when the material conditions
for its solution are already present or at least in the course of
formation. In broad outline, the Asiatic, ancient,[A] feudal and modern
bourgeois modes of production may be designated as epochs marking
progress in the economic development of society. The bourgeois mode of
production is the last antagonistic form of the social process of
production – antagonistic not in the sense of individual antagonism
but of an antagonism that emanates from the individuals' social
conditions of existence – but the productive forces developing within
bourgeois society create also the material conditions for a solution of
this antagonism. The prehistory of human society accordingly closes
with this social formation.


Frederick Engels, with whom I maintained a constant exchange of ideas
by correspondence since the publication of his brilliant essay on the
critique of economic categories (printed in the Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher, arrived by another road (compare his Lage der arbeitenden
Klasse in England) at the same result as I, and when in the spring of
1845 he too came to live in Brussels, we decided to set forth together
our conception as opposed to the ideological one of German philosophy,
in fact to settle accounts with our former philosophical conscience. 

The intention was carried out in the form of a critique of
post-Hegelian philosophy. The manuscript [The German Ideology], two
large octavo volumes, had long ago reached the publishers in Westphalia
when we were informed that owing to changed circumstances it could not
be printed. We abandoned the manuscript to the gnawing criticism of
the mice all the more willingly since we had achieved our main purpose
– self-clarification. Of the scattered works in which at that time we
presented one or another aspect of our views to the public, I shall
mention only the Manifesto of the Communist Party, jointly 
written by Engels and myself, and a Discours sur le libre echange, which I
myself published. 
The salient points of our conception were first outlined in an academic, although polemical, form in my Misere de la philosophie..., 
this book which was aimed at Proudhon appeared in
1847. The publication of an essay on Wage-Labour [Wage-Labor and 
Capital] written in German in which I combined the lectures I had held
on this subject at the German Workers' Association in Brussels, was
interrupted by the February Revolution and my forcible removal from
Belgium in consequence.


The publication of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in 1848 and 1849 and
subsequent events cut short my economic studies, which I could only
resume in London in 1850. The enormous amount of material relating to
the history of political economy assembled in the British Museum, the
fact that London is a convenient vantage point for the observation of
bourgeois society, and finally the new stage of development which this
society seemed to have entered with the discovery of gold in California
and Australia, induced me to start again from the very beginning and to
work carefully through the new material. These studies led partly of
their own accord to apparently quite remote subjects on which I had to
spend a certain amount of time. But it was in particular the
imperative necessity of earning my living which reduced the time at my
disposal. My collaboration, continued now for eight years, with the
New York Tribune, the leading Anglo-American newspaper, necessitated
an excessive fragmentation of my studies, for I wrote only
exceptionally newspaper correspondence in the strict sense. Since a
considerable part of my contributions consisted of articles dealing
with important economic events in Britain and on the continent, I was
compelled to become conversant with practical detail which, strictly
speaking, lie outside the sphere of political economy.


This sketch of the course of my studies in the domain of political
economy is intended merely to show that my views – no matter how they
may be judged and how little they conform to the interested prejudices
of the ruling classes – are the outcome of conscientious research
carried on over many years. At the entrance to science, as at the
entrance to hell, the demand must be made:


Qui si convien lasciare ogni sospetto
 Ogni vilta convien che qui sia morta.


 [From Dante, Divina Commedia:
 Here must all distrust be left;
 All cowardice must here be dead.]

Karl Marx
London, January 1859



A. As a second footnote to the Communist Manifesto, Engels wrote in 1888: 


In 1847, the pre-history of society, the social organization existing previous to recorded history, [was] all but unknown. Since then, August von Haxthausen (1792-1866) discovered common ownership of land in Russia, Georg Ludwig von Maurer proved it to be the social foundation from which all Teutonic races started in history, and, by and by, village communities were found to be, or to have been, the primitive form of society everywhere from India to Ireland. The inner organization of this primitive communistic society was laid bare, in its typical form, by Lewis Henry Morgan's (1818-1861) crowning discovery of the true nature of the gens and its relation to the tribe. With the dissolution of the primeval communities, society begins to be differentiated into separate and finally antagonistic classes. I have attempted to retrace this dissolution in The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State, second edition, Stuttgart, 1886. 


 
Thus, as the science of understanding pre-history progressed (pre-history being that time before written records of human civilization exist), Marx & Engels changed their understanding and descriptions accordingly. In the above text, Marx mentions  “Asiatic” modes of production. In the idea of an Asiatic mode of production, Marx and Engels were following Hegel’s schema, see: The Oriental Realm). They later dropped the idea of a distinctive Asiatic mode of production, and kept four basic forms: tribal, ancient, feudal, and capitalist.

 

[See also: the Abstracted version]

Next:  I. The Commodity

Table of Contents  |
Marx Engels Archive





==========

## Wages, Price and Profit










Economic Manuscripts: Value, Price and Profit, Karl Marx 1865




Value, Price and Profit
Speech by Marx to the First International Working Men's Association, June 1865


Source: Marx, Karl. Value, Price and Profit. New York: International Co., Inc, 1969;
Written: between end of May and June 27, 1865;
First published: 1898;
 Edited: by Eleanor Marx Aveling;
HTML Mark-up: Mike Ballard, 1995;
Proofed: and corrected by Brandon Poole, 2009.

Introduction


    Preface by Edward Aveling

    Preliminary
 1. Production and Wages
 2. Production, Wages, Profits
 3. Wages and Currency
 4. Supply and Demand
 5. Wages and Prices
 6. Value and Labour
 7. Labour Power
 8. Production of Surplus Value
 9. Value of Labour
10. Profit is made by Selling a Commodity at its Value
11. The different Parts into which Surplus Value is Decomposed
12. The General Relation of Profits, Wages, and Prices
13. Main cases of Attempts at Raising Wages or Resisting their Fall
14. The Struggle between Capital and Labour, and its Results

 


Study Guide |
Notes by Marx
Marx and Engels on Political Economy |
Marx Engels Archive





==========

## [Preliminary]










Economic Manuscripts: VALUE, PRICE AND PROFIT


Value, Price and Profit

Preliminary
CITIZENS,
Before entering into the subject-matter, allow me to make a few
preliminary remarks. There reigns now on the Continent a real epidemic of
strikes, and a general clamour for a rise of wages. The question will turn up
at our Congress. You, as the head of the International Association, ought to
have settled convictions upon this paramount question. For my own part, I
considered it therefore my duty to enter fully into the matter, even at the
peril of putting your patience to a severe test.
Another preliminary remark I have to make in regard to Citizen Weston. He
has not only proposed to you, but has publicly defended, in the interest of the
working class, as he thinks, opinions he knows to be most unpopular with the
working class. Such an exhibition of moral courage all of us must highly
honour. I hope that, despite the unvarnished style of my paper, at its
conclusion he will find me agreeing with what appears to me the just idea lying
at the bottom of his theses, which, however, in their present form, I cannot
but consider theoretically false and practically dangerous.
I shall now at once proceed to the business before us.

I. Production and Wages
Citizen Weston's argument rested, in fact, upon two premises:
firstly, the amount of national production is a fixed thing, a constant
quantity or magnitude, as the mathematicians would say; secondly, that the
amount of real wages, that is to say, of wages as measured by the quantity of
the commodities they can buy, is a fixed amount, a constant magnitude.
Now, his first assertion is evidently erroneous. Year after year you will
find that the value and mass of production increase, that the productive powers
of the national labour increase, and that the amount of money necessary to
circulate this increasing production continuously changes. What is true at the
end of the year, and for different years compared with each other, is true for
every average day of the year. The amount or magnitude of national production
changes continuously. It is not a constant but a variable magnitude, and apart
from changes in population it must be so, because of the continuous change in
the accumulation of capital and the productive powers of labour. It is
perfectly true that if a rise in the general rate of wages should take place
today, that rise, whatever its ulterior effects might be, would, by itself, not
immediately change the amount of production. It would, in the first instance,
proceed from the existing state of things. But if before the rise of wages the
national production was variable, and not fixed, it will continue to be
variable and not fixed after the rise of wages.
But suppose the amount of national production to be constant instead of
variable. Even then, what our friend Weston considers a logical conclusion
would still remain a gratuitous assertion. If I have a given number, say eight,
the absolute limits of this number do not prevent its parts from changing their
relative limits. If profits were six and wages two, wages might increase to six
and profits decrease to two, and still the total amount remain eight. The fixed
amount of production would by no means prove the fixed amount of wages. How
then does our friend Weston prove this fixity? By asserting it.
But even conceding him his assertion, it would cut both ways, while he
presses it only in one direction. If the amount of wages is a constant
magnitude, then it can be neither increased nor diminished. If then, in
enforcing a temporary rise of wages, the working men act foolishly, the
capitalists, in enforcing a temporary fall of wages, would act not less
foolishly. Our friend Weston does not deny that, under certain circumstances,
the working men can enforce a rise of wages, but their amount being
naturally fixed, there must follow a reaction. On the other hand, he knows also
that the capitalists can enforce a fall of wages, and, indeed,
continuously try to enforce it. According to the principle of the constancy of
wages, a reaction ought to follow in this case not less than in the former. The
working men, therefore, reacting against the attempt at, or the act of,
lowering wages, would act rightly. They would, therefore, act rightly in
enforcing a rise of wages, because every reaction against the
lowering of wages is an action for raising wages. According to Citizen
Weston's own principle of the constancy of wages, the working men
ought, therefore, under certain circumstances, to combine and struggle for a
rise of wages. If he denies this conclusion, he must give up the premise from
which it flows. He must not say that the amount of wages is a constant
quantity, but that, although it cannot and must not rise, it can
and must fall, whenever capital pleases to lower it. If the capitalist
pleases to feed you upon potatoes instead of upon meat, and upon oats instead
of upon wheat, you must accept his will as a law of political economy, and
submit to it. If in one country the rate of wages is higher than in another, in
the United States, for example, than in England, you must explain this
difference in the rate of wages by a difference between the will of the
American capitalist and the will of the English capitalist, a method which
would certainly very much simplify, not only the study of economic phenomena,
but of all other phenomena.
But even then, we might ask, why the will of the American
capitalist differs from the will of the English capitalist? And to answer the
question you must go beyond the domain of will. A person may tell me
that God wills one thing in France, and another thing in England. If I summon
him to explain this duality of will, he might have the brass to answer me that
God wills to have one will in France and another will in England. But our
friend Weston is certainly the last man to make an argument of such a complete
negation of all reasoning.
The will of the capitalist is certainly to take as much as
possible. What we have to do is not to talk about his will, but to
enquire into his power, the limits of that power, and the
character of those limits.


II. Production, Wages, Profits
The address Citizen Weston read to us might have been compressed
into a nutshell.
All his reasoning amounted to this: If the working class forces the
capitalist class to pay five shillings instead of four shillings in the shape
of money wages, the capitalist will return in the shape of commodities four
shillings' worth instead of five shillings' worth. The working class would have
to pay five shillings for what, before the rise of wages, they bought with four
shillings. But why is this the case? Why does the capitalist only return four
shillings' worth for five shillings? Because the amount of wages is fixed. By
why is it fixed at four shillings' worth of commodities? Why not at three, or
two, or any other sum? If the limit of the amount of wages is settled by an
economical law, independent alike of the will of the capitalist and the will of
the working man, the first thing Citizen Weston had to do was to state that law
and prove it. He ought then, moreover, to have proved that the amount of wages
actually paid at every given moment always corresponds exactly to the necessary
amount of wages, and never deviates from it. If, on the other hand, the given
limit of the amount of wages is founded on the mere will of the
capitalist, or the limits of his avarice, it is an arbitrary limit. There is
nothing necessary in it. It may be changed by the will of the
capitalist, and may, therefore, be changed against his will.
Citizen Weston illustrated his theory by telling you that a bowl contains a
certain quantity of soup, to be eaten by a certain number of persons, an
increase in the broadness of the spoons would produce no increase in the amount
of soup. He must allow me to find this illustration rather spoony. It reminded
me somewhat of the simile employed by Menenius Agrippa. When the Roman
plebeians struck against the Roman patricians, the patrician Agrippa told them
that the patrician belly fed the plebeian members of the body politic. Agrippa
failed to show that you feed the members of one man by filling the belly of
another. Citizen Weston, on his part, has forgotten that the bowl from which
the workmen eat is filled with the whole produce of national labour, and that
what prevents them fetching more out of it is neither the narrowness of the
bowl nor the scantiness of its contents, but only the smallness of their
spoons.
By what contrivance is the capitalist enabled to return four shillings'
worth for five shillings? By raising the price of the commodity he sells. Now,
does a rise and more generally a change in the prices of commodities, do the
prices of commodities themselves, depend on the mere will of the capitalist? Or
are, on the contrary, certain circumstances wanted to give effect to that will?
If not, the ups and downs, the incessant fluctuations of market prices, become
an insoluble riddle.
As we suppose that no change whatever has taken place either in the
productive powers of labour, or in the amount of capital and labour employed,
or in the value of the money wherein the values of products are estimated, but
only a change in the rate of wages, how could that rise of
wages affect the prices of commodities? Only by affecting the
actual proportion between the demand for, and the supply of these
commodities.
It is perfectly true that, considered as a whole, the working class spends,
and must spend, its income upon necessaries. A general rise in the
rate of wages would, therefore, produce a rise in the demand for, and
consequently in the market prices of necessaries. The capitalists who
produce these necessaries would be compensated for the risen wages by the
rising market prices of their commodities. But how with the other capitalists
who do not produce necessaries? And you must not fancy them a small
body. If you consider that two-thirds of the national produce are consumed by
one-fifth of the population — a member of the House of Commons stated it
recently to be but one-seventh of the population — you will understand
what an immense proportion of the national produce must be produced in the
shape of luxuries, or be exchanged for luxuries, and what an immense
amount of the necessaries themselves must be wasted upon flunkeys, horses,
cats, and so forth, a waste we know from experience to become always much
limited with the rising prices of necessaries.
Well, what would be the position of those capitalists who do not
produce necessaries? For the fall in the rate of profit, consequent
upon the general rise of wages, they could not compensate themselves by a
rise in the price of their commodities, because the demand for those
commodities would not have increased. Their income would have decreased, and
from this decreased income they would have to pay more for the same amount of
higher-priced necessaries. But this would not be all. As their income had
diminished they would have less to spend upon luxuries, and therefore their
mutual demand for their respective commodities would diminish. Consequent upon
this diminished demand the prices of their commodities would fall. In these
branches of industry, therefore, the rate of profit would fall, not
only in simple proportion to the general rise in the rate of wages, but in the
compound ratio of the general rise of wages, the rise in the prices of
necessaries, and the fall in the prices of luxuries.
What would be the consequence of this difference in the rates of
profit for capitals employed in the different branches of industry? Why,
the consequence that generally obtains whenever, from whatever reason, the
average rate of profit comes to differ in different spheres of
production. Capital and labour would be transferred from the less remunerative
to the more remunerative branches; and this process of transfer would go on
until the supply in the one department of industry would have risen
proportionately to the increased demand, and would have sunk in the other
departments according to the decreased demand. This change effected, the
general rate of profit would again be equalized in the different
branches. As the whole derangement originally arose from a mere change in the
proportion of the demand for, and supply of, different commodities, the cause
ceasing, the effect would cease, and PRICES would return to their former level
and equilibrium. Instead of being limited to some branches of industry, the
fall in the rate of profit consequent upon the rise of wages would have
become general. According to our supposition, there would have taken place no
change in the productive powers of labour, nor in the aggregate amount of
production, but that given amount of production would have changed its
form. A greater part of the produce would exist in the shape of
necessaries, a lesser part in the shape of luxuries, or what comes to the same,
a lesser part would be exchanged for foreign luxuries, and be consumed in its
original form, or, what again comes to the same, a greater part of the native
produce would be exchanged for foreign necessaries instead of for luxuries. The
general rise in the rate of wages would, therefore, after a temporary
disturbance of market prices, only result in a general fall of the rate of
profit without any permanent change in the prices of commodities. If I am told
that in the previous argument I assume the whole surplus wages to be spent upon
necessaries, I answer that I have made the supposition most advantageous to the
opinion of Citizen Weston. If the surplus wages were spent upon articles
formerly not entering into the consumption of the working men, the real
increase of their purchasing power would need no proof. Being, however, only
derived from an advance of wages, that increase of their purchasing power must
exactly correspond to the decrease of the purchasing power of the capitalists.
The aggregate demand for commodities would, therefore, not
increase, but the constituent parts of that demand would
change. The increasing demand on the one side would be counterbalanced
by the decreasing demand on the other side. Thus the aggregate demand remaining
stationary, no change whatever could take place in the market prices of
commodities. You arrive, therefore, at this dilemma: Either the surplus wages
are equally spent upon all articles of consumption — then the expansion
of demand on the part of the working class must be compensated by the
contraction of demand on the part of the capitalist class — or the
surplus wages are only spent upon some articles whose market prices will
temporarily rise. The consequent rise in the rate of profit in some, and the
consequent fall in the rate of profit in other branches of industry will
produce a change in the distribution of capital and labour, going on until the
supply is brought up to the increased demand in the one department of industry,
and brought down to the diminished demand in the other departments of industry.
On the one supposition there will occur no change in the prices of commodities.
On the other supposition, after some fluctuations of market prices, the
exchangeable values of commodities will subside to the former level. On both
suppositions the general rise in the rate of wages will ultimately result in
nothing else but a general fall in the rate of profit.
To stir up your powers of imagination Citizen Weston requested you to think
of the difficulties which a general rise of English agricultural wages from
nine shillings to eighteen shillings would produce. Think, he exclaimed, of the
immense rise in the demand for necessaries, and the consequent fearful rise in
their prices! Now, all of you know that the average wages of the American
agricultural labourer amount to more than double that of the English
agricultural labourer, although the prices of agricultural produce are lower in
the United States than in the United Kingdom, although the general relations of
capital and labour obtain in the United States the same as in England, and
although the annual amount of production is much smaller in the United States
than in England. Why, then, does our friend ring this alarm bell? Simply to
shift the real question before us. A sudden rise of wages from nine shillings
to eighteen shillings would be a sudden rise to the amount of 100 percent. Now,
we are not at all discussing the question whether the general rate of wages in
England could be suddenly increased by 100 percent. We have nothing at all to
do with the magnitude of the rise, which in every practical instance
must depend on, and be suited to, given circumstances. We have only to inquire
how a general rise in the rate of wages, even if restricted to one percent,
will act.
Dismissing friend Weston's fancy rise of 100 percent, I propose calling your
attention to the real rise of wages that took place in Great Britain from 1849
to 1859.
You are all aware of the Ten Hours Bill, or rather Ten-and-a-half Hours
Bill, introduced since 1848. This was one of the greatest economical changes we
have witnessed. It was a sudden and compulsory rise of wages, not in some local
trades, but in the leading industrial branches by which England sways the
markets of the world. It was a rise of wages under circumstances singularly
unpropitious. Dr. Ure, Professor Senior, and all the other official economical
mouthpieces of the middle class, [The aristocracy was the
upper class of Great Britain, while the capitalists composed what was known to
Marx as the middle class] proved, and I must say upon much
stronger grounds than those of our friend Weston, that it would sound the
death-knell of English industry. They proved that it not only amounted to a
simple rise of wages, but to a rise of wages initiated by, and based upon, a
diminution of the quantity of labour employed. They asserted that the twelfth
hour you wanted to take from the capitalist was exactly the only hour from
which he derived his profit. They threatened a decrease of accumulation, rise
of prices, loss of markets, stinting of production, consequent reaction upon
wages, ultimate ruin. In fact, they declared Maximillian Robespierre's Maximum
Laws[1] to be a small affair
compared to it; and they were right in a certain sense. Well, what was the
result? A rise in the money wages of the factory operatives, despite the
curtailing of the working day, a great increase in the number of factory hands
employed, a continuous fall in the prices of their products, a marvellous
development in the productive powers of their labour, an unheard-of progressive
expansion of the markets for their commodities. In Manchester, at the meeting,
in 1860, of the Society for the Advancement of Science, I myself heard Mr.
Newman confess that he, Dr. Ure, Senior, and all other official propounders of
economical science had been wrong, while the instinct of the people had been
right. I mention Mr. W. Newman, not Professor Francis Newman, because he
occupies an eminent position in economical science, as the contributor to, and
editor of, Mr. Thomas Tooke's History Of Prices, that magnificent work
which traces the history of prices from 1793 to 1856. If our friend Weston's
fixed idea of a fixed amount of wages, a fixed amount of production, a fixed
degree of the productive power of labour, a fixed and permanent will of the
capitalist, and all his other fixedness and finality were correct, Professor
Senior's woeful forebodings would been right, and Robert Owen[2], who already in 1816 proclaimed a
general limitation of the working day the first preparatory step to the
emancipation of the working class, and actually in the teeth of the general
prejudice inaugurated it on his own hook in his cotton factory at New Lanark,
would have been wrong.
In the very same period during which the introduction of the Ten Hours Bill,
and the rise of wages consequent upon it, occurred, there took place in Great
Britain, for reasons which it would be out of place to enumerate here, a
general rise in agricultural wages. Although it is not required for my
immediate purpose, in order not to mislead you, I shall make some preliminary
remarks.
If a man got two shillings weekly wages, and if his wages rose to four
shillings, the rate of wages would have risen by 100 per cent. This
would seem a very magnificent thing if expressed as a rise in the rate of
wages, although the actual amount of wages, four shillings
weekly, would still remain a wretchedly small, a starvation pittance. You must
not, therefore, allow yourselves to be carried away by the high sounding per
cents in rate of wages. You must always ask: What was the
original amount?
Moreover, you will understand, that if there were ten men receiving each 2s.
per week, five men receiving each 5s., and five men receiving 11s. weekly, the
twenty men together would receive 100s., or £5, weekly. If then a rise,
say by 20 per cent, upon the aggregate sum of their weekly wages took
place, there would be an advance from £5 to £6. Taking the average,
we might say that the general rate of wages had risen by 20 per cent,
although, in fact, the wages of the ten men had remained stationary, the wages
of the one lot of five men had risen from 5s. to 6s. only, and the wages of the
other lot of five from 55s. to 70s.[3] One half of the men would not have improved at all
their position, one quarter would have improved it in an imperceptible degree,
and only one quarter would have bettered it really. Still, reckoning by the
average, the total amount of the wages of those twenty men would have
increased by 25 per cent, and as far as the aggregate capital that employs
them, and the prices of the commodities they produce, are concerned, it would
be exactly the same as if all of them had equally shared in the average rise of
wages. In the case of agricultural labour, the standard wages being very
different in the different counties of England and Scotland, the rise affected
them very unequally.
Lastly, during the period when that rise of wages took place counteracting
influences were at work such as the new taxes consequent upon the Russian war,
the extensive demolition of the dwelling-houses of the agricultural labourers,
and so forth. Having premised so much, I proceed to state that from 1849 to
1859 there took place a rise of about 40 percent in the average rate
of the agricultural wages of Great Britain. I could give you ample details in
proof of my assertion, but for the present purpose think it sufficient to refer
you to the conscientious and critical paper read in 1860 by the late Mr. John
C. Morton at the London Society of Arts on “The Forces used in
Agriculture.” Mr. Morton gives the returns, from bills and other
authentic documents, which he had collected from about one hundred farmers,
residing in twelve Scotch and thirty-five English counties.
According to our friend Weston's opinion, and taken together with the
simultaneous rise in the wages of the factory operatives, there ought to have
occurred a tremendous rise in the prices of agricultural produce during the
period 1849 to 1859. But what is the fact? Despite the Russian war, and the
consecutive unfavourable harvests from 1854 to 1856, the average price of
wheat, which is the leading agricultural produce of England, fell from about 3
Pounds per quarter for the years 1838 to 1848 to about 2 Pounds 10 Shillings
per quarter for the years 1849 to 1859. This constitutes a fall in the price of
wheat of more than 16 percent simultaneously with an average rise of
agricultural wages of 40 percent. During the same period, if we compare its end
with its beginning, 1859 with 1849, there was a decrease of official pauperism
from 934,419 to 860,470, the difference being 73,949; a very small decrease, I
grant, and which in the following years was again lost, but still a
decrease.
It might be said that, consequent upon the abolition of the Corn Laws, the
import of foreign corn was more than doubled during the period from 1849 to
1859, as compared with the period from 1838 to 1848. And what of that? From
Citizen Weston's standpoint one would have expected that this sudden, immense,
and continuously increasing demand upon foreign markets must have sent up the
prices of agricultural produce there to a frightful height, the effect of
increased demand remaining the same, whether it comes from without or from
within. What was the fact? Apart from some years of failing harvests, during
all that period the ruinous fall in the price of corn formed a standing theme
of declamation in France; the Americans were again and again compelled to burn
their surplus produce; and Russia, if we are to believe Mr. Urquhart, prompted
the Civil War in the United States because her agricultural exports were
crippled by the Yankee competition in the markets of Europe.
Reduced to its abstract form, Citizen Weston's argument would come
to this: Every rise in demand occurs always on the basis of a given amount of
production. It can, therefore, never increase the supply of the articles
demanded, but can only enhance their money prices. Now the most
common observation shows than an increased demand will, in some instances,
leave the market prices of commodities altogether unchanged, and will, in other
instances, cause a temporary rise of market prices followed by an increased
supply, followed by a reduction of the prices to their original level, and in
many cases below their original level. Whether the rise of demand
springs from surplus wages, or from any other cause, does not at all change the
conditions of the problem. From Citizen Weston's standpoint the general
phenomenon was as difficult to explain as the phenomenon occurring under the
exceptional circumstances of a rise of wages. His argument had, therefore, no
peculiar bearing whatever upon the subject we treat. It only expressed his
perplexity at accounting for the laws by which an increase of demand produces
an increase of supply, instead of an ultimate rise of market prices.


III. Wages and Currency
On the second day of the debate our friend Weston clothed his
old assertions in new forms. He said: Consequent upon a general rise in money
wages, more currency will be wanted to pay the same wages. The currency being
fixed, how can you pay with this fixed currency increased money wages?
First the difficulty arose from the fixed amount of commodities accruing to the
working man despite his increase of money wages; now it arises from the
increased money wages, despite the fixed amount of commodities. Of course, if
you reject his original dogma, his secondary grievance will disappear. However,
I shall show that this currency question has nothing at all to do with the
subject before us.
In your country the mechanism of payments is much more perfected than in any
other country of Europe. Thanks to the extent and concentration of the banking
system, much less currency is wanted to circulate the same amount of values,
and to transact the same or a greater amount of business. For example, as far
as wages are concerned, the English factory operative pays his wages weekly to
the shopkeeper, who sends them weekly to the banker, who returns them weekly to
the manufacturer, who again pays them away to his working men, and so forth. By
this contrivance the yearly wages of an operative, say of 52 Pounds, may be
paid by one single Sovereign turning round every week in the same circle. Even
in England the mechanism is less perfect than in Scotland, and is not
everywhere equally perfect; and therefore we find, for example, that in some
agricultural districts, much more currency is wanted to circulate a much
smaller amount of values.
If you cross the Channel you will find that the money wages are
much lower than in England, but that they are circulated in Germany, Italy,
Switzerland, and France by a much larger amount of currency. The same
Sovereign will not be so quickly intercepted by the banker or returned to the
industrial capitalist; and, therefore, instead of one Sovereign circulating 52
Pounds yearly, you want, perhaps, three Sovereigns to circulate yearly wages to
the amount of 25 Pounds. Thus, by comparing continental countries with England,
you will see at once that low money wages may require a much larger currency
for their circulation than high money wages, and that this is, in fact, a
merely technical point, quite foreign to our subject.
According to the best calculations I know, the yearly income of the working
class of this country may be estimated at 250,000,000 Pounds. This immense sum
is circulated by about three million Pounds. Suppose a rise of wages of fifty
per cent to take place. Then, instead of three millions of currency, four and a
half millions would be wanted. As a very considerable part of the working-man's
daily expenses is laid out in silver and copper, that is to say, in mere
tokens, whose relative value to gold is arbitrarily fixed by law, like that of
inconvertible money paper, a rise of money wages by fifty per cent would, in
the extreme case, require and additional circulation of Sovereigns, say to the
amount of one million. One million, now dormant, in the shape of bullion or
coin, in the cellars of the Bank of England, or of private bankers would
circulate. But even the trifling expense resulting from the additional minting
or the additional wear and tear of that million might be spared, and would
actually be spared, if any friction should arise from the want of the
additional currency. All of you know that the currency of this country is
divided into two great departments. One sort, supplied by bank-notes of
different descriptions, is used in the transactions between dealers and
dealers, and the larger payments from consumers to dealers, while another sort
of currency, metallic coin, circulates in the retail trade. Although distinct,
these two sorts of currency intermix with each other. Thus gold coin, to a very
great extent, circulates even in larger payments for all the odd sums under 5
Pounds. If tomorrow 4 Pound notes, or 3 Pound notes, or 2 Pound notes were
issued, the gold filling these channels of circulation would at once be driven
out of them, and flow into those channels where they would be needed from the
increase of money wages. Thus the additional million required by an advance of
wages by fifty per cent would be supplied without the addition of one single
Sovereign. The same effect might be produced, without one additional bank-note,
by an additional bill circulation, as was the case in Lancashire for a very
considerable time.
If a general rise in the rate of wages, for example, of 100 per cent, as
Citizen Weston supposed it to take place in agricultural wages, would produce a
great rise in the prices of necessaries, and, according to his views, require
an additional amount of currency not to be procured, a general fall in
wages must produce the same effect, on the same scale, in the opposite
direction. Well! All of you know that the years 1858 to 1860 were the most
prosperous years for the cotton industry, and that peculiarly the year 1860
stands in that respect unrivalled in the annals of commerce, while at the same
time all other branches of industry were most flourishing. The wages of the
cotton operatives and of all the other working men connected with their trade
stood, in 1860, higher than ever before. The American crisis came, and those
aggregate wages were suddenly reduced to about one-fourth of their former
amount. This would have been in the opposite direction a rise of 400 per cent.
If wages rise from five to twenty, we say that they rise by 400 per cent; if
they fall from twenty to five, we say that they fall by seventy-five per cent;
but the amount of rise in the one and the amount of fall in the other case
would be the same, namely, fifteen shillings. This, then, was a sudden change
in the rate of wages unprecedented, and at the same time extending over a
number of operatives which, if we count all the operatives not only directly
engaged in but indirectly dependent upon the cotton trade, was larger by
one-half than the number of agricultural labourers. Did the price of wheat
fall? It rose from the annual average of 47 shillings 8d per quarter
during the three years of 1858-1860 to the annual average of 55 shillings 10d
per quarter during the three years 1861-1863. As to the currency, there were
coined in the mint in 1861 8,673,323 Pounds, against 3,378,792 Pounds in 1860.
That is to say, there were coined 5,294,440 Pounds more in 1861 than in 1860.
It is true the bank-note circulation was in 1861 less by 1,319,000 Pounds than
in 1860. Take this off. There remains still a surplus of currency for the year
1861, as compared with the prosperity year, 1860, to the amount of 3,975,440
Pounds, or about 4,000,000 Pounds; but the bullion reserve in the Bank of
England had simultaneously decreased, not quite to the same, but in an
approximating proportion.
Compare the year 1862 with 1842. Apart from the immense increase in the
value and amount of commodities circulated, in 1862 the capital paid in regular
transactions for shares, loans, etc. for the railways in England and Wales
amounted alone to 320,000,000 Pounds, a sum that would have appeared fabulous
in 1842. Still, the aggregate amounts in currency in 1862 and 1842 were pretty
nearly equal, and generally you will find a tendency to a progressive
diminution of currency in the face of enormously increasing value, not only of
commodities, but of monetary transactions generally. From our friend Weston's
standpoint this is an unsolvable riddle. Looking somewhat deeper into this
matter, he would have found that, quite apart from wages, and supposing them to
be fixed, the value and mass of the commodities to be circulated, and generally
the amount of monetary transactions to be settled, vary daily; that the amount
of bank-notes issued varies daily; that the amount of payments realized without
the intervention of any money, by the instrumentality of bills, cheques,
book-credits, clearing houses, varies daily; that, as far as actual metallic
currency is required, the proportion between the coin in circulation and the
coin and bullion in reserve or sleeping in the cellars of banks varies daily;
that the amount of bullion absorbed by the national circulation and the amount
being sent abroad for international circulation vary daily. He would have found
that this dogma of a fixed currency is a monstrous error, incompatible with our
everyday movement. He would have inquired into the laws which enable a currency
to adapt itself to circumstances so continually changing, instead of turning
his misconception of the laws of currency into an argument against a rise of
wages.


IV. Supply and Demand
Our friend Weston accepts the Latin proverb that
“repetitio est mater studiorum,” that is to say, that
repetition is the mother of study, and consequently he repeated his original
dogma again under the new form, that the contraction of currency, resulting
from an enhancement of wages, would produce a diminution of capital, and so
forth. Having already dealt with his currency crotchet, I consider it quite
useless to enter upon the imaginary consequences he fancies to flow from his
imaginary currency mishap. I shall proceed to at once reduce his one and
the same dogma, repeated in so many different shapes, to its simplest
theoretical form.
The uncritical way in which he has treated his subject will become evident
from one single remark. He pleads against a rise of wages or against high wages
as the result of such a rise. Now, I ask him: What are high wages and what are
low wages? Why constitute, for example, five shillings weekly low, and twenty
shillings weekly high wages? If five is low as compared with twenty, twenty is
still lower as compared with two hundred. If a man was to lecture on the
thermometer, and commenced by declaiming on high and low degrees, he would
impart no knowledge whatever. He must first tell me how the freezing-point is
found out, and how the boiling-point, and how these standard points are settled
by natural laws, not by the fancy of the sellers or makers of thermometers.
Now, in regard to wages and profits, Citizen Weston has not only failed to
deduce such standard points from economical laws, but he has not even felt the
necessity to look after them. He satisfied himself with the acceptance of the
popular slang terms of low and high as something having a fixed meaning,
although it is self-evident that wages can only be said to be high or low as
compared with a standard by which to measure their magnitudes.
He will be unable to tell me why a certain amount of money is given for a
certain amount of labour. If he should answer me, “This was settled by
the law of supply and demand,” I should ask him, in the first instance,
by what law supply and demand are themselves regulated. And such an answer
would at once put him out of court. The relations between the supply and demand
of labour undergo perpetual change, and with them the market prices of labour.
If the demand overshoots the supply wages rise; if the supply overshoots the
demand wages sink, although it might in such circumstances be necessary to
test the real state of demand and supply by a strike, for example, or
any other method. But if you accept supply and demand as the law regulating
wages, it would be as childish as useless to declaim against a rise of wages,
because, according to the supreme law you appeal to, a periodical rise of wages
is quite as necessary and legitimate as a periodical fall of wages. If you do
not accept supply and demand as the law regulating wages, I again
repeat the question, why a certain amount of money is given for a certain
amount of labour?
But to consider matters more broadly: You would be altogether mistaken in
fancying that the value of labour or any other commodity whatever is ultimately
fixed by supply and demand. Supply and demand regulate nothing but the
temporary fluctuations of market prices. They will explain to you why
the market price of a commodity rises above or sinks below its value,
but they can never account for the value itself. Suppose supply and
demand to equilibrate, or, as the economists call it, to cover each other. Why,
the very moment these opposite forces become equal they paralyze each other,
and cease to work in the one or other direction. At the moment when supply and
demand equilibrate each other, and therefore cease to act, the market
price of a commodity coincides with its real value, with the
standard price round which its market prices oscillate. In inquiring into the
nature of that VALUE, we have therefore nothing at all to do with the temporary
effects on market prices of supply and demand. The same holds true of wages and
of the prices of all other commodities.


V. Wages and Prices
Reduced to their simplest theoretical expression, all our
friend's arguments resolve themselves into this one dogma: “The
prices of commodities are determined or regulated by wages."
I might appeal to practical observation to bear witness against this
antiquated and exploded fallacy. I might tell you that the English factory
operatives, miners, shipbuilders, and so forth, whose labour is relatively
high-priced, undersell by the cheapness of their produce all other nations;
while the English agricultural labourer, for example, whose labour is
relatively low-priced, is undersold by almost every other nation because of the
dearness of his produce. By comparing article with article in the same country,
and the commodities of different countries, I might show, apart from some
exceptions more apparent than real, that on an average the high-priced labour
produces the low-priced, and low priced labour produces the high-priced
commodities. This, of course, would not prove that the high price of labour in
the one, and its low price in the other instance, are the respective causes of
those diametrically opposed effects, but at all events it would prove that the
prices of commodities are not ruled by the prices of labour. However, it is
quite superfluous for us to employ this empirical method.
It might, perhaps, be denied that Citizen Weston has put forward the dogma:
“The prices of commodities are determined or regulated by
wages.” In point of fact, he has never formulated it. He said, on
the contrary, that profit and rent also form constituent parts of the prices of
commodities, because it is out of the prices of commodities that not only the
working man's wages, but also the capitalist's profits and the landlord's rents
must be paid. But how in his idea are prices formed? First by wages. Then an
additional percentage is joined to the price on behalf of the capitalist, and
another additional percentage on behalf of the landlord. Suppose the wages of
the labour employed in the production of a commodity to be ten. If the rate of
profit was 100 per cent, to the wages advanced the capitalist would add ten,
and if the rate of rent was also 100 per cent upon the wages, there would be
added ten more, and the aggregate price of the commodity would amount to
thirty. But such a determination of prices would be simply their determination
by wages. If wages in the above case rose to twenty, the price of the commodity
would rise to sixty, and so forth. Consequently all the superannuated writers
on political economy who propounded the dogma that wages regulate prices, have
tried to prove it by treating profit and rent as mere additional
percentages upon wages. None of them were, of course, able to reduce the
limits of those percentages to any economic law. They seem, on the contrary, to
think profits settled by tradition, custom, the will of the capitalist, or by
some other equally arbitrary and inexplicable method. If they assert that they
are settled by the competition between the capitalists, they say nothing. That
competition is sure to equalize the different rates of profit in different
trades, or reduce them to one average level, but it can never determine the
level itself, or the general rate of profit.
What do we mean by saying that the prices of the commodities are determined
by wages? Wages being but a name for the price of labour, we mean that the
prices of commodities are regulated by the price of labour. As
“price” is exchangeable value — and in speaking of value I
speak always of exchangeable value — is exchangeable value expressed
in money, the proposition comes to this, that “the value of
commodities is determined by the value of labour,” or that
“the value of labour is the general measure of value."
But how, then, is the “value of labour” itself
determined? Here we come to a standstill. Of course, we come to a standstill if
we try reasoning logically, yet the propounders of that doctrine make short
work of logical scruples. Take our friend Weston, for example. First he told us
that wages regulate the price of commodities and that consequently when wages
rise prices must rise. Then he turned round to show us that a rise of wages
will be no good because the prices of commodities had risen, and because wages
were indeed measured by the prices of the commodities upon which they are
spent. Thus we begin by saying that the value of labour determines the value of
commodities, and we wind up by saying that the value of commodities determines
the value of labour. Thus we move to and fro in the most vicious circle, and
arrive at no conclusion at all.
On the whole, it is evident that by making the value of one commodity, say
labour, corn, or any other commodity, the general measure and regulator of
value, we only shift the difficulty, since we determine one value by another,
which on its side wants to be determined.
The dogma that “wages determine the price of commodities,”
expressed in its most abstract terms, comes to this, that “value is
determined by value,” and this tautology means that, in fact, we know
nothing at all about value. Accepting this premise, all reasoning about the
general laws of political economy turns into mere twaddle. It was, therefore,
the great merit of Ricardo that in his work on the principles of political
economy, published in 1817, he fundamentally destroyed the old popular,
and worn-out fallacy that “wages determine prices,” a fallacy which
Adam Smith and his French predecessors had spurned in the really scientific
parts of their researches, but which they reproduced in their more exoterical
and vulgarizing chapters.
 

1. The
Maximum Law was introduced during the Great French Revolution in 1792, fixing
definite price limits for commodities and standard rates of wages. The chief
supporters of the Maximum Law were the so-called “madmen” who
represented the interests of the urban and village poor. Robespierre, the
leader of the Jacobin Party, introduced this law at a time when the Jacobins as
a result of tactical considerations had formed a bloc with the
“madmen.” – Ed.
2. Robert
Owen (1771-1858) was a British manufacturer who became a utopian socialist. He
introduced in his factory the ten-hour day, and also organised sickness
insurance, consumers' co-operative societies, etc. – Ed.
3. These
figures, 55s.-70s., refer to the total wages of the group of five men. The wage
of each man in the group would increase from 11s. to 14s. – Ed.
 

Table of Contents | Next Section | Marx Engels
Archive | Economics Index 




==========

## VI. [Value and Labour]










Economic Manuscripts: VALUE, PRICE AND PROFIT


Value, Price and Profit

VI. Value and Labour
Citizens, I have now arrived at a point where I must enter upon the real development of the question. I cannot promise to do this in a very satisfactory way, because to do so I should be obliged to go over the whole field of political economy. I can, as the French would say, but “effleurer la question,” touch upon the main points. The first question we have to put is: What is the value of a commodity? How is it determined?

At first sight it would seem that the value of a commodity is a thing quite relative, and not to be settled without considering one commodity in its relations to all other commodities. In fact, in speaking of the value, the value in exchange of a commodity, we mean the proportional quantities in which it exchanges with all other commodities. But then arises the question: How are the proportions in which commodities exchange with each other regulated? We know from experience that these proportions vary infinitely. Taking one single commodity, wheat, for instance, we shall find that a quarter of wheat exchanges in almost countless variations of proportion with different commodities. Yet, its value remaining always the same, whether expressed in silk, gold, or any other commodity, it must be something distinct from, and independent of, these different rates of exchange with different articles. It must be possible to express, in a very different form, these various equations with various commodities.

Besides, if I say a quarter of wheat exchanges with iron in a certain proportion, or the value of a quarter of wheat is expressed in a certain amount of iron, I say that the value of wheat and its equivalent in iron are equal to some third thing, which is neither wheat nor iron, because I suppose them to express the same magnitude in two different shapes. Either of them, the wheat or the iron, must, therefore, independently of the other, be reducible to this third thing which is their common measure.

To elucidate this point I shall recur to a very simple geometrical illustration. In comparing the areas of triangles of all possible forms and magnitudes, or comparing triangles with rectangles, or any other rectilinear figure, how do we proceed? We reduce the area of any triangle whatever to an expression quite different from its visible form. Having found from the nature of the triangle that its area is equal to half the product of its base by its height, we can then compare the different values of all sorts of triangles, and of all rectilinear figures whatever, because all of them may be resolved into a certain number of triangles.

The same mode of procedure must obtain with the values of commodities. We must be able to reduce all of them to an expression common to all, and distinguishing them only by the proportions in which they contain that identical measure.

As the exchangeable values of commodities are only social functions of those things, and have nothing at all to do with the natural qualities, we must first ask: What is the common social substance of all commodities? It is labour. To produce a commodity a certain amount of labour must be bestowed upon it, or worked up in it. And I say not only labour, but social labour. A man who produces an article for his own immediate use, to consume it himself, creates a product, but not a commodity. As a self-sustaining producer he has nothing to do with society. But to produce a commodity, a man must not only produce an article satisfying some social want, but his labour itself must form part and parcel of the total sum of labour expended by society. It must be subordinate to the division of labour within society. It is nothing without the other divisions of labour, and on its part is required to integrate them.

If we consider commodities as values, we consider them exclusively under the single aspect of realized, fixed, or, if you like, crystallized social labour. In this respect they can differ only by representing greater or smaller quantities of labour, as, for example, a greater amount of labour may be worked up in a silken handkerchief than in a brick. But how does one measure quantities of labour? By the time the labour lasts, in measuring the labour by the hour, the day, etc. Of course, to apply this measure, all sorts of labour are reduced to average or simple labour as their unit. We arrive, therefore, at this conclusion. A commodity has a value, because it is a crystallization of social labour. The greatness of its value, or its relative value, depends upon the greater or less amount of that social substance contained in it; that is to say, on the relative mass of labour necessary for its production. The relative values of commodities are, therefore, determined by the respective quantities or amounts of labour, worked up, realized, fixed in them. The correlative quantities of commodities which can be produced in the same time of labour are equal. Or the value of one commodity is to the value of another commodity as the quantity of labour fixed in the one is to the quantity of labour fixed in the other.

I suspect that many of you will ask: Does then, indeed, there exist such a vast or any difference whatever, between determining the values of commodities by wages, and determining them by the relative quantities of labour necessary for their production? You must, however, be aware that the reward for labour, and quantity of labour, are quite disparate things. Suppose, for example, equal quantities of labour to be fixed in one quarter of wheat and one ounce of gold. I resort to the example because it was used by Benjamin Franklin in his first Essay published in 1721, and entitled A Modest Enquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency, where he, one of the first, hit upon the true nature of value.

Well. We suppose, then, that one quarter of wheat and one ounce of gold are equal values or equivalents, because they are crystallizations of equal amounts of average labour, of so many days' or so many weeks' labour respectively fixed in them. In thus determining the relative values of gold and corn, do we refer in any way whatever to the wages of the agricultural labourer and the miner? Not a bit. We leave it quite indeterminate how their day's or their week's labour was paid, or even whether wage labour was employed at all. If it was, wages may have been very unequal. The labourer whose labour is realized in the quarter of wheat may receive two bushels only, and the labourer employed in mining may receive one-half of the ounce of gold. Or, supposing their wages to be equal, they may deviate in all possible proportions from the values of the commodities produced by them. They may amount to one-fourth, one-fifth, or any other proportional part of the one quarter of corn or the one ounce of gold. Their wages can, of course, not exceed, not be more than the values of the commodities they produced, but they can be less in every possible degree. Their wages will be limited by the values of the products, but the values of their products will not be limited by the wages. And above all, the values, the relative values of corn and gold, for example, will have been settled without any regard whatever to the value of the labour employed, that is to say, to wages. To determine the values of commodities by the relative quantities of labour fixed in them, is, therefore, a thing quite different from the tautological method of determining the values of commodities by the value of labour, or by wages. This point, however, will be further elucidated in the progress of our inquiry.

In calculating the exchangeable value of a commodity we must add to the quantity of labour previously worked up in the raw material of the commodity, and the labour bestowed on the implements, tools, machinery, and buildings, with which such labour is assisted. For example, the value of a certain amount of cotton yarn is the crystallization of the quantity of labour added to the cotton during the spinning process, the quantity of labour previously realized in the cotton itself, the quantity of labour realized in the coal, oil, and other auxiliary substances used, the quantity of labour fixed in the steam-engine, the spindles, the factory building, and so forth. Instruments of production properly so-called, such as tools, machinery, buildings, serve again and again for longer or shorter period during repeated processes of production. If they were used up at once, like the raw material, their whole value would at once be transferred to the commodities they assist in producing. But as a spindle, for example, is but gradually used up, an average calculation is made, based upon the average time it lasts, and its average waste or wear and tear during a certain period, say a day. In this way we calculate how much of the value of the spindle is transferred to the yarn daily spin, and how much, therefore, of the total amount of labour realized in a pound of yarn, for example, is due to the quantity of labour previously realized in the spindle. For our present purpose it is not necessary to dwell any longer upon this point.

It might seem that if the value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of labour bestowed upon its production, the lazier a man, or the clumsier a man, the more valuable his commodity, because the greater the time of labour required for finishing the commodity. This, however, would be a sad mistake. You will recollect that I used the word “social labour,” and many points are involved in this qualification of “social.” In saying that the value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of labour worked up or crystallized in it, we mean the quantity of labour necessary for its production in a given state of society, under certain social average conditions of production, with a given social average intensity, and average skill of the labour employed. When, in England, the power-loom came to compete with the hand-loom, only half the former time of labour was wanted to convert a given amount of yarn into a yard of cotton or cloth. The poor hand-loom weaver now worked seventeen or eighteen hours daily, instead of the nine or ten hours he had worked before. Still the product of twenty hours of his labour represented now only ten social hours of labour, or ten hours of labour socially necessary for the conversion of a certain amount of yarn into textile stuffs. His product of twenty hours had, therefore, no more value than his former product of ten hours.

If then the quantity of socially necessary labour realized in commodities regulates their exchangeable values, every increase in the quantity of labour wanted for the production of a commodity must augment its value, as every diminution must lower it.

If the respective quantities of labour necessary for the production of the respective commodities remained constant, their relative values also would be constant. But such is not the case. The quantity of labour necessary for the production of a commodity changes continuously with the changes in the productive powers of labour, the more produce is finished in a given time of labour; and the smaller the productive powers of labour, the less produce is finished in the same time. If, for example, in the progress of population it should become necessary to cultivate less fertile soils, the same amount of produce would be only attainable by a greater amount of labour spent, and the value of agricultural produce would consequently rise. On the other hand, if, with the modern means of production, a single spinner converts into yarn, during one working day, many thousand times the amount of cotton which he could have spun during the same time with the spinning wheel, it is evident that every single pound of cotton will absorb many thousand times less of spinning labour than it did before, and consequently, the value added by spinning to every single pound of cotton will be a thousand times less than before. The value of yarn will sink accordingly.

Apart from the different natural energies and acquired working abilities of different peoples, the productive powers of labour must principally depend: —

Firstly. Upon the natural conditions of labour, such as fertility of soil, mines, and so forth.

Secondly. Upon the progressive improvement of the social powers of labour, such as are derived from production on a grand scale, concentration of capital and combination of labour, subdivision of labour, machinery, improved methods, appliance of chemical and other natural agencies, shortening of time and space by means of communication and transport, and every other contrivance by which science presses natural agencies into the service of labour, and by which the social or co-operative character of labour is developed. The greater the productive powers of labour, the less labour is bestowed upon a given amount of produce; hence the smaller the value of the produce. The smaller the productive powers of labour, the more labour is bestowed upon the same amount of produce; hence the greater its value. As a general law we may, therefore, set it down that: —

The values of commodities are directly as the times of labour employed in their production, and are inversely as the productive powers of the labour employed.

Having till now only spoken of value, I shall add a few words about price, which is a peculiar form assumed by value.

Price, taken by itself, is nothing but the monetary expression of value. The values of all commodities of the country, for example, are expressed in gold prices, while on the Continent they are mainly expressed in silver prices. The value of gold or silver, like that of all other commodities is regulated by the quantity of labour necessary for getting them. You exchange a certain amount of your national products, in which a certain amount of your national labour is crystallized, for the produce of the gold and silver producing countries, in which a certain quantity of their labour is crystallized. It is in this way, in fact by barter, that you learn to express in gold and silver the values of all commodities, that is the respective quantities of labour bestowed upon them. Looking somewhat closer into the monetary expression of value, or what comes to the same, the conversion of value into price, you will find that it is a process by which you give to the values of all commodities an independent and homogeneous form, or by which you express them as quantities of equal social labour. So far as it is but the monetary expression of value, price has been called natural price by Adam Smith, “prix necessaire” by the French physiocrats.

What then is the relation between value and market prices, or between natural prices and market prices? You all know that the market price is the same for all commodities of the same kind, however the conditions of production may differ for the individual producers. The market price expresses only the average amount of social labour necessary, under the average conditions of production, to supply the market with a certain mass of a certain article. It is calculated upon the whole lot of a commodity of a certain description.

So far the market price of a commodity coincides with its value. On the other hand, the oscillations of market prices, rising now over, sinking now under the value or natural price, depend upon the fluctuations of supply and demand. The deviations of market prices from values are continual, but as Adam Smith says:

 “The natural price is the central price to which the prices of commodities are continually gravitating. Different accidents may sometimes keep them suspended a good deal above it, and sometimes force them down even somewhat below it. But whatever may be the obstacles which hinder them from settling in this center of repose and continuance, they are constantly tending towards it.” 

I cannot now sift this matter. It suffices to say the if supply and demand equilibrate each other, the market prices of commodities will correspond with their natural prices, that is to say with their values, as determined by the respective quantities of labour required for their production. But supply and demand must constantly tend to equilibrate each other, although they do so only by compensating one fluctuation by another, a rise by a fall, and vice versa. If instead of considering only the daily fluctuations you analyze the movement of market prices for longer periods, as Mr. Tooke, for example, has done in his History of Prices, you will find that the fluctuations of market prices, their deviations from values, their ups and downs, paralyze and compensate each other; so that apart from the effect of monopolies and some other modifications I must now pass by, all descriptions of commodities are, on average, sold at their respective values or natural prices. The average periods during which the fluctuations of market prices compensate each other are different for different kinds of commodities, because with one kind it is easier to adapt supply to demand than with the other.

If then, speaking broadly, and embracing somewhat longer periods, all descriptions of commodities sell at their respective values, it is nonsense to suppose that profit, not in individual cases; but that the constant and usual profits of different trades spring from the prices of commodities, or selling them at a price over and above their value. The absurdity of this notion becomes evident if it is generalized. What a man would constantly win as a seller he would constantly lose as a purchaser. It would not do to say that there are men who are buyers without being sellers, or consumers without being producers. What these people pay to the producers, they must first get from them for nothing. If a man first takes your money and afterwards returns that money in buying your commodities, you will never enrich yourselves by selling your commodities too dear to that same man. This sort of transaction might diminish a loss, but would never help in realizing a profit. To explain, therefore, the general nature of profits, you must start from the theorem that, on an average, commodities are sold at their real values, and that profits are derived from selling them at their values, that is, in proportion to the quantity of labour realized in them. If you cannot explain profit upon this supposition, you cannot explain it at all. This seems paradox and contrary to every-day observation. It is also paradox that the earth moves round the sun, and that water consists of two highly inflammable gases. Scientific truth is always paradox, if judged by every-day experience, which catches only the delusive appearance of things.

VII. Labour Power
Having now, as far as it could be done in such a cursory manner, analyzed the nature of value, of the value of any commodity whatever, we must turn our attention to the specific value of labour. And here, again, I must startle you by a seeming paradox. All of you feel sure that what they daily sell is their Labour; that, therefore, Labour has a price, and that, the price of a commodity being only the monetary expression of its value, there must certainly exist such a thing as the value of labour. However, there exists no such thing as the value of labour in the common acceptance of the word. We have seen that the amount of necessary labour crystallized in a commodity constitutes its value. Now, applying this notion of value, how could we define, say, the value of a ten hours working day? How much labour is contained in that day? Ten hours' labour.

To say that the value of a ten hours working day is equal to ten hours' labour, or the quantity of labour contained in it, would be a tautological and, moreover, a nonsensical expression. Of course, having once found out the true but hidden sense of the expression “value of labour,” we shall be able to interpret this irrational, and seemingly impossible application of value, in the same way that, having once made sure of the real movement of the celestial bodies, we shall be able to explain their apparent or merely phenomenal movements.

What the working man sells is not directly his labour, but his labouring power, the temporary disposal of which he makes over to the capitalist. This is so much the case that I do not know whether by the English Laws, but certainly by some Continental Laws, the maximum time is fixed for which a man is allowed to sell his labouring power. If allowed to do so for any indefinite period whatever, slavery would be immediately restored. Such a sale, if it comprised his lifetime, for example, would make him at once the lifelong slave of his employer.

One of the oldest economists and most original philosophers of England — Thomas Hobbes — has already, in his Leviathan, instinctively hit upon this point overlooked by all his successors. He says: “the value or worth of a man is, as in all other things, his price: that is so much as would be given for the use of his power.” Proceeding from this basis, we shall be able to determine the value of labour as that of all other commodities.

But before doing so, we might ask, how does this strange phenomenon arise, that we find on the market a set of buyers, possessed of land, machinery, raw material, and the means of subsistence, all of them, save land in its crude state, the products of labour, and on the other hand, a set of sellers who have nothing to sell except their labouring power, their working arms and brains? That the one set buys continually in order to make a profit and enrich themselves, while the other set continually sells in order to earn their livelihood? The inquiry into this question would be an inquiry into what the economists call “previous or original accumulation,” but which ought to be called original expropriation. We should find that this so-called original accumulation means nothing but a series of historical processes, resulting in a decomposition of the original union existing between the labouring Man and his Instruments of Labour. Such an inquiry, however, lies beyond the pale of my present subject. The separation between the Man of Labour and the Instruments of Labour once established, such a state of things will maintain itself and reproduce itself upon a constantly increasing scale, until a new and fundamental revolution in the mode of production should again overturn it, and restore the original union in a new historical form.

What, then, is the value of labouring power?

Like that of every other commodity, its value is determined by the quantity of labour necessary to produce it. The labouring power of a man exists only in his living individuality. A certain mass of necessaries must be consumed by a man to grow up and maintain his life. But the man, like the machine, will wear out, and must be replaced by another man. Beside the mass of necessaries required for his own maintenance, he wants another amount of necessaries to bring up a certain quota of children that are to replace him on the labour market and to perpetuate the race of labourers. Moreover, to develop his labouring power, and acquire a given skill, another amount of values must be spent. For our purpose it suffices to consider only average labour, the costs of whose education and development are vanishing magnitudes. Still I must seize upon this occasion to state that, as the costs of producing labouring powers of different quality differ, so much differ the values of the labouring powers employed in different trades. The cry for an equality of wages rests, therefore, upon a mistake, is an inane wish never to be fulfilled. It is an offspring of that false and superficial radicalism that accepts premises and tries to evade conclusions. Upon the basis of the wages system the value of labouring power is settled like that of every other commodity; and as different kinds of labouring power have different values, or require different quantities of labour for their production, they must fetch different prices in the labour market. To clamour for equal or even equitable retribution on the basis of the wages system is the same as to clamour for freedom on the basis of the slavery system. What you think just or equitable is out of the question. The question is: What is necessary and unavoidable with a given system of production? After what has been said, it will be seen that the value of labouring power is determined by the value of the necessaries required to produce, develop, maintain, and perpetuate the labouring power.

VIII. Production of Surplus Value
Now suppose that the average amount of the daily necessaries of a labouring man require six hours of average labour for their production. Suppose, moreover, six hours of average labour to be also realized in a quantity of gold equal to 3s. Then 3s. would be the price, or the monetary expression of the daily value of that man's labouring power. If he worked daily six hours he would daily produce a value sufficient to buy the average amount of his daily necessaries, or to maintain himself as a labouring man.

But our man is a wages labourer. He must, therefore, sell his labouring power to a capitalist. If he sells it at 3s. daily, or 18s. weekly, he sells it at its value. Suppose him to be a spinner. If he works six hours daily he will add to the cotton a value of 3s. daily. This value, daily added by him, would be an exact equivalent for the wages, or the price of his labouring power, received daily. But in that case no surplus value or surplus produce whatever would go to the capitalist. Here, then, we come to the rub.

In buying the labouring power of the workman, and paying its value, the capitalist, like every other purchaser, has acquired the right to consume or use the commodity bought. You consume or use the labouring power of a man by making him work, as you consume or use a machine by making it run. By buying the daily or weekly value of the labouring power of the workman, the capitalist has, therefore, acquired the right to use or make that labouring power during the whole day or week. The working day or the working week has, of course, certain limits, but those we shall afterwards look more closely at.

For the present I want to turn your attention to one decisive point. The value of the labouring power is determined by the quantity of labour necessary to maintain or reproduce it, but the use of that labouring power is only limited by the active energies and physical strength of the labourer. The daily or weekly value of the labouring power is quite distinct from the daily or weekly exercise of that power, the same as the food a horse wants and the time it can carry the horseman are quite distinct. The quantity of labour by which the value of the workman's labouring power is limited forms by no means a limit to the quantity of labour which his labouring power is apt to perform. Take the example of our spinner. We have seen that, to daily reproduce his labouring power, he must daily reproduce a value of three shillings, which he will do by working six hours daily. But this does not disable him from working ten or twelve or more hours a day. But by paying the daily or weekly value of the spinner's labouring power the capitalist has acquired the right of using that labouring power during the whole day or week. He will, therefore, make him work say, daily, twelve hours. Over and above the six hours required to replace his wages, or the value of his labouring power, he will, therefore, have to work six other hours, which I shall call hours of surplus labour, which surplus labour will realize itself in a surplus value and a surplus produce. If our spinner, for example, by his daily labour of six hours, added three shillings' value to the cotton, a value forming an exact equivalent to his wages, he will, in twelve hours, add six shillings' worth to the cotton, and produce a proportional surplus of yarn. As he has sold his labouring power to the capitalist, the whole value of produce created by him belongs to the capitalist, the owner pro tem. of his labouring power. By advancing three shillings, the capitalist will, therefore, realize a value of six shillings, because, advancing a value in which six hours of labour are crystallized, he will receive in return a value in which twelve hours of labour are crystallized. By repeating this same process daily, the capitalist will daily advance three shillings and daily pocket six shillings, one half of which will go to pay wages anew, and the other half of which will form surplus value, for which the capitalist pays no equivalent. It is this sort of exchange between capital and labour upon which capitalistic production, or the wages system, is founded, and which must constantly result in reproducing the working man as a working man, and the capitalist as a capitalist.

The rate of surplus value, all other circumstances remaining the same, will depend on the proportion between that part of the working day necessary to reproduce the value of the labouring power and the surplus time or surplus labour performed for the capitalist. It will, therefore, depend on the ratio in which the working day is prolonged over and above that extent, by working which the working man would only reproduce the value of his labouring power, or replace his wages.

IX. Value of Labour
We must now return to the expression, “value, or price of labour.” We have seen that, in fact, it is only the value of the labouring power, measured by the values of commodities necessary for its maintenance. But since the workman receives his wages after his labour is performed, and knows, moreover, that what he actually gives to the capitalist is his labour, the value or price of his labouring power necessarily appears to him as the price or value of his labour itself. If the price of his labouring power is three shillings, in which six hours of labour are realized, and if he works twelve hours, he necessarily considers these three shillings as the value or price of twelve hours of labour, although these twelve hours of labour realize themselves in a value of six shillings. A double consequence flows from this.

Firstly. The value or price of the labouring power takes the semblance of the price or value of labour itself, although, strictly speaking, value and price of labour are senseless terms.

Secondly. Although one part only of the workman's daily labour is paid, while the other part is unpaid, and while that unpaid or surplus labour constitutes exactly the fund out of which surplus value or profit is formed, it seems as if the aggregate labour was paid labour.

This false appearance distinguishes wages labour from other historical forms of labour. On the basis of the wages system even the unpaid labour seems to be paid labour. With the slave, on the contrary, even that part of his labour which is paid appears to be unpaid. Of course, in order to work the slave must live, and one part of his working day goes to replace the value of his own maintenance. But since no bargain is struck between him and his master, and no acts of selling and buying are going on between the two parties, all his labour seems to be given away for nothing.

Take, on the other hand, the peasant serf, such as he, I might say, until yesterday existed in the whole of East of Europe. This peasant worked, for example, three days for himself on his own field or the field allotted to him, and the three subsequent days he performed compulsory and gratuitous labour on the estate of his lord. Here, then, the paid and unpaid parts of labour were sensibly separated, separated in time and space; and our Liberals overflowed with moral indignation at the preposterous notion of making a man work for nothing.

In point of fact, however, whether a man works three days of the week for himself on his own field and three days for nothing on the estate of his lord, or whether he works in the factory or the workshop six hours daily for himself and six for his employer, comes to the same, although in the latter case the paid and unpaid portions of labour are inseparably mixed up with each other, and the nature of the whole transaction is completely masked by the intervention of a contract and the pay received at the end of the week. The gratuitous labour appears to be voluntarily given in the one instance, and to be compulsory in the other. That makes all the difference.

In using the word “value of labour,” I shall only use it as a popular slang term for “value of labouring power."

X. Profit is Made by Selling a Commodity at its Value
Suppose an average hour of labour to be realized in a value equal to sixpence, or twelve average hours of labour to be realized in six shillings. Suppose, further, the value of labour to be three shillings or the produce of six hours' labour. If, then, in the raw material, machinery, and so forth, used up in a commodity, twenty-four hours of average labour were realized, its value would amount to twelve shillings. If, moreover, the workman employed by the capitalist added twelve hours of labour to those means of production, these twelve hours would be realized in an additional value of six shillings. The total value of the product would, therefore, amount to thirty-six hours of realized labour, and be equal to eighteen shillings. But as the value of labour, or the wages paid to the workman, would be three shillings only, no equivalent would have been paid by the capitalist for the six hours of surplus labour worked by the workman, and realized in the value of the commodity. By selling this commodity at its value for eighteen shillings, the capitalist would, therefore, realize a value of three shillings, for which had paid no equivalent. These three shillings would constitute the surplus value or profit pocketed by him. The capitalist would consequently realize the profit of three shillings, not by selling his commodity at a price over and above its value, but by selling it at its real value.

The value of a commodity is determined by the total quantity of labour contained in it. But part of that quantity of labour is realized in a value for which and equivalent has been paid in the form of wages; part of it is realized in a value for which NO equivalent has been paid. Part of the labour contained in the commodity is paid labour; part is unpaid labour. By selling, therefore, the commodity at its value, that is, as the crystallization of the total quantity of labour bestowed upon it, the capitalist must necessarily sell it at a profit. He sells not only what has cost him an equivalent, but he sells also what has cost him nothing, although it has cost his workman labour. The cost of the commodity to the capitalist and its real cost are different things.

I repeat, therefore, that normal and average profits are made by selling commodities not above, but at their real values.

XI. The Different Parts into which Surplus Value is Decomposed
The surplus value, or that part of the total value of the commodity in which the surplus labour or unpaid labour of the working man is realized, I call profit. The whole of that profit is not pocketed by the employing capitalist. The monopoly of land enables the landlord to take one part of that surplus value, under the name of rent, whether the land is used for agricultural buildings or railways, or for any other productive purpose. On the other hand, the very fact that the possession of the instruments of labour enables the employing capitalist to produce a surplus value, or, what comes to the same, to appropriate to himself a certain amount of unpaid labour, enables the owner of the means of labour, which he lends wholly or partly to the employing capitalist — enables, in one word, the money-lending capitalist to claim for himself under the name of interest another part of that surplus value, so that there remains to the employing capitalist as such only what is called industrial or commercial profit.

By what laws this division of the total amount of surplus value amongst the three categories of people is regulated is a question quite foreign to our subject. This much, however, results from what has been stated.

Rent, interest, and industrial profit are only different names for different parts of the surplus value of the commodity, or the unpaid labour enclosed in it, and they are equally derived from this source and from this source alone. They are not derived from land as such or from capital as such, but land and capital enable their owners to get their respective shares out of the surplus value extracted by the employing capitalist from the labourer. For the labourer himself it is a matter of subordinate importance whether that surplus value, the result of his surplus labour, or unpaid labour, is altogether pocketed by the employing capitalist, or whether the latter is obliged to pay portions of it, under the name of rent and interest, away to third parties. Suppose the employing capitalist to use only his own capital and to be his own landlord, then the whole surplus value would go into his pocket.

It is the employing capitalist who immediately extracts from the labourer this surplus value, whatever part of it he may ultimately be able to keep for himself. Upon this relation, therefore between the employing capitalist and the wages labourer the whole wages system and the whole present system of production hinge. Some of the citizens who took part in our debate were, there, wrong in trying to mince matters, and to treat this fundamental relation between the employing capitalist and the working man as a secondary question, although they were right in stating that, under given circumstances, a rise of prices might affect in very unequal degrees the employing capitalist, the landlord, the moneyed capitalist, and, if you please, the tax-gatherer.

Another consequence follows from what has been stated.

That part of the value of the commodity which represents only the value of the raw materials, the machinery, in one word, the value of the means of production used up, forms no revenue at all, but replaces only capital. But, apart from this, it is false that the other part of the value of the commodity which forms revenue, or may be spent in the form of wages, profits, rent, interest, is constituted by the value of wages, the value of rent, the value of profits, and so forth. We shall, in the first instance, discard wages, and only treat industrial profits, interest, and rent. We have just seen that the surplus value contained in the commodity, or that part of its value in which unpaid labour is realized, resolves itself into different fractions, bearing three different names.

But it would be quite the reverse of the truth to say that its value is composed of, or formed by, the addition of the    independent values of these three constituents.

If one hour of labour realizes itself in a value of sixpence, if the working day of the labourer comprises twelve hours, if half of this time is unpaid labour, that surplus labour will add to the commodity a surplus value of three shillings, that is of value for which no equivalent has been paid. This surplus value of three shillings constitutes the whole fund which the employing capitalist may divide, in whatever proportions, with the landlord and the money-lender. The value of these three shillings constitutes the limit of the value they have to divide amongst them. But it is not the employing capitalist who adds to the value of the commodity an arbitrary value for his profit, to which another value is added for the landlord, and so forth, so that the addition of these arbitrarily fixed values would constitute the total value. You see, therefore, the fallacy of the popular notion, which confounds the decomposition of a given value into three parts, with the formation of that value by the addition of three independent values, thus converting the aggregate value, from which rent, profit, and interest are derived, into an arbitrary magnitude.

If the total profit realized by a capitalist is equal to 100 Pounds, we call this sum, considered as absolute magnitude, the amount of profit. But if we calculate the ratio which those 100 Pounds bear to the capital advanced, we call this relative magnitude, the rate of profit. It is evident that this rate of profit may be expressed in a double way.

Suppose 100 Pounds to be the capital advanced in wages. If the surplus value created is also 100 Pounds — and this would show us that half the working day of the labourer consists of unpaid labour — and if we measured this profit by the value of the capital advanced in wages, we should say that the rate of profit amounted to one hundred percent, because the value advanced would be one hundred and the value realized would be two hundred.

If, on the other hand, we should not only consider the capital advanced in wages, but the total capital advanced, say, for example, 500 Pounds, of which 400 Pounds represented the value of raw materials, machinery, and so forth, we should say that the rate of profit amounted only to twenty percent, because the profit of one hundred would be but the fifth part of the total capital advanced.

The first mode of expressing the rate of profit is the only one which shows you the real ratio between paid and unpaid labour, the real degree of the exploitation (you must allow me this French word) of labour. The other mode of expression is that in common use, and is, indeed, appropriate for certain purposes. At all events, it is very useful for concealing the degree in which the capitalist extracts gratuitous labour from the workman.

In the remarks I have still to make I shall use the word profit for the whole amount of the surplus value extracted by the capitalist without any regard to the division of that surplus value between different parties, and in using the words rate of profit, I shall always measure profits by the value of the capital advanced in wages.
 


Table of Contents |
Next Section |
Marx Engels Archive |
Economics Index





==========

## XII. General Relation of Profits, Wages and Prices










Economic Manuscripts: VALUE, PRICE AND PROFIT


Value, Price and Profit

XII. General Relation of Profits, Wages, and Prices
Deduct from the value of a commodity the value replacing the value of the raw materials and other means of production used upon it, that is to say, deduct the value representing the past labour contained in it, and the remainder of its value will resolve into the quantity of labour added by the working man last employed. If that working man works twelve hours daily, if twelve hours of average labour crystallize themselves in an amount of gold equal to six shillings, this additional value of six shillings is the only value his labour will have created. This given value, determined by the time of his labour, is the only fund from which both he and the capitalist have to draw their respective shares or dividends, the only value to be divided into wages and profits. It is evident that this value itself will not be altered by the variable proportions in which it may be divided amongst the two parties. There will also be nothing changed if in the place of one working man you put the whole working population, twelve million working days, for example, instead of one.

Since the capitalist and workman have only to divide this limited value, that is, the value measured by the total labour of the working man, the more the one gets the less will the other get, and vice versa. Whenever a quantity is given, one part of it will increase inversely as the other decreases. If the wages change, profits will change in an opposite direction. If wages fall, profits will rise; and if wages rise, profits will fall. If the working man, on our former supposition, gets three shillings, equal to one half of the value he has created, or if his whole working day consists half of paid, half of unpaid labour, the rate of profit will be 100 percent, because the capitalist would also get three shillings. If the working man receives only two shillings, or works only one third of the whole day for himself, the capitalist will get four shillings, and the rate of profit will be 200 per cent. If the working man receives four shillings, the capitalist will only receive two, and the rate of profit would sink to 50 percent, but all these variations will not affect the value of the commodity. A general rise of wages would, therefore, result in a fall of the general rate of profit, but not affect values. 

But although the values of commodities, which must ultimately regulate their market prices, are exclusively determined by the total quantities of labour fixed in them, and not by the division of that quantity into paid and unpaid labour, it by no means follows that the values of the single commodities, or lots of commodities, produced during twelve hours, for example, will remain constant. The number or mass of commodities produced in a given time of labour, or by a given quantity of labour, depends upon the productive power of the labour employed, and not upon its extent or length. With one degree of the productive power of spinning labour, for example, a working day of twelve hours may produce twelve pounds of yarn, with a lesser degree of productive power only two pounds. If then twelve hours' average labour were realized in the value of six shillings in the one case, the twelve pounds of yarn would cost six shillings, in the other case the two pounds of yarn would also cost six shillings. One pound of yarn would, therefore, cost sixpence in the one case, and three shillings in the other. The difference of price would result from the difference in the productive powers of labour employed. One hour of labour would be realized in one pound of yarn with the greater productive power, while with the smaller productive power, six hours of labour would be realized in one pound of yarn. The price of a pound of yarn would, in the one instance, be only sixpence, although wages were relatively high and the rate of profit low; it would be three shillings in the other instance, although wages were low and the rate of profit high. This would be so because the price of the pound of yarn is regulated by the total amount of labour worked up in it, and not by the proportional division of that total amount into paid and unpaid labour. The fact I have mentioned before that high-price labour may produce cheap, and low-priced labour may produce dear commodities, loses, therefore, its paradoxical appearance. It is only the expression of the general law that the value of a commodity is regulated by the quantity of labour worked up in it, and the quantity of labour worked up in it depends altogether upon the productive powers of labour employed, and will therefore, vary with every variation in the productivity of labour.


XIII. Main Cases of Attempts at Raising Wages or Resisting their Fall
Let us now seriously consider the main cases in which a rise of wages is attempted or a reduction of wages resisted.

1. We have seen that the value of the labouring power, or in more popular parlance, the value of labour, is determined by the value of necessaries, or the quantity of labour required to produce them.

If, then, in a given country the value of the daily average necessaries of the labourer represented six hours of labour expressed in three shillings, the labourer would have to work six hours daily to produce an equivalent for this daily maintenance. If the whole working day was twelve hours, the capitalist would pay him the value of his labour by paying him three shillings. Half the working day would be unpaid labour, and the rate of profit would amount to 100 percent. But now suppose that, consequent upon a decrease of productivity, more labour should be wanted to produce, say, the same amount of agricultural produce, so that the price of the average daily necessaries should rise from three to four shillings. In that case the value of labour would rise by one third, or 33 1/3 percent. Eight hours of the working day would be required to produce an equivalent for the daily maintenance of the labourer, according to his old standard of living. The surplus labour would therefore sink from six hours to four, and the rate of profit from 100 to 50 percent. But in insisting upon a rise of wages, the labourer would only insist upon getting the increased value of his labour, like every other seller of a commodity, who, the costs of his commodities having increased, tries to get its increased value paid. If wages did not rise, or not sufficiently rise, to compensate for the increased values of necessaries, the price of labour would sink below the value of labour, and the labourer's standard of life would deteriorate.

But a change might also take place in an opposite direction. By virtue of the increased productivity of labour, the same amount of the average daily necessaries might sink from three to two shillings, or only four hours out of the working day, instead of six, be wanted to reproduce an equivalent for the value of the daily necessaries. The working man would now be able to buy with two shillings as many necessaries as he did before with three shillings. Indeed, the value of labour would have sunk, but diminished value would command the same amount of commodities as before. Then profits would rise from three to four shillings, and the rate of profit from 100 to 200 percent. Although the labourer's absolute standard of life would have remained the same, his relative wages, and therewith his relative social position, as compared with that of the capitalist, would have been lowered. If the working man should resist that reduction of relative wages, he would only try to get some share in the increased productive powers of his own labour, and to maintain his former relative position in the social scale. Thus, after the abolition of the Corn Laws, and in flagrant violation of the most solemn pledges given during the anti-corn law agitation, the English factory lords generally reduced wages ten per cent. The resistance of the workmen was at first baffled, but, consequent upon circumstances I cannot now enter upon, the ten per cent lost were afterwards regained.

2. The values of necessaries, and consequently the value of labour, might remain the same, but a change might occur in their money prices, consequent upon a previous change in the value of money. By the discovery of more fertile mines and so forth, two ounces of gold might, for example, cost no more labour to produce than one ounce did before. The value of gold would then be depreciated by one half, or fifty per cent. As the values of all other commodities would then be expressed in twice their former money prices, so also the same with the value of labour. Twelve hours of labour, formerly expressed in six shillings, would now be expressed in twelve shillings. If the working man's wages should remain three shillings, instead of rising to six shillings, the money price of his labour would only be equal to half the value of his labour, and his standard of life would fearfully deteriorate. This would also happen in a greater or lesser degree if his wages should rise, but not proportionately to the fall in the value of gold. In such a case nothing would have been changed, either in the productive powers of labour, or in supply and demand, or in values.

Nothing would have changed except the money names of those values. To say that in such a case the workman ought not to insist upon a proportionate rise of wages, is to say that he must be content to be paid with names, instead of with things. All past history proves that whenever such a depreciation of money occurs, the capitalists are on the alert to seize this opportunity for defrauding the workman. A very large school of political economists assert that, consequent upon the new discoveries of gold lands, the better working of silver mines, and the cheaper supply of quicksilver, the value of precious metals has again depreciated. This would explain the general and simultaneous attempts on the Continent at a rise of wages.

3. We have till now supposed that the working day has given limits. The working day, however, has, by itself, no constant limits. It is the constant tendency of capital to stretch it to its utmost physically possible length, because in the same degree surplus labour, and consequently the profit resulting therefrom, will be increased. The more capital succeeds in prolonging the working day, the greater the amount of other peoples' labour it will appropriate.

During the seventeenth and even the first two thirds of the eighteenth century a ten hours' working day was the normal working day all over England. During the anti-Jacobin war, which was in fact a war waged by the British barons against the British working masses, capital celebrated its bacchanalia, and prolonged the working day from ten to twelve, fourteen, eighteen hours. Malthus, by no means a man whom you would suspect of a maudlin sentimentalism declared in a pamphlet, published about 1815, that if this sort of thing was to go on the life of the nation would be attacked at its very source. A few years before the general introduction of newly-invented machinery, about 1765, a pamphlet appeared in England under the title, An Essay On Trade. The anonymous author, an avowed enemy of the working classes, declaims on the necessity of expanding the limits of the working day. Amongst other means to this end, he proposes working houses, which, he says, ought to be “Houses of Terror.” And what is the length of the working he prescribes for these “Houses of Terror"? Twelve hours, the very same time which in 1832 was declared by capitalists, political economists, and ministers to be not only the existing but the necessary time of labour for a child under twelve years.

By selling his labouring power, and he must do so under the present system, the working man makes over to the capitalist the consumption of that power, but within certain rational limits. He sells his labouring power in order to maintain it, apart from its natural wear and tear, but not to destroy it. In selling his labouring power at its daily or weekly value, it is understood that in one day or one week that labouring power shall not be submitted to two days' or two weeks' waste or wear and tear. Take a machine worth 1000 Pounds. If it is used up in ten years it will add to the value of the commodities in whose production it assists 100 Pounds yearly. If it is used up in five years it will add 200 Pounds yearly, or the value of its annual wear and tear is in inverse ratio to the quickness with which it is consumed. But this distinguishes the working man from the machine. Machinery does not wear out exactly in the same ratio in which it is used. Man, on the contrary, decays in a greater ratio than would be visible from the mere numerical addition of work.

In their attempts at reducing the working day to its former rational dimensions, or, where they cannot enforce a legal fixation of a normal working day, at checking overwork by a rise of wages, a rise not only in proportion to the surplus time exacted, but in a greater proportion, working men fulfill only a duty to themselves and their race. They only set limits to the tyrannical usurpations of capital. Time is the room of human development. A man who has no free time to dispose of, whose whole lifetime, apart from the mere physical interruptions by sleep, meals, and so forth, is absorbed by his labour for the capitalist, is less than a beast of burden. He is a mere machine for producing Foreign Wealth, broken in body and brutalized in mind. Yet the whole history of modern industry shows that capital, if not checked, will recklessly and ruthlessly work to cast down the whole working class to this utmost state of degradation.

In prolonging the working day the capitalist may pay higher wages and still lower the value of labor, if the rise of wages does not correspond to the greater amount of labour extracted, and the quicker decay of the labouring power thus caused. This may be done in another way. Your middle-class statisticians will tell you, for instance, that the average wages of factory families in Lancashire has risen. They forget that instead of the labour of the man, the head of the family, his wife and perhaps three or four children are now thrown under the Juggernaut wheels of capital, and that the rise of the aggregate wages does not correspond to the aggregate surplus labour extracted from the family.

Even with given limits of the working day, such as they now exist in all branches of industry subjected to the factory laws, a rise of wages may become necessary, if only to keep up the old standard value of labour. By increasing the intensity of labour, a man may be made to expend as much vital force in one hour as he formerly did in two. This has, to a certain degree, been effected in the trades, placed under the Factory Acts, by the acceleration of machinery, and the greater number of working machines which a single individual has now to superintend. If the increase in the intensity of labour or the mass of labour spent in an hour keeps some fair proportion to the decrease in the extent of the working day, the working man will still be the winner. If this limit is overshot, he loses in one form what he has gained in another, and ten hours of labour may then become as ruinous as twelve hours were before. In checking this tendency of capital, by struggling for a rise of wages corresponding to the rising intensity of labour, the working man only resists the depreciation of his labour and the deterioration of his race.

4. All of you know that, from reasons I have not now to explain, capitalistic production moves through certain periodical cycles. It moves through a state of quiescence, growing animation, prosperity, overtrade, crisis, and stagnation. The market prices of commodities, and the market rates of profit, follow these phases, now sinking below their averages, now rising above them.

Considering the whole cycle, you will find that one deviation of the market price is being compensated by the other, and that, taking the average of the cycle, the market prices of commodities are regulated by their values. Well! During the phases of sinking market prices and the phases of crisis and stagnation, the working man, if not thrown out of employment altogether, is sure to have his wages lowered. Not to be defrauded, he must, even with such a fall of market prices, debate with the capitalist in what proportional degree a fall of wages has become necessary. If, during the phases of prosperity, when extra profits are made, he did not battle for a rise of wages, he would, taking the average of one industrial cycle, not even receive his average wages, or the value of his labour. It is the utmost height of folly to demand, that while his wages are necessarily affected by the adverse phases of the cycle, he should exclude himself from compensation during the prosperous phases of the cycle. Generally, the values of all commodities are only realized by the compensation of the continuously changing market prices, springing from the continuous fluctuations of demand and supply. On the basis of the present system labour is only a commodity like others. It must, therefore, pass through the same fluctuations to fetch an average price corresponding to its value.

It would be absurd to treat it on the one hand as a commodity, and to want on the other hand to exempt it from the laws which regulate the prices of commodities. The slave receives a permanent and fixed amount of maintenance; the wage-labourer does not. He must try to get a rise of wages in the one instance, if only to compensate for a fall of wages in the other. If he resigned himself to accept the will, the dictates of the capitalist as a permanent economical law, he would share in all the miseries of the slave, without the security of the slave.

5. In all the cases I have considered, and they form ninety-nine out of a hundred, you have seen that a struggle for a rise of wages follows only in the track of previous changes, and is the necessary offspring of previous changes in the amount of production, the productive powers of labour, the value of labour, the value of money, the extent or the intensity of labour extracted, the fluctuations of market prices, dependent upon the fluctuations of demand and supply, and consistent with the different phases of the industrial cycle; in one word, as reactions of labour against the previous action of capital. By treating the struggle for a rise of wages independently of all these circumstances, by looking only upon the change of wages, and overlooking all other changes from which they emanate, you proceed from a false premise in order to arrive at false conclusions.


XIV. The Struggle Between Capital and Labour and its Results
1. Having shown that the periodical resistance on the part of the working men against a reduction of wages, and their periodical attempts at getting a rise of wages, are inseparable from the wages system, and dictated by the very fact of labour being assimilated to commodities, and therefore subject to the laws, regulating the general movement of prices; having furthermore, shown that a general rise of wages would result in a fall in the general rate of profit, but not affect the average prices of commodities, or their values, the question now ultimately arises, how far, in this incessant struggle between capital and labour, the latter is likely to prove successful.

I might answer by a generalization, and say that, as with all other commodities, so with labour, its market price will, in the long run, adapt itself to its value; that, therefore, despite all the ups and downs, and do what he may, the working man will, on an average, only receive the value of his labour, which resolves into the value of his labouring power, which is determined by the value of the necessaries required for its maintenance and reproduction, which value of necessaries finally is regulated by the quantity of labour wanted to produce them.

But there are some peculiar features which distinguish the value of the labouring power, or the value of labour, from the values of all other commodities. The value of the labouring power is formed by two elements -- the one merely physical, the other historical or social. Its ultimate limit is determined by the physical element, that is to say, to maintain and reproduce itself, to perpetuate its physical existence, the working class must receive the necessaries absolutely indispensable for living and multiplying. The value of those indispensable necessaries forms, therefore, the ultimate limit of the value of labour. On the other hand, the length of the working day is also limited by ultimate, although very elastic boundaries. Its ultimate limit is given by the physical force of the labouring man. If the daily exhaustion of his vital forces exceeds a certain degree, it cannot be exerted anew, day by day.

However, as I said, this limit is very elastic. A quick succession of unhealthy and short-lived generations will keep the labour market as well supplied as a series of vigorous and long-lived generations. Besides this mere physical element, the value of labour is in every country determined by a traditional standard of life. It is not mere physical life, but it is the satisfaction of certain wants springing from the social conditions in which people are placed and reared up. The English standard of life may be reduced to the Irish standard; the standard of life of a German peasant to that of a Livonian peasant. The important part which historical tradition and social habitude play in this respect, you may learn from Mr. Thornton's work on over-population, where he shows that the average wages in different agricultural districts of England still nowadays differ more or less according to the more or less favourable circumstances under which the districts have emerged from the state of serfdom.

This historical or social element, entering into the value of labour, may be expanded, or contracted, or altogether extinguished, so that nothing remains but the physical limit. During the time of the anti-Jacobin war, undertaken, as the incorrigible tax-eater and sinecurist, old George Rose, used to say, to save the comforts of our holy religion from the inroads of the French infidels, the honest English farmers, so tenderly handled in a former chapter of ours, depressed the wages of the agricultural labourers even beneath that mere physical minimum, but made up by Poor Laws the remainder necessary for the physical perpetuation of the race. This was a glorious way to convert the wages labourer into a slave, and Shakespeare's proud yeoman into a pauper.

By comparing the standard wages or values of labour in different countries, and by comparing them in different historical epochs of the same country, you will find that the value of labour itself is not a fixed but a variable magnitude, even supposing the values of all other commodities to remain constant.

A similar comparison would prove that not only the market rates of profit change, but its average rates.

But as to profits, there exists no law which determines their minimum. We cannot say what is the ultimate limit of their decrease. And why cannot we fix that limit? Because, although we can fix the minimum of wages, we cannot fix their maximum.

We can only say that, the limits of the working day being given, the maximum of profit corresponds to the physical minimum of wages; and that wages being given, the maximum of profit corresponds to such a prolongation of the working day as is compatible with the physical forces of the labourer. The maximum of profit is therefore limited by the physical minimum of wages and the physical maximum of the working day. It is evident that between the two limits of the maximum rate of profit an immense scale of variations is possible. The fixation of its actual degree is only settled by the continuous struggle between capital and labour, the capitalist constantly tending to reduce wages to their physical minimum, and to extend the working day to its physical maximum, while the working man constantly presses in the opposite direction.

The matter resolves itself into a question of the respective powers of the combatants.

2. As to the limitation of the working day in England, as in all other countries, it has never been settled except by legislative interference. Without the working men's continuous pressure from without that interference would never have taken place. But at all events, the result was not to be attained by private settlement between the working men and the capitalists. This very necessity of general political action affords the proof that in its merely economical action capital is the stronger side.

As to the limits of the value of labour, its actual settlement always depends upon supply and demand, I mean the demand for labour on the part of capital, and the supply of labour by the working men. In colonial countries the law of supply and demand favours the working man. Hence the relatively high standard of wages in the United States. Capital may there try its utmost. It cannot prevent the labour market from being continuously emptied by the continuous conversion of wages labourers into independent, self-sustaining peasants. The position of a wages labourer is for a very large part of the American people but a probational state, which they are sure to leave within a longer or shorter term. To mend this colonial state of things the paternal British Government accepted for some time what is called the modern colonization theory, which consists in putting an artificial high price upon colonial land, in order to prevent the too quick conversion of the wages labourer into the independent peasant.

But let us now come to old civilized countries, in which capital domineers over the whole process of production. Take, for example, the rise in England of agricultural wages from 1849 to 1859. What was its consequence? The farmers could not, as our friend Weston would have advised them, raise the value of wheat, nor even its market prices. They had, on the contrary, to submit to their fall. But during these eleven years they introduced machinery of all sorts, adopted more scientific methods, converted part of arable land into pasture, increased the size of farms, and with this the scale of production, and by these and other processes diminishing the demand for labour by increasing its productive power, made the agricultural population again relatively redundant. This is the general method in which a reaction, quicker or slower, of capital against a rise of wages takes place in old, settled countries. Ricardo has justly remarked that machinery is in constant competition with labour, and can often be only introduced when the price of labour has reached a certain height, but the appliance of machinery is but one of the many methods for increasing the productive powers of labour. The very same development which makes common labour relatively redundant simplifies, on the other hand, skilled labour, and thus depreciates it.

The same law obtains in another form. With the development of the productive powers of labour the accumulation of capital will be accelerated, even despite a relatively high rate of wages. Hence, one might infer, as Adam Smith, in whose days modern industry was still in its infancy, did infer, that the accelerated accumulation of capital must turn the balance in favour of the working man, by securing a growing demand for his labour. From this same standpoint many contemporary writers have wondered that English capital having grown in that last twenty years so much quicker than English population, wages should not have been more enhanced. But simultaneously with the progress of accumulation there takes place a progressive change in the composition of capital. That part of the aggregate capital which consists of fixed capital, machinery, raw materials, means of production in all possible forms, progressively increases as compared with the other part of capital, which is laid out in wages or in the purchase of labour. This law has been stated in a more or less accurate manner by Mr. Barton, Ricardo, Sismondi, Professor Richard Jones, Professor Ramsey, Cherbuilliez, and others.

If the proportion of these two elements of capital was originally one to one, it will, in the progress of industry, become five to one, and so forth. If of a total capital of 600, 300 is laid out in instruments, raw materials, and so forth, and 300 in wages, the total capital wants only to be doubled to create a demand for 600 working men instead of for 300. But if of a capital of 600, 500 is laid out in machinery, materials, and so forth and 100 only in wages, the same capital must increase from 600 to 3,600 in order to create a demand for 600 workmen instead of 300. In the progress of industry the demand for labour keeps, therefore, no pace with the accumulation of capital. It will still increase, but increase in a constantly diminishing ratio as compared with the increase of capital.

These few hints will suffice to show that the very development of modern industry must progressively turn the scale in favour of the capitalist against the working man, and that consequently the general tendency of capitalistic production is not to raise, but to sink the average standard of wages, or to push the value of labour more or less to its minimum limit. Such being the tendency of things in this system, is this saying that the working class ought to renounce their resistance against the encroachments of capital, and abandon their attempts at making the best of the occasional chances for their temporary improvement? If they did, they would be degraded to one level mass of broken wretches past salvation. I think I have shown that their struggles for the standard of wages are incidents inseparable from the whole wages system, that in 99 cases out of 100 their efforts at raising wages are only efforts at maintaining the given value of labour, and that the necessity of debating their price with the capitalist is inherent to their condition of having to sell themselves as commodities. By cowardly giving way in their everyday conflict with capital, they would certainly disqualify themselves for the initiating of any larger movement.

At the same time, and quite apart from the general servitude involved in the wages system, the working class ought not to exaggerate to themselves the ultimate working of these everyday struggles. They ought not to forget that they are fighting with effects, but not with the causes of those effects; that they are retarding the downward movement, but not changing its direction; that they are applying palliatives, not curing the malady. They ought, therefore, not to be exclusively absorbed in these unavoidable guerilla fights incessantly springing up from the never ceasing encroachments of capital or changes of the market. They ought to understand that, with all the miseries it imposes upon them, the present system simultaneously engenders the material conditions and the social forms necessary for an economical reconstruction of society. Instead of the conservative motto: “A fair day's wage for a fair day's work!” they ought to inscribe on their banner the revolutionary watchword: “Abolition of the wages system!"

After this very long and, I fear, tedious exposition, which I was obliged to enter into to do some justice to the subject matter, I shall conclude by proposing the following resolutions:

Firstly. A general rise in the rate of wages would result in a fall of the general rate of profit, but, broadly speaking, not affect the prices of commodities.

Secondly. The general tendency of capitalist production is not to raise, but to sink the average standard of wages.

Thirdly. Trades Unions work well as centers of resistance against the encroachments of capital. They fail partially from an injudicious use of their power. They fail generally from limiting themselves to a guerilla war against the effects of the existing system, instead of simultaneously trying to change it, instead of using their organized forces as a lever for the final emancipation of the working class that is to say the ultimate abolition of the wages system.
 


Table of Contents |
Marx Engels Archive |
Economics Index





==========

## Preface to the First German Edition of Capital








Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I - 1867 Preface



Karl MarxCapital Volume One

1867Preface to theFirst German Edition

 
The work, the first volume of which I now submit to
the public, forms the continuation of my Zur Kritik der Politischen
Oekonomie (A Contribution to the Criticism of Political
Economy) published in 1859. The long pause between the first part and the
continuation is due to an illness of many years’ duration that again and
again interrupted my work.

The substance of that earlier work is summarised in the first three
chapters of this volume. This is done not merely for the sake of connexion
and completeness. The presentation of the subject matter is improved. As
far as circumstances in any way permit, many points only hinted at in the
earlier book are here worked out more fully, whilst, conversely, points
worked out fully there are only touched upon in this volume. The sections
on the history of the theories of value and of money are now, of course,
left out altogether. The reader of the earlier work will find, however,
in the notes to the first chapter additional sources of reference relative
to the history of those theories.


Every beginning is difficult, holds in all sciences. To understand the
first chapter, especially the section that contains the analysis of commodities,
will, therefore, present the greatest difficulty. That which concerns more
especially the analysis of the substance of value and the magnitude of
value, I have, as much as it was possible, popularised. 
[1] The value-form, whose fully developed shape is the money-form, is very
elementary and simple. Nevertheless, the human mind has for more than 2,000
years sought in vain to get to the bottom of it all, whilst on the other
hand, to the successful analysis of much more composite and complex forms,
there has been at least an approximation. Why? Because the body, as an
organic whole, is more easy of study than are the cells of that body. In
the analysis of economic forms, moreover, neither microscopes nor chemical
reagents are of use. The force of abstraction must replace both. But in
bourgeois society, the commodity-form of the product of labour — or value-form
of the commodity — is the economic cell-form. To the superficial observer,
the analysis of these forms seems to turn upon minutiae. It does in fact
deal with minutiae, but they are of the same order as those dealt with
in microscopic anatomy.

With the exception of the section on value-form, therefore, this volume
cannot stand accused on the score of difficulty. I presuppose, of course,
a reader who is willing to learn something new and therefore to think for
himself.

The physicist either observes physical phenomena where they occur in
their most typical form and most free from disturbing influence, or, wherever
possible, he makes experiments under conditions that assure the occurrence
of the phenomenon in its normality. In this work I have to examine the
capitalist mode of production, and the conditions of production and exchange
corresponding to that mode. Up to the present time, their classic ground
is England. That is the reason why England is used as the chief illustration
in the development of my theoretical ideas. If, however, the German reader
shrugs his shoulders at the condition of the English industrial and agricultural
labourers, or in optimist fashion comforts himself with the thought that
in Germany things are not nearly so bad; I must plainly tell him, “De te
fabula narratur!” [It is of you that the story is told. – Horace]

Intrinsically, it is not a question of the higher or lower degree
of development of the social antagonisms that result from the natural laws
of capitalist production. It is a question of these laws themselves, of
these tendencies working with iron necessity towards inevitable results.
The country that is more developed industrially only shows, to the less
developed, the image of its own future.

But apart from this. Where capitalist production is fully naturalised
among the Germans (for instance, in the factories proper) the condition
of things is much worse than in England, because the counterpoise of the
Factory Acts is wanting. In all other spheres, we, like all the rest of
Continental Western Europe, suffer not only from the development of capitalist
production, but also from the incompleteness of that development. Alongside
the modern evils, a whole series of inherited evils oppress us, arising
from the passive survival of antiquated modes of production, with their
inevitable train of social and political anachronisms. We suffer not only
from the living, but from the dead. Le mort saisit le vif!
[The dead holds the living in his grasp. – formula of French common law]

The social statistics of Germany and the rest of Continental Western
Europe are, in comparison with those of England, wretchedly compiled. But
they raise the veil just enough to let us catch a glimpse of the Medusa
head behind it. We should be appalled at the state of things at home, if,
as in England, our governments and parliaments appointed periodically commissions
of inquiry into economic conditions; if these commissions were armed with
the same plenary powers to get at the truth; if it was possible to find
for this purpose men as competent, as free from partisanship and respect
of persons as are the English factory-inspectors, her medical reporters
on public health, her commissioners of inquiry into the exploitation of
women and children, into housing and food. Perseus wore a magic cap down
over his eyes and ears as a make-believe that there are no monsters.

Let us not deceive ourselves on this. As in the 18th century, the American
war of independence sounded the tocsin for the European middle class, so
that in the 19th century, the American Civil War sounded it for the European
working class. In England the process of social disintegration is palpable.
When it has reached a certain point, it must react on the Continent. There
it will take a form more brutal or more humane, according to the degree
of development of the working class itself. Apart from higher motives,
therefore, their own most important interests dictate to the classes that
are for the nonce the ruling ones, the removal of all legally removable
hindrances to the free development of the working class. For this reason,
as well as others, I have given so large a space in this volume to the
history, the details, and the results of English factory legislation. One
nation can and should learn from others. And even when a society has got
upon the right track for the discovery of the natural laws of its movement
— and it is the ultimate aim of this work, to lay bare the economic law
of motion of modern society — it can neither clear by bold leaps, nor
remove by legal enactments, the obstacles offered by the successive phases
of its normal development. But it can shorten and lessen the birth-pangs.

To prevent possible misunderstanding, a word. I paint the capitalist and
the landlord in no sense couleur de rose [i.e., seen through rose-tinted glasses]. But here individuals are
dealt with only in so far as they are the personifications of economic
categories, embodiments of particular class-relations and class-interests.
My standpoint, from which the evolution of the economic formation of society
is viewed as a process of natural history, can less than any other make
the individual responsible for relations whose creature he socially remains,
however much he may subjectively raise himself above them.

In the domain of Political Economy, free scientific inquiry meets not
merely the same enemies as in all other domains. The peculiar nature of
the materials it deals with, summons as foes into the field of battle the
most violent, mean and malignant passions of the human breast, the Furies
of private interest. The English Established Church, e.g., will more readily
pardon an attack on 38 of its 39 articles than on 1/39 of its income. Now-a-days
atheism is culpa levis [a relatively slight sin, c.f. mortal sin], as compared with criticism of existing property
relations. Nevertheless, there is an unmistakable advance. I refer, e.g.,
to the Blue book published within the last few weeks: “Correspondence with
Her Majesty’s Missions Abroad, regarding Industrial Questions and Trades’
Unions.” The representatives of the English Crown in foreign countries
there declare in so many words that in Germany, in France, to be brief,
in all the civilised states of the European Continent, radical change in
the existing relations between capital and labour is as evident and inevitable
as in England. At the same time, on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean,
Mr. Wade, vice-president of the United States, declared in public meetings
that, after the abolition of slavery, a radical change of the relations
of capital and of property in land is next upon the order of the day. These
are signs of the times, not to be hidden by purple mantles or black cassocks.
They do not signify that tomorrow a miracle will happen. They show that,
within the ruling classes themselves, a foreboding is dawning, that the
present society is no solid crystal, but an organism capable of change,
and is constantly changing.

The second volume of this book will treat of the process of the circulation
of capital (Book II.), and of the varied forms assumed by capital in the
course of its development (Book III.), the third and last volume (Book
IV.), the history of the theory.

Every opinion based on scientific criticism I welcome. As to prejudices
of so-called public opinion, to which I have never made concessions, now
as aforetime the maxim of the great Florentine is mine:


 “Segui il tuo corso, e lascia dir le genti.” 
[Follow your own course, and let people talk – paraphrased from Dante]


Karl Marx
London
July 25, 1867

Footnotes

[1] This is the more necessary, as even the
section of Ferdinand Lassalle’s work against Schulze-Delitzsch, in which
he professes to give “the intellectual quintessence” of my explanations
on these subjects, contains important mistakes. If Ferdinand Lassalle has
borrowed almost literally from my writings, and without any acknowledgement,
all the general theoretical propositions in his economic works, e.g., those
on the historical character of capital, on the connexion between the conditions
of production and the mode of production, &c., &c., even to the
terminology created by me, this may perhaps be due to purposes of propaganda.
I am here, of course, not speaking of his detailed working out and application
of these propositions, with which I have nothing to do.


Transcribed by Zodiac
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Prefaces and Afterwords


Capital Volume One- Index




==========

## Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation








Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I - Chapter Thirty Two




Karl Marx. Capital Volume One

Chapter Thirty-Two: Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation

 
What does the primitive accumulation of capital, i.e.,
its historical genesis, resolve itself into? In so far as it is not immediate
transformation of slaves and serfs into wage labourers, and therefore a
mere change of form, it only means the expropriation of the immediate producers,
i.e., the dissolution of private property based on the labour of
its owner. Private property, as the antithesis to social, collective property,
exists only where the means of labour and the external conditions of labour
belong to private individuals. But according as these private individuals
are labourers or not labourers, private property has a different character.
The numberless shades, that it at first sight presents, correspond to the
intermediate stages lying between these two extremes. The private property
of the labourer in his means of production is the foundation of petty industry,
whether agricultural, manufacturing, or both; petty industry, again, is
an essential condition for the development of social production and of
the free individuality of the labourer himself. Of course, this petty mode
of production exists also under slavery, serfdom, and other states of dependence.
But it flourishes, it lets loose its whole energy, it attains its adequate
classical form, only where the labourer is the private owner of his own
means of labour set in action by himself: the peasant of the land which
he cultivates, the artisan of the tool which he handles as a virtuoso.
This mode of production presupposes parcelling of the soil and scattering
of the other means of production. As it excludes the concentration of these
means of production, so also it excludes cooperation, division of labour
within each separate process of production, the control over, and the productive
application of the forces of Nature by society, and the free development
of the social productive powers. It is compatible only with a system of
production, and a society, moving within narrow and more or less primitive
bounds. To perpetuate it would be, as Pecqueur rightly says, “to decree
universal mediocrity". At a certain stage of development, it brings forth
the material agencies for its own dissolution. From that moment new forces
and new passions spring up in the bosom of society; but the old social
organisation fetters them and keeps them down. It must be annihilated;
it is annihilated. Its annihilation, the transformation of the individualised
and scattered means of production into socially concentrated ones, of the
pigmy property of the many into the huge property of the few, the expropriation
of the great mass of the people from the soil, from the means of subsistence,
and from the means of labour, this fearful and painful expropriation of
the mass of the people forms the prelude to the history of capital. It
comprises a series of forcible methods, of which we have passed in review
only those that have been epoch-making as methods of the primitive accumulation
of capital. The expropriation of the immediate producers was accomplished
with merciless Vandalism, and under the stimulus of passions the most infamous,
the most sordid, the pettiest, the most meanly odious. Self-earned private
property, that is based, so to say, on the fusing together of the isolated,
independent labouring individual with the conditions of his labour, is supplanted
by capitalistic private property, which rests on exploitation of the nominally
free labour of others, i.e., on wage labour. [1]

As soon as this process of transformation has sufficiently decomposed
the old society from top to bottom, as soon as the labourers are turned
into proletarians, their means of labour into capital, as soon as the capitalist
mode of production stands on its own feet, then the further socialisation
of labour and further transformation of the land and other means of production
into socially exploited and, therefore, common means of production, as
well as the further expropriation of private proprietors, takes a new form.
That which is now to be expropriated is no longer the labourer working for
himself, but the capitalist exploiting many labourers. This expropriation
is accomplished by the action of the immanent laws of capitalistic production
itself, by the centralisation of capital. One capitalist always kills many.
Hand in hand with this centralisation, or this expropriation of many capitalists
by few, develop, on an ever-extending scale, the cooperative form of the
labour process, the conscious technical application of science, the methodical
cultivation of the soil, the transformation of the instruments of labour
into instruments of labour only usable in common, the economising of all
means of production by their use as means of production of combined, socialised
labour, the entanglement of all peoples in the net of the world market,
and with this, the international character of the capitalistic regime.
Along with the constantly diminishing number of the magnates of capital,
who usurp and monopolise all advantages of this process of transformation,
grows the mass of misery, oppression, slavery, degradation, exploitation;
but with this too grows the revolt of the working class, a class always
increasing in numbers, and disciplined, united, organised by the very mechanism
of the process of capitalist production itself. The monopoly of capital
becomes a fetter upon the mode of production, which has sprung up and flourished
along with, and under it. Centralisation of the means of production and
socialisation of labour at last reach a point where they become incompatible
with their capitalist integument. This integument is burst asunder. The
knell of capitalist private property sounds. The expropriators are expropriated.


The capitalist mode of appropriation, the result of the capitalist
mode of production, produces capitalist private property. This is the first
negation of individual private property, as founded on the labour of the
proprietor. But capitalist production begets, with the inexorability of
a law of Nature, its own negation. It is the negation of negation. This
does not re-establish private property for the producer, but gives him
individual property based on the acquisition of the capitalist era: i.e.,
on cooperation and the possession in common of the land and of the means
of production.


The transformation of scattered private property, arising
from individual labour, into capitalist private property is, naturally,
a process, incomparably more protracted, violent, and difficult, than the
transformation of capitalistic private property, already practically resting
on socialised production, into socialised property. In the former case,
we had the expropriation of the mass of the people by a few usurpers; in
the latter, we have the expropriation of a few usurpers by the mass of
the people. [2]

 



Footnotes

1. “Nous sommes dans une condition tout-à-fait
nouvelle de la societé... nous tendons a séparer toute espèce de
propriété d’avec toute espèce de travail.”  [We are in a situation which is entirely new for society ...  we are striving to separate every kind of property from every kind of labour]  (Sismondi: “Nouveaux
Principes d’Econ. Polit.” t.II, p.434.)
2. The advance of industry, whose involuntary
promoter is the bourgeoisie, replaces the isolation of the labourers, due
to competition, by their revolutionary combination, due to association.
The development of Modern Industry, therefore, cuts from under its feet
the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces and appropriates
products. What the bourgeoisie, therefore, produces, above all, are its
own grave-diggers. Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally
inevitable.... Of all the classes that stand face-to-face with the bourgeoisie
today, the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The other
classes perish and disappear in the face of Modern Industry, the proletariat
is its special and essential product.... The lower middle classes, the
small manufacturers, the shopkeepers, the artisan, the peasant, all these
fight against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their existence
as fractions of the middle class... they are reactionary, for they try
to roll back the wheel of history. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, “Manifest
der Kommunistischen Partei,” London, 1848, pp. 9, 11.
 


Transcribed by Zodiac
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Thirty-Three: The Modern Theory of Colonisation


Capital Volume One Index




==========

## Preface to The Peasant War in Germany




The Peasant War in Germany: Preface








The Peasant War in Germany by Frederick Engels

Preface to the Second Edition (1870)
This work was written in London in the summer of 1850, under the vivid impression of the counter-revolution that had just been completed. It appeared in 1850 in the fifth and sixth issues of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, a political economic review edited by Karl Marx in Hamburg. My political friends in Germany desire to see it in book form, and I hereby fulfil that desire, since, unfortunately, it still has the interest of timeliness.
The work does not pretend to present independently collected material. Quite the contrary, all the material relating to the peasant revolts and to Thomas Muenzer has been taken from Zimmermann[1] whose book, although showing gaps here and there, is still the best presentation of the facts. Moreover, old Zimmermann enjoyed his subject. The same revolutionary instinct which makes him here the advocate of the oppressed classes, made him later one of the best in the extreme left wing of Frankfurt.
If, nevertheless, the Zimmermann representation lacks internal coherence; if it does not succeed in showing the religious and political controversies of that epoch as a reflection of the class struggles that were taking place simultaneously; if it sees in the class struggles only oppressors and oppressed, good and evil, and the final victory of evil; if its insight into social conditions which determined both the outbreak and the outcome of the struggle is extremely poor, it was the fault of the time in which that book came into existence. Nevertheless, for its time, and among the German idealistic works on history, it stands out as written in a very realistic vein.
This book, while giving the historic course of the struggle only in its outlines, undertakes to explain the origin of the peasant wars, the attitude of the various parties which appear in the war, the political and religious theories through which those parties strove to make clear to themselves their position; and finally, the result of the struggle as determined by the historical-social conditions of life, to show the political constitution of Germany of that time, the revolt against it; and to prove that the political and religious theories were not the causes, but the result of that stage in the development of agriculture, industry, land and waterways, commerce and finance, which then existed in Germany. This, the only materialistic conception of history, originates, not from myself but from Marx, and can be found in his works on the French Revolution of 1848–9, published in the same review, and in his Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.
The parallel between the German Revolutions of 1525 and of 1848–9 was too obvious to be left entirely without attention. However, together with an identity of events in both cases, as for instance, the suppression of one local revolt after the other by the army of the princes, together with a sometimes comic similitude in the behaviour of the city middle-class, the difference is quite clear.
“Who profited by the Revolution of 1525? The princes. Who profited by the Revolution of 1848? The big princes, Austria and Prussia. Behind the princes of 1525 there stood the lower middle-class of the cities, held chained by means of taxation. Behind the big princes of 1850, there stood the modern big bourgeoisie, quickly subjugating them by means of the State debt. Behind the big bourgeoisie stand the proletarians.”
I am sorry to state that in this paragraph too much honour was given to the German bourgeoisie. True, it had the opportunity of “quickly subjugating” the monarchy by means of the State debt. Never did it avail itself of this opportunity.
Austria fell as a boon into the lap of the bourgeoisie after the war of 1866, but the bourgeoisie does not understand how to govern. It is powerless and inefficient in everything. Only one thing is it capable of doing: to storm against the workers as soon as they begin to stir. It remains at the helm only because the Hungarians need it.
And in Prussia? True, the State debt has increased by leaps and bounds. The deficit has become a permanent feature. The State expenditures keep growing, year in and year out. The bourgeoisie have a majority in the Chamber. No taxes can be increased and no debts incurred without their consent. But where is their power in the State? It was only a couple of months ago, when a deficit was looming, that again they found themselves in the most favourable position. They could have gained considerable concessions by persevering. What was their reaction? They considered it a sufficient concession when the Government allowed them to lay at its feet nine millions, not for one year alone, but to be collected indefinitely every year.
I do not want to blame the “national liberals” of the Chamber more than is their due. I know they have been forsaken by those who stand behind them, by the mass of the bourgeoisie. This mass does not wish to govern. 1848 is still in its bones.
Why the German bourgeoisie has developed this remarkable trait, will be discussed later.
In general, however, the above quotation has proved perfectly true. Beginning from 1850, the small States were in constant retreat, serving only as levers for Prussian and Austrian intrigues. Austria and Prussia were engaged in ever-stronger struggles for supremacy. Finally, the fearful clash of 1866 took place. Austria, retaining all its provinces, subjugated, directly and indirectly, the entire north of Prussia, while leaving the fate of the three southern States in the air.
In all these grand activities of the States, only the following are of particular importance for the German working class:
First, that universal suffrage has given the workers the power to be directly represented in the legislative assemblies.
Second, that Prussia has set a good example by swallowing three crowns by the grace of God. That after this operation her own crown is maintained by the grace of God as pure as she claims it to be, not even the national liberals believe any more.
Third, that there is only one serious enemy of the Revolution in Germany at the present time – the Prussian government.
Fourth, that the Austro-Germans will now be compelled to ask themselves what they wish to be, Germans or Austrians; whom they wish to adhere to, to Germany or her extraordinary transleithanian appendages. It has been obvious for a long time that they will have to give up one or the other. Still, this has been continually glossed over by the petty-bourgeois democracy.
As to other important controversies concerning 1866 which were threshed out between the “national-liberals” and the people’s party ad nauseam, coming years will show that the two standpoints fought so bitterly simply because they were the opposite poles of the same stupidity.
In the social conditions of Germany, the year 1866 has changed almost nothing. A few bourgeois reforms: uniform measures and weights, freedom of movement, freedom of trade, etc. – all within limits befitting bureaucracy, do not even come up to that of which other western European countries have been in possession for a long while, and leave the main evil, the system of bureaucratic concessions, unshaken. As to the proletariat, the freedom of movement, and of citizenship, the abolition of passports and other such legislation is made illusory by the current police practice.
What is much more important than the grand manoeuvres of the State in 1866 is the growth of German industry and commerce, of the railways, the telegraph, and ocean steamship navigation since 1848. This progress may be lagging behind that of England or even France, but it is unheard of for Germany, and has done more in twenty years than would have been previously possible in a century. Germany has been drawn, earnestly and irrevocably, into world commerce. Capital invested in industry has multiplied rapidly. The position of the bourgeoisie has improved accordingly. The surest sign of industrial prosperity – speculation – has blossomed richly, princes and dukes being chained to its triumphal chariot. German capital is now constructing Russian and Rumanian railways, whereas, only fifteen years ago, the German railways went a-begging to English entrepreneurs. How, then, is it possible that the bourgeoisie has not conquered political power, that it behaves in so cowardly a manner toward the government?
It is the misfortune of the German bourgeoisie to have come too late – quite in accordance with the beloved German tradition. The period of its ascendancy coincides with the time when the bourgeoisie of the other western European countries is politically on the downward path. In England, the bourgeoisie could place its real representative, Bright, into the government only by extending the franchise which in the long run is bound to put an end to its very domination. In France, the bourgeoisie, which for two years only, 1849–50, had held power as a class under the republican régime, was able to continue its social existence only by transferring its power to Louis Bonaparte and the army. Under present conditions of enormously increased interdependence of the three most progressive European countries, it is no more possible for the German bourgeoisie extensively to utilize its political power while the same class has outlived itself in England and France. It is a peculiarity of the bourgeoisie, distinguishing it from all other classes, that a point is being reached in its development after which every increase in its power, that is, every enlargement of its capital, only tends to make it more and more incapable of retaining political dominance. “Behind the big bourgeoisie stand the proletarians.” In the degree as the bourgeoisie develops its industry, its commerce, and its means of communication, it also produces the proletariat. At a certain point, which must not necessarily appear simultaneously and on the same stage of development everywhere, it begins to note that this, its second self, has outgrown it. From then on, it loses the power for exclusive political dominance. It looks for allies with whom to share its authority, or to whom to cede all power, as circumstances may demand.
In Germany, this turning point came for the bourgeoisie as early as 1848. The bourgeoisie became frightened, not so much by the German, as by the French proletariat. The battle of June, 1848, in Paris, showed the bourgeoisie what could be expected. The German proletariat was restless enough to prove to the bourgeoisie that the seed of revolution had been sown also in German soil. From that day, the edge of bourgeois political action was broken. The bourgeoisie looked around for allies. It sold itself to them regardless of price, and there it remains.
These allies are all of a reactionary turn. It is the king’s power, with his army and his bureaucracy; it is the big feudal nobility; it is the smaller junker; it is even the clergy. The bourgeoisie has made so many compacts and unions with all of them to save its dear skin, that now it has nothing more to barter. And the more the proletariat developed, the more it began to feel as a class and to act as one, the feebler became the bourgeoisie. When the astonishingly bad strategy of the Prussians triumphed over the astonishingly worse strategy of the Austrians at Sadowa, it was difficult to say who gave a deeper sigh of relief, the Prussian bourgeois, who was a partner to the defeat at Sadowa, or his Austrian colleague.
Our upper middle-class of 1870 acted in the same fashion as did the moderate middle-class of 1525. As to the small bourgeoisie, the master artisans and merchants, they remain unchanged. They hope to climb up to the big bourgeoisie, and they are fearful lest they be pushed down into the ranks of the proletariat. Between fear and hope, they will in times of struggle seek to save their precious skin and to join the victors when the struggle is over. Such is their nature.
The social and political activities of the proletariat have kept pace with the rapid growth of industry since 1848. The role of the German workers, as expressed in their trade unions, their associations, political organisations and public meetings, at elections, and in the so-called Reichstag, is alone a sufficient indication of the transformation which came over Germany in the last twenty years. It is to the credit of the German workers that they alone have managed to send workers and workers’ representatives into the Parliament – a feat which neither the French nor the English had hitherto accomplished.
Still, even the proletariat shows some resemblance to 1525. The class of the population which entirely and permanently depends on wages is now, as then, a minority of the German people. This class is also compelled to seek allies. The latter can be found only among the petty bourgeoisie, the low grade proletariat of the cities, the small peasants, and the wage-workers of the land.
The petty bourgeoisie has been mentioned above. This class is entirely unreliable except when a victory has been won. Then its noise in the beer saloons is without limit. Nevertheless, there are good elements among it, who, of their own accord, follow the workers.
The lumpenproletariat, this scum of the decaying elements of all classes, which establishes headquarters in all the big cities, is the worst of all possible allies. It is an absolutely venal, an absolutely brazen crew. If the French workers, in the course of the Revolution, inscribed on the houses: Mort aux voleurs! (Death to the thieves!) and even shot down many, they did it, not out of enthusiasm for property, but because they rightly considered it necessary to hold that band at arm’s length. Every leader of the workers who utilises these gutter-proletarians as guards or supports, proves himself by this action alone a traitor to the movement.
The small peasants (bigger peasants belong to the bourgeoisie) are not homogeneous. They are either in serfdom bound to their lords and masters, and inasmuch as the bourgeoisie has failed to do its duty in freeing those people from serfdom, it will not be difficult to convince them that salvation, for them, can be expected only from the working class; or they are tenants, whose situation is almost equal to that of the Irish. Rents are so high that even in times of normal crops the peasant and his family can hardly eke out a bare existence; when the crops are bad, he virtually starves. When he is unable to pay his rent, he is entirely at the mercy of the landlord. The bourgeoisie thinks of relief only under compulsion. Where, then, should the tenants look for relief outside of the workers?
There is another group of peasants, those who own a small piece of land. In most cases they are so burdened with mortgages that their dependence upon the usurer is equal to the dependence of the tenant upon the landlord. What they earn is practically a meager wage, which, since good and bad crops alternate, is highly uncertain. These people cannot have the least hope of getting anything out of the bourgeoisie, because it is the bourgeoisie, the capitalist usurers, that squeeze the life-blood out of them. Still, the peasants cling to their property, though in reality it does not belong to them, but to the usurers. It will be necessary to make it clear to these people that only when a government of the people will have transformed all mortgages into a debt to the State, and thereby lowered the rent, will they be able to free themselves from the usurer. This, however, can be accomplished only by the working class.
Wherever middle and large land ownership prevails, the wage-workers of the land form the most numerous class. This is the case throughout the entire north and east of Germany, and it is here that the industrial workers of the city find their most numerous and natural allies. In the same way as the capitalist is opposed to the industrial worker, the large landowner or large tenant is opposed to the wage-workers of the land. The measures that help the one must also help the other. The industrial workers can free themselves only by turning the capital of the bourgeoisie, that is, the raw materials, machines and tools, the foodstuffs necessary for production, into social property, their own property, to be used by them in common. Similarly, the wage-workers of the land can be freed from their hideous misery only when the main object of their work, the land itself, will be withdrawn from the private property of the large peasants and still larger feudal masters, and transformed into social property to be cultivated by an association of land workers on common basis. And here we come to the famous decision of the International Socialist Congress in Basle: That it is in the interest of society to transform property on land into common national property. This decision was made primarily for those countries where there is large land ownership, with large agricultural enterprises, with one master and many wage-workers in every estate. It is these conditions that still prevail in Germany, and next to England, the decision was most timely for Germany. The agricultural proletariat, the wage-workers of the land, is the class from which the bulk of the armies of the princes is being recruited. It is the class which, thanks to universal suffrage, sends into Parliament the great mass of feudal masters and Junkers. However, it is also the class nearest to the industrial workers of the city. It shares their conditions of living, and it is still deeper steeped in misery than the city workers. This class, powerless because split and scattered, but possessing hidden power which is so well known to the government and nobility that they purposely allow the schools to deteriorate in order that the rural population should remain unenlightened, must be called to life and drawn into the movement. This is the most urgent task of the German labour movement. From the day when the mass of the workers of the land have learned to understand their own interests, a reactionary, feudal, bureaucratic or bourgeois government in Germany becomes an impossibility.

 

Contents | Addendum to the Preface | Marx/Engels Archive
Last updated on 15 July 2020




==========

## Supplement to the Preface of 1870 for the Third Edition of 1875




The Peasant War in Germany: Addendum 








The Peasant War in Germany by Frederick Engels

Addendum to the Preface
THE preceding lines were written over four years ago, but they are valid also at present. What was true after Sadowa and the partition of Germany is being confirmed also after Sedan and the erection of the Holy German Empire of Prussian nationality. Little indeed are the “world-shaking” activities of the States in the realm of so-called big politics in a position to change the trend of historic development.
What these grand activities of the States are in a position to accomplish is to hasten the tempo of historic movement. In this respect, the originators of the above-mentioned “world-shaking” events have made involuntary successes which to themselves appear highly undesirable, but which, however, they must take into the bargain, for better or worse.
Already the war of 1866 had shaken the old Prussia to its foundations. After 1848 it was difficult to bring the rebellious industrial element of the western provinces, bourgeois as well as proletarian, under the old discipline. Still, somehow, this was accomplished, and the interests of the Junkers of the eastern provinces, together with those of the army, again became dominant in the State. In 1866 almost all the northwest of Germany became Prussian. Besides the incurable moral injury to the Prussian crown, by the fact that it had swallowed up three other crowns by the grace of God, the centre of gravity of the monarchy had moved considerably westward. The four million Rhinelanders and Westphalians were reinforced, first, by four million Germans annexed through the North German Alliance directly, and then by six million annexed indirectly. In 1870, however, eight million southwest Germans were added, so that, in the “new monarchy,” the fourteen and a half million old Prussians (all the six East Elbian provinces, among them, two million Poles) were opposed by twenty-five million who had long outgrown the old Prussian junker feudalism. So it happened that the very victories of the Prussian army displaced the entire foundation of the Prussian State edifice; the junker dominance became ever more intolerable, even for the government itself. At the same time, however, the struggle between the bourgeoisie and the workers, made inevitable by the impetuous growth of industry, relegated to the background the struggle between Junkers and bourgeoisie, so that the inner social foundations of the old State suffered a complete transformation. Ever since 1840, the condition making possible the existence of the slowly rotting monarchy was the struggle between nobility and bourgeoisie, wherein the monarchy retained equilibrium. From the moment, however, when it was no more a question of protecting the nobility against the onslaught of the bourgeoisie, but of protecting all propertied classes against the onslaught of the working-class, the absolute monarchy had to turn to that form of state which was expressly devised for this specific purpose – the Bonapartist monarchy. This change of Prussia towards Bonapartism I have discussed in another place (Woknungsfrage). What I did not stress there, and what is very important in this connection, is that this change was the greatest progress made by Prussia after 1848, which only shows how backward Prussia was in point of modern development. It is a fact that the Prussian State still was a semi-feudal State, whereas Bonapartism is, at all events, a modern form of state which presupposes the abolition of feudalism. Thus Prussia must decide to do away with its numerous remnants of feudalism, to sacrifice its junkerdom as such. This, naturally, is being done in the mildest possible form, and under the tune of the favourite melody, “Always slowly forward.” An example of such “reform” work is the notorious organisation of districts, which, removing the feudal privileges of the individual junker in relation to his estate, restores them as special privileges of the big landowners in relation to the entire district. The substance remains, it being only translated from the feudal into the bourgeois dialect. The old Prussian junker is forcibly being transformed into something akin to the English squire. He need not have offered so much resistance, because the one is just as foolish as the other.
Thus it was the peculiar feat of Prussia not only to culminate, by the end of this century, her bourgeois revolution begun in 1808–13 and continued in 1848, but to culminate it in the present form of Bonapartism. If everything goes well, and the world remains nice and quiet, and we all become old enough, we can still perhaps live to see – about 1900 – the government of Prussia actually relinquishing all feudal institutions, and Prussia finally reaching a point where France stood in 1792.
Speaking positively, the abolition of feudalism means the introduction of bourgeois conditions. In the measure as the privileges of the nobility fall, legislation becomes more and more bourgeois. Here, again, we meet with the chief point at issue, the attitude of the German bourgeoisie towards the government. We have seen that the government is compelled to introduce these slow and petty reforms, but in its relation to the bourgeoisie, the government portrays these small concessions as sacrifices in favour of the bourgeoisie, as concessions yielded by the crown with difficulty and pain, and for which the bourgeoisie must, in return, yield something to the government. The bourgeoisie, on the other hand, though quite aware of this state of affairs, allows itself to be fooled. This is the source of the tacit agreement which is the basis of all Reichstag and Chamber debates. On the one hand, the government reforms the laws at a snail pace tempo in the interests of the bourgeoisie; it removes the impediments to industry emanating from the multiplicity of small states; it creates unity of coinage, of measures and weights; it gives freedom of trade, etc.; it grants the freedom of movement; it puts the working power of Germany at the unlimited disposal of capital; it creates favourable conditions for trade and speculation. On the other hand, the bourgeoisie leaves in the hands of the government all actual political power; it votes taxes, loans and recruits; it helps to frame all new reform laws in a way that the old police power over undesirable individuals shall remain in full force. The bourgeoisie buys its gradual social emancipation for the price of immediate renunciation of its own political power. Naturally, the motive which makes such agreement acceptable to the bourgeoisie is not the fear of the government but the fear of the proletariat.
Miserable as the bourgeoisie appears in the political realm, it cannot be denied that as far as industry and commerce are concerned, the bourgeoisie fulfils its historic duty. The growth of industry and commerce mentioned already in the introduction to the second edition has been going on with even greater vigour. What has taken place in the Rhenish-Westphalian industrial region since 1869, is unprecedented for Germany, and it reminds one of the rapid growth in the English manufacturing districts at the beginning of this century. The same thing will happen in Saxony and Upper Silesia, in Berlin, Hanover, and the southern States. At last we have world trade, a really big industry, and a really modern bourgeoisie. But we have also had a real crisis, and we have a truly mighty proletariat. For the future historian of Germany, the battle roar of 1859–64 on the field of Spicheren, Mars la Tour, Sedan, and the rest, will be of much less importance than the unpretentious, quiet, and constantly forward-moving development of the German proletariat. Immediately after 1870, the German workers stood before a grave trial – the Bonapartist war provocation and its natural sequence, the general national enthusiasm in Germany. The German workers did not allow themselves to be illusioned for a moment. Not a trace of national chauvinism made itself manifest among them. In the midst of a mania for victory, they remained cool, demanding “equitable peace with the French Republic and no annexations,” and not even the state of siege was in a position to silence them. No glory of battle, no phraseology of German “imperial magnificence” attracted them. Their sole aim remained the liberation of the entire European proletariat. We may say with full assurance that in no country have the workers stood such a difficult test with such splendid results.
The state of siege of wartime was followed by trials for treason, lèse majesté, and contempt of officers and by ever increasing police atrocities practised in peace time. The Volksstaat had three or four editors in prison simultaneously; the other papers, in the same ratio. Every known party speaker had to face court at least once a year, and was usually convicted. Deportations, confiscations, suppressions of meetings rapidly followed one another, but all to no avail. The place of every prisoner or deportee was immediately filled by another. For one suppressed gathering, two others were substituted, wearing out arbitrary police power in one locality after the other by endurance and strict conformity to the law. Persecution defeated its own purpose. Far from breaking the workers’ party or even bending it, it attracted ever new recruits, and strengthened the organisation. In their struggle against the authorities and the individual bourgeois, the workers manifested an intellectual and moral superiority. Particularly in their conflicts with the employers of labour did they show that they, the workers, were now the educated class, while the capitalists were dupes. In their fights, a sense of humour prevailed, showing how sure they were of their cause, and how superior they felt. A struggle thus conducted on historically prepared soil must yield great results. The success of the January (1874) elections stood out, unique in the history of the modern labour movement, and the astonishment aroused by them throughout Europe was perfectly deserved.
The German workers have two important advantages compared with the rest of Europe. First, they belong to the most theoretical people of Europe; second, they have retained that sense of theory which the so-called “educated” people of Germany have totally lost. Without German philosophy, particularly that of Hegel, German scientific Socialism (the only scientific Socialism extant) would never have come into existence. Without a sense for theory, scientific Socialism would have never become blood and tissue of the workers. What an enormous advantage this is, may be seen on the one hand from the indifference of the English labour movement towards all theory, which is one of the reasons why it moves so slowly in spite of the splendid organisation of the individual unions; on the other hand, from the mischief and confusion created by Proudhonism in its original form among the Frenchmen and Belgians, and in its caricature form, as presented by Bakunin, among the Spaniards and Italians.
The second advantage is that, chronologically speaking, the Germans were the last to appear in the labour movement. In the same manner as German theoretical Socialism will never forget that it rests on the shoulders of Saint Simon, Fourier and Owen, the three who, in spite of their fantastic notions and Utopianism, belonged to the most significant heads of all time and whose genius anticipated numerous things the correctness of which can now be proved in a scientific way, so the practical German labour movement must never forget that it has developed on the shoulders of the English and French movements, that it had utilised their experience, acquired at a heavy price, and that for this reason it was in a position to avoid their mistakes which in their time were unavoidable. Without the English trade unions and the French political workers’ struggles preceding the German labour movement, without the mighty impulse given by the Paris Commune, where would we now be?
It must be said to the credit of the German workers that they have utilised the advantages of their situation with rare understanding. For the first time in the history of the labour movement the struggle is being so conducted that its three sides, the theoretical, the political and the practical economical (opposition to the capitalists), form one harmonious and well-planned entity. In this concentric attack, as it were, lies the strength and invincibility of the German movement.
It is due to this advantageous situation on the one hand, to the insular peculiarities of the British, and to the cruel suppression of the French movements on the other, that for the present moment the German workers form the vanguard of the proletarian struggle. How long events will allow them to occupy this post of honour cannot be foreseen. But as long as they are placed in it, let us hope that they will discharge their duties in the proper manner. It is the specific duty of the leaders to gain an ever clearer understanding of the theoretical problems, to free themselves more and more from the influence of traditional phrases inherited from the old conception of the world, and constantly to keep in mind that Socialism, having become a science, demands the same treatment as every other science – it must be studied. The task of the leaders will be to bring understanding, thus acquired and clarified, to the working masses, to spread it with increased enthusiasm, to close the ranks of the party organisations and of the labour unions with ever greater energy. The votes cast in favour of the Socialists last January may represent considerable strength, but they still are far from being the majority of the German working class; and encouraging as may be the successes of the propaganda among the rural population, more remains to be done in this field. The slogan is not to flinch in the struggle. The task is to wrest from the enemy’s hands one seat after the other, one electoral district after the other. In the first place, however, it is necessary to retain a real international spirit which permits of no chauvinism, which joyfully greets each new step of the proletarian movement, no matter in which nation it is made. If the German workers proceed in this way, they may not march exactly at the head of the movement – it is not in the interest of the movement that the workers of one country should march at the head of all – but they will occupy an honourable place on the battle line, and they will stand armed for battle when other unexpected grave trials or momentous events will demand heightened courage, heightened determination, and the will to act.



 


FREDERICK ENGELS
London, July 1, 1874.




 

Contents | Chapter 1 | Marx/Engels Archive
Last updated on 15 July 2020




==========

## Introduction







The Civil War in France



Frederick Engels: The Civil War in France


1891 Introduction by Frederick Engels
  On the 20th Anniversary of the Paris Commune 
[PostScript][A] 

 
I did not anticipate that I would be asked to prepare a new edition of the
  Address of the General Council of the International on The Civil War in
  France, and to write an introduction to it. Therefore I can only touch
  briefly here on the most important points. 
I am prefacing the longer work mentioned above by the two shorter
  addresses of the General Council on the Franco-Prussian War. [Chapter 1 and Chapter 2] In the first place, because the second
  of these, which itself cannot be fully understood without the first, is
  referred to in The Civil War. But also because these two Addresses,
  likewise drafted by Marx, are, no less than The Civil War,
  outstanding examples of the author’s remarkable gift, first proved in
  The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
  Bonaparte, for grasping clearly the character, the import, and the
  necessary consequences of great historical events, at a time when these
  events are still in process before our eyes, or have only just taken place.
  And, finally, because we in Germany are still having to endure the
  consequences which Marx prophesied would follow from these events. 
Has that which was declared in the first Address not come to pass: that if
  Germany’s defensive war against Louis Bonaparte degenerated into a war
  of conquest against the French people, all the misfortunes which befell
  Germany after the so-called wars of liberation[B] would revive again with renewed intensity?
  Have we not had a further 20 years of Bismarck’s government, the Exceptional
  Law and the anti-socialist campaign taking the place of the prosecutions
  of demagogues,[C] with
  the same arbitrary police measures and with literally the same staggering
  interpretations of the law? 
And has not the prophecy been proved to the
  letter that the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine would "force France into the
  arms of Russia," and that after this annexation Germany must either become
  the avowed tool of Russia, or must, after some short respite, arm for a new
  war, and, moreover, "a race war against the combined Slavonic and Roman
  races"? Has not the annexation of the French provinces driven France into the
  arms of Russia? Has not Bismarck for fully 20 years vainly wooed the favor of
  the tsar, wooed it with services even more lowly than those which little
  Prussia, before it became the "first power in Europe," was wont to lay at
  Holy Russia’s feet? And is there not every day hanging over our heads
  the Damocles’ sword of war, on the first day of which all the chartered
  covenants of princes will be scattered like chaff; a war of which nothing is
  certain but the absolute uncertainty of its outcome; a race war which will
  subject the whole of Europe to devastation by 15 or 20 million armed men, and
  is only not already raging because even the strongest of the great military
  states shrinks before the absolute incalculability of its final outcome? 
All the more is it our duty to make again accessible to the German workers
  these brilliant proofs, now half-forgotten, of the far-sightedness of the
  international working class policy in 1870. 
What is true of these two Addresses is also true of The Civil War in
  France. On May 28, the last fighters of the Commune succumbed to
  superior forces on the slopes of Belleville; and only two days later, on May
  30, Marx read to the General Council the work in which the historical
  significance of the Paris Commune is delineated in short powerful strokes,
  but with such clearness, and above all such truth, as has never again been
  attained on all the mass of literature which has been written on this
  subject. 

If today, we look back at the activity and historical significance of the
  Paris Commune of 1871, we shall find it necessary to make a few additions to
  the account given in The Civil War in France. 
The members of the Commune were divided into a majority of the Blanquists,
  who had also been predominant in the Central Committee of the National Guard;
  and a minority, members of the International Working Men’s Association,
  chiefly consisting of adherents of the Proudhon school of socialism. The
  great majority of the Blanquists at that time were socialist only by
  revolutionary and proletarian instinct; only a few had attained greater
  clarity on the essential principles, through Vaillant, who was familiar with
  German scientific socialism. It is therefore comprehensible that in the
  economic sphere much was left undone which, according to our view today, the
  Commune ought to have done. The hardest thing to understand is certainly the
  holy awe with which they remained standing respectfully outside the gates of
  the Bank of France. This was also a serious political mistake. The bank in
  the hands of the Commune – this would have been worth more than 10,000
  hostages. It would have meant the pressure of the whole of the French
  bourgeoisie on the Versailles government in favor of peace with the Commune,
  but what is still more wonderful is the correctness of so much that was
  actually done by the Commune, composed as it was of Blanquists and
  Proudhonists. Naturally, the Proudhonists were chiefly responsible for the
  economic decrees of the Commune, both for their praiseworthy and their
  unpraiseworthy aspects; as the Blanquists were for its political actions and
  omissions. And in both cases the irony of history willed – as is usual
  when doctrinaires come to the helm – that both did the opposite of what
  the doctrines of their school proscribed. 
Proudhon, the Socialist of the small peasant and master-craftsman,
  regarded association with positive hatred. He said of it that there was more
  bad than good in it; that it was by nature sterile, even harmful, because it
  was a fetter on the freedom of the workers; that it was a pure dogma,
  unproductive and burdensome, in conflict as much with the freedom of the
  workers as with economy of labor; that its disadvantages multiplied more
  swiftly than its advantages; that, as compared with it, competition, division
  of labor and private property were economic forces. Only for the exceptional
  cases – as Proudhon called them – of large-scale industry and
  large industrial units, such as railways, was there any place for the
  association of workers. (Cf. Idee Generale de la Revolution, 3
  etude.) 
By 1871, even in Paris, the centre of handicrafts, large-scale industry
  had already so much ceased to be an exceptional case that by far the most
  important decree of the Commune instituted an organization of large-scale
  industry and even of manufacture which was not based only on the association
  of workers in each factory, but also aimed at combining all these
  associations in one great union; in short an organization which, as Marx
  quite rightly says in The Civil War, must necessarily have led in
  the end to communism, that is to say, the direct antithesis of the Proudhon
  doctrine. And, therefore, the Commune was also the grave of the Proudhon
  school of socialism. Today this school has vanished from French working class
  circles; among them now, among the Possibilists no
  less than among the “Marxists”, Marx’s theory rules
  unchallenged. Only among the “radical” bourgeoisie are there
  still Proudhonists. 
The Blanquists fared no better. Brought up in the school of conspiracy,
  and held together by the strict discipline which went with it, they started
  out from the viewpoint that a relatively small number of resolute,
  well-organized men would be able, at a given favorable moment, not only seize
  the helm of state, but also by energetic and relentless action, to keep power
  until they succeeded in drawing the mass of the people into the revolution
  and ranging them round the small band of leaders. this conception involved,
  above all, the strictest dictatorship and centralization of all power in the
  hands of the new revolutionary government. And what did the Commune, with its
  majority of these same Blanquists, actually do? In all its proclamations to
  the French in the provinces, it appealed to them to form a free federation of
  all French Communes with Paris, a national organization, which for the first
  time was really to be created by the nation itself. It was precisely the
  oppressing power of the former centralized government, army, political police
  and bureaucracy, which Napoleon had created in 1798 and since then had been
  taken over by every new government as a welcome instrument and used against
  its opponents, it was precisely this power which was to fall everywhere, just
  as it had already fallen in Paris. 
From the outset the Commune was compelled to recognize that the working
  class, once come to power, could not manage with the old state machine; that
  in order not to lose again its only just conquered supremacy, this working
  class must, on the one hand, do away with all the old repressive machinery
  previously used against it itself, and, on the other, safeguard itself
  against its own deputies and officials, by declaring them all, without
  exception, subject to recall at any moment. What had been the characteristic
  attribute of the former state? Society had created its own organs to look
  after its common interests, originally through simple division of labor. But
  these organs, at whose head was the state power, had in the course of time,
  in pursuance of their own special interests, transformed themselves from the
  servants of society into the masters of society, as can be seen, for example,
  not only in the hereditary monarchy, but equally also in the democratic
  republic. Nowhere do “politicians” form a more separate, powerful
  section of the nation than in North America. There, each of the two great
  parties which alternately succeed each other in power is itself in turn
  controlled by people who make a business of politics, who speculate on seats
  in the legislative assemblies of the Union as well as of the separate states,
  or who make a living by carrying on agitation for their party and on its
  victory are rewarded with positions. 
It is well known that the Americans have been striving for 30 years to
  shake off this yoke, which has become intolerable, and that in spite of all
  they can do they continue to sink ever deeper in this swamp of corruption. It
  is precisely in America that we see best how there takes place this process
  of the state power making itself independent in relation to society, whose
  mere instrument it was originally intended to be. Here there exists no
  dynasty, no nobility, no standing army, beyond the few men keeping watch on
  the Indians, no bureaucracy with permanent posts or the right to pensions.
  and nevertheless we find here two great gangs of political speculators, who
  alternately take possession of the state power and exploit it by the most
  corrupt means and for the most corrupt ends – and the nation is
  powerless against these two great cartels of politicians, who are ostensibly
  its servants, but in reality exploit and plunder it. 
Against this transformation of the state and the organs of the state from
  servants of society into masters of society – an inevitable
  transformation in all previous states – the Commune made use of two
  infallible expedients. In this first place, it filled all posts –
  administrative, judicial, and educational – by election on the basis of
  universal suffrage of all concerned, with the right of the same electors to
  recall their delegate at any time. And in the second place, all officials,
  high or low, were paid only the wages received by other workers. The highest
  salary paid by the Commune to anyone was 6,000 francs. In this way an
  effective barrier to place-hunting and careerism was set up, even apart from
  the binding mandates to delegates to representative bodies which were also
  added in profusion. 
This shattering of the former state power and its replacement by a new and
  really democratic state is described in detail in the third section of
  The Civil War. But it was necessary to dwell briefly here once more
  on some of its features, because in Germany particularly the superstitious
  belief in the state has been carried over from philosophy into the general
  consciousness of the bourgeoisie and even to many workers. According to the
  philosophical notion, “the state is the realization of the idea” or the
  Kingdom of God on earth, translated into philosophical terms, the sphere in
  which eternal truth and justice is or should be realized. And from this
  follows a superstitious reverence for the state and everything connected with
  it, which takes roots the more readily as people from their childhood are
  accustomed to imagine that the affairs and interests common to the whole of
  society could not be looked after otherwise than as they have been looked
  after in the past, that is, through the state and its well-paid officials.
  And people think they have taken quite an extraordinary bold step forward
  when they have rid themselves of belief in hereditary monarchy and swear by
  the democratic republic. In reality, however,
  the state is nothing but a machine for the oppression of one class by
  another, and indeed in the democratic republic no less than in the monarchy;
  and at best an evil inherited by the proletariat after its victorious
  struggle for class supremacy, whose worst sides the proletariat, just like
  the Commune, cannot avoid having to lop off at the earliest possible moment,
  until such time as a new generation, reared in new and free social
  conditions, will be able to throw the entire lumber of the state on the
  scrap-heap. 
Of late, the Social-Democratic philistine has once more been filled with
  wholesome terror at the words: Dictatorship of the Proletariat. Well and
  good, gentlemen, do you want to know what this dictatorship looks like? Look
  at the Paris Commune. That was the Dictatorship of the Proletariat. 
Frederick Engels 
London, on the 20th anniversary 
  of the Paris Commune, March 18, 1891. 
 
Next: [Contemporary News Articles] 
 

[A] At
  the time Engels wrote the Introduction he was writing for the large audience
  who had already read the popular book by Marx. His intention was to give new
  historical data, making for a preface that would remind readers of the
  content inside the book, but also provide additional postscript information
  to prompt the reader to reread the work in whole. In this publication we have
  put the postscript information into this file, and the historical background
  and detailed account of the Civil War into the introduction. In the original document, the introductory
  information was placed before the section break above (i.e. following the
  paragraph ending: "...as has never again been attained on all the mass of
  literature which has been written on this subject.") 
[B] The
  national liberation war of the German people against Napoleon’s rule in
  1813-14. 
[C] In
  the 1820s in Germany “demagogues” was applied to the participants
  in the Opposition movement among the German intelligentsia, who came out
  against the reactionary political system in the German states and advocated
  the unification of Germany. “Demagogues” were ruthlessly
  persecuted by the authorities. 

Table of Contents: The Civil War in
  France 
 






==========

## First Address of the General Council of the International







The Civil War in France



Karl Marx: The Civil War in France


The First Address[1]
  July 23, 1870 
[The Beginning of the Franco-Prussian War] 

 
In the Inaugural Address of the International Working Men’s
  Association, of November 1864, we said: 
“If the emancipation of the working classes requires
  their fraternal concurrence, how are they to fulfill that great mission with
  a foreign policy in pursuit of criminal designs, playing upon national
  prejudices, and squandering in piratical wars the people’s blood and
  treasure?” 
We defined the foreign policy aimed at by the International in these
  words: 
“Vindicate the simple laws of morals and justice,
  which ought to govern the relations of private individuals, as the laws
  paramount of the intercourse of nations.” 
No wonder that Louis Bonaparte, who usurped power by exploiting the war of
  classes in France, and perpetuated it by periodical wars abroad, should, from
  the first, have treated the International as a dangerous foe. On the eve of
  the plebiscite[A] he
  ordered a raid on the members of the Administrative Committee of the
  International Working Men’s Association throughout France, at Paris,
  Lyons, Rouen, Marseilles, Brest, etc., on the pretext that the International
  was a secret society dabbling in a complot for his assassination, a
  pretext soon after exposed in its full absurdity by his own judges. What was
  the real crime of the French branches of the International? They told the
  French people publicly and emphatically that voting the plebiscite was voting
  despotism at home and war abroad. It has been, in fact, their work that in
  all the great towns, in all the industrial centres of France, the working
  class rose like one man to reject the plebiscite. Unfortunately, the balance
  was turned by the heavy ignorance of the rural districts. The stock
  exchanges, the cabinets, the ruling classes, and the press of Europe
  celebrated the plebiscite as a signal victory of the French emperor over the
  French working class; and it was the signal for the assassination, not of an
  individual, but of nations. 
The war plot of July [19] 1870[B] is but an amended edition of the coup
  d’etat of December 1851. At first view, the thing seemed so absurd
  that France would not believe in its real good earnest. It rather believed
  the deputy denouncing the ministerial war talk as a mere stock-jobbing trick.
  When, on July 15, war was at last officially announced to the Corps
  Legislatif, the whole Opposition refused to vote the preliminary
  subsidies – even Thiers
  branded it as “detestable”; all the independent journals of Paris
  condemned it, and, wonderful to relate, the provincial press joined in almost
  unanimously. 
Meanwhile, the Paris members of the International had again set to work.
  In the Reveil of July 12, they published their manifesto “to
  the Workmen of all Nations,” from which we extract the following few
  passages: 
“Once more,” they say, “on the pretext of
  European equilibrium, of national honor, the peace of the world is menaced by
  political ambitions. French, German, Spanish workmen! Let our voices unite in
  one cry of reprobation against war! 
[...] 
“War for a question of preponderance or a dynasty
  can, in the eyes of workmen, be nothing but a criminal absurdity. In answer
  to the warlike proclamations of those who exempt themselves from the blood
  tax, and find in public misfortunes a source of fresh speculations, we
  protest, we who want peace, labor, and liberty! 
[...] 
“Brothers in Germany! Our division would only result
  in the complete triumph of the despotism on both sides of the Rhine... 
“Workmen of all countries! Whatever may for the
  present become of our common efforts, we, the members of the International
  Working Men’s Association, who know of no frontiers, we send you, as a
  pledge of indissoluble solidarity, the good wishes and the salutations of the
  workmen of France.” 
This manifesto of our Paris section was followed by numerous similar
  French addresses, of which we can here only quote the declaration of
  Neuilly-sur-Seine, published in the Marseillaise of July 22: 
“The war, is it just? No! The war, is it national?
  No! It is merely dynastic. In the name of humanity, or democracy, and the
  true interests of France, we adhere completely and energetically to the
  protestation of the International against the war.” 
These protestations expressed the true sentiments of the French working
  people, as was soon shown by a curious incident. The Band of the
  10th of December, first organized under the presidency of Louis
  Bonaparte, having been masqueraded into blouses [i.e., to appear as common workers] and let loose on
  the streets of Paris, there to perform the contortions of war fever, the real
  workmen of the Faubourgs [suburbs, workers’
  districts] came forward with public peace demonstrations so
  overwhelming that Pietri, the Prefect of Police, thought it prudent to stop
  at once all further street politics, on the plea that the real Paris people
  had given sufficient vent to their pent-up patriotism and exuberant war
  enthusiasm. 
Whatever may be the incidents of Louis Bonaparte’s war with Prussia,
  the death-knell of the Second Empire has already sounded at Paris. It will
  end, as it began, by a parody. But let us not forget that it is the
  governments and the ruling classes of Europe who enabled Louis Bonaparte to
  play during 18 years the ferocious farce of the Restored Empire. 
On the German side, the war is a war of defence; but who put Germany to
  the necessity of defending herself? Who enabled Louis Bonaparte to wage war
  upon her? Prussia! It was Bismarck who conspired with that very same Louis
  Bonaparte for the purpose of crushing popular opposition at home, and
  annexing Germany to the Hohenzollern dynasty. If the battle of Sadowa had
  been lost instead of being won, French battalions would have overrun Germany
  as the allies of Prussia. After her victory, did Prussia dream one moment of
  opposing a free Germany to an enslaved France? Just the contrary. While
  carefully preserving all the native beauties of her old system, she
  super-added all the tricks of the Second Empire, its real despotism, and its
  mock democratism, its political shams and its financial jobs, its high-flown
  talk and its low legerdemains. The Bonapartist regime, which till
  then only flourished on one side of the Rhine, had now got its counterfeit on
  the other. From such a state of things, what else could result but war? 
If the German working class allows the present war to lose its strictly
  defensive character and to degenerate into a war against the French people,
  victory of defeat will prove alike disastrous. All the miseries that befell
  Germany after her wars of independence will revive with accumulated
  intensity. 
The principles of the International are, however, too widely spread and
  too firmly rooted amongst the German working class to apprehend such a sad
  consummation. The voices of the French workmen had re-echoed from Germany. A
  mass meeting of workmen, held at Brunswick on July 16, expressed its full
  concurrence with the Paris manifesto, spurned the idea of national antagonism
  to France, and wound up its resolutions with these words: 
“We are the enemies of all wars, but above all of
  dynastic wars. ... With deep sorrow and grief we are forced to undergo a
  defensive war as an unavoidable evil; but we call, at the same time, upon the
  whole German working class to render the recurrence of such an immense social
  misfortune impossible by vindicating for the peoples themselves the power to
  decide on peace and war, and making them masters of their own
  destinies.” 
At Chemnitz, a meeting of delegates, representing 50,000 Saxon workmen,
  adopted unanimously a resolution to this effect: 
“In the name of German Democracy, and especially of
  the workmen forming the Democratic Socialist Party, we declare the present
  war to be exclusively dynastic.... We are happy to grasp the fraternal hand
  stretched out to us by the workmen of France.... Mindful of the watchword of
  the International Working Men’s Association: Proletarians of all
  countries, unite, we shall never forget that the workmen of all countries are
  our friends and the despots of all countries our enemies.” 
The Berlin branch of the International has also replied to the Paris
  manifesto: 
“We,” they say, “join with heart and hand
  your protestation.... Solemnly, we promise that neither the sound of the
  trumpets, nor the roar of the cannon, neither victory nor defeat, shall
  divert us from our common work for the union of the children of toil of all
  countries.” 
Be it so! 
In the background of this suicidal strike looms the dark figure of Russia.
  It is an ominous sign that the signal for the present war should have been
  given at the moment when the Moscovite government had just finished its
  strategic lines of railway and was already massing troops in the direction of
  the Prut.[C] Whatever
  sympathy the Germans may justly claim in a war of defense against Bonapartist
  aggression, they would forfeit at once by allowing the Prussian government to
  call for, or accept the help of, the Cossack. Let them
  remember that after their war of independence against the first Napoleon,
  Germany lay for generations prostrate at the feet of the tsar. 
The English working class stretch the hand of fellowship to the French and
  German working people. They feel deeply convinced that whatever turn the
  impending horrid war may take, the alliance of the working classes of all
  countries will ultimately kill war. The very fact that while official France
  and Germany are rushing into a fratricidal feud, the workmen of France and
  Germany send each other messages of peace and goodwill; this great fact,
  unparalleled in the history of the past, opens the vista of a brighter
  future. It proves that in contrast to old society, with its economical
  miseries and its political delirium, a new society is springing up, whose
  International rule will be Peace, because its national ruler will be
  everywhere the same – Labour! The pioneer of that new society is the
  International Working Men’s Association. 
 
Chapter 2: [Prussian Occupation of
  France] 
 

[A] A plebiscite is a direct vote by an electorate of a
  nation to decide a question of national importance, such as governmental
  policy. Conducted by Napoleon III in May 1870 the questions were so worded
  that it was impossible to express disapproval of the policy of the Second
  Empire without declaring opposition to all democratic reforms for the working
  class. The sections of the First International in France argued that their
  members should not participate in the vote. On the eve of the plebiscite
  members of the Paris Federation were arrested on a charge of conspiring
  against Napoleon III. This pretext was further used by the government to
  launch a campaign of persecution of the members of the International
  throughout France. At the trial of the Paris Federation members (June 22 to
  July 5, 1870), the charge of conspiracy was clearly exposed as without any
  basis. Nevertheless a number of the International’s members were
  sentenced to imprisonment based solely on their socialistic beliefs. The
  working class of France responded to these political persecutions with mass
  protests. 
[B] The date when Napoleon III declared war on Prussia. 
[C] The river Prut, rising in the southwestern Ukraine and
  flowing southeast, forming part of the border between Roumania (within an
  autonomous part of Austria-Hungary) and Russia (later to join the river
  Danube). Length:  853 kilometers. 

Table of Contents: The Civil War in
  France 
 






==========

## Second Address of the General Council of the International







The Civil War in France



Karl Marx: The Civil War in France


The Second Address[2]
  September 9, 1870 
[Prussian Occupation of France] 

 
In our first manifesto of the 23rd of July, we
  said: 
 
“The death-knell of the Second Empire has already
  sounded at Paris. It will end, as it began, by a parody. But let us not
  forget that it is the governments and the ruling classes of Europe who
  enabled Louis Bonaparte to play during 18 years the ferocious farce of the
  Restored Empire.” 
Thus, even before war operations had actually set in, we treated the
  Bonapartist bubble as a thing of the past. 
If we were not mistaken as to the vitality of the Second Empire, we were
  not wrong in our apprehension lest the German war should “lose its
  strictly defensive character and degenerate into a war against the French
  people.” The war of defense ended, in point of fact, with the surrender
  of Louis Bonaparte, the Sedan
  capitulation, and the proclamation of the republic at Paris. But long
  before these events, the very moment that the utter rottenness of the
  imperialist arms became evident, the Prussian military camarilla had
  resolved upon conquest. There lay an ugly obstacle in their way –
  [Prussian] King William’s own proclamations at the commencement of the
  war. 
In a speech from the throne to the North German Diet, he had solemnly
  declared to make war upon the emperor of the French and not upon the French
  nation, where he said: 
“The Emperor Napoleon having made by land and sea an
  attack on the German nation, which desired and still desires to live in peace
  with the French people, I have assumed the command of the German armies to
  repel his aggression, and I have been led by military events to cross the
  frontiers of France.” 
Not content to assert the defensive character of the war by the statement
  that he only assumed the command of the German armies “to repel
  aggression", he added that he was only “led by military events”
  to cross the frontiers of France. A defensive war does, of course, not
  exclude offensive operations, dictated by military events. 
Thus, the pious king stood pledged before France and the world to a
  strictly defensive war. How to release him from his solemn pledge? The stage
  managers had to exhibit him as reluctantly yielding to the irresistible
  behest of the German nation. They at once gave the cue to the liberal German
  middle class, with its professors, its capitalists, its aldermen, and its
  penmen. That middle class, which, in its struggles for civil liberty, had,
  from 1846 to 1870, been exhibiting an unexampled spectacle of irresolution,
  incapacity and cowardice, felt, of course, highly delighted to bestride the
  European scene as the roaring lion of German patriotism. It re-vindicated its
  civic independence by affecting to force upon the Prussian government the
  secret designs of that same government. It does penance for its
  long-continued, and almost religious, faith in Louis Bonaparte’s
  infallibility, but shouting for the dismemberment of the French republic. Let
  us, for a moment, listen to the special pleadings of those stout-hearted
  patriots! 
They dare not pretend that the people of Alsace and Lorraine pant for the
  German embrace; quite the contrary. To punish their French patriotism,
  Strasbourg, a town with an independent citadel commanding it, has for six
  days been wantonly and fiendishly bombarded by “German” explosive
  shells, setting it on fire, and killing great numbers of its defenceless
  inhabitants! Yet, the soil of those provinces once upon a time belonged to
  the whilom German empire.[A] Hence, it seems, the soil and the human beings grown
  on it must be confiscated as imprescriptible German property. If the map of
  Europe is to be re-made in the antiquary’s vein, let us by no means
  forget that the Elector of Brandenburg, for his Prussian dominions, was the
  vassal of the Polish republic.[B] 
The more knowing patriots, however, require Alsace and the German-speaking
  Lorraine as a “material guarantee” against French aggression. As
  this contemptible plea has bewildered many weak-minded people, we are bound
  to enter more fully upon it. 
There is no doubt that the general configuration of Alsace, as compared
  with the opposite bank of the Rhine, and the presence of a large fortified
  town like Strasbourg, about halfway between Basle and Germersheim, very much
  favour a French invasion of South Germany, while they offer peculiar
  difficulties to an invasion of France from South Germany. There is, further,
  no doubt that the addition of Alsace and German-speaking Lorraine would give
  South Germany a much stronger frontier, inasmuch as she would then be the
  master of the crest of the Vosges mountains in its whole length, and of the
  fortresses which cover its northern passes. If Metz were annexed as well,
  France would certainly for the moment be deprived of her two principal bases
  of operation against Germany, but that would not prevent her from
  concentrating a fresh one at Nancy or Verdun. While Germany owns Coblenz,
  Mayence [i.e., Mainz], Germersheim, Rastatt, and Ulm, all bases of operation against
  France, and plentifully made use of in this war, with what show of fair play
  can she begrudge France Strasbourg and Metz, the only two fortresses of any
  importance she has on that side? Moreover, Strasbourg endangers South Germany
  only while South Germany is a separate power from North Germany. From 1792 to
  1795, South Germany was never invaded from that direction, because Prussia
  was a party to the war against the French Revolution; but as soon as Prussia
  made a peace of her own[C] in 1795, and left the South to shift for itself, the
  invasions of South Germany with Strasbourg as a base began and continued till
  1809. The fact is, a united Germany can always render Strasbourg and
  any French army in Alsace innocuous by concentrating all her troops, as was
  done in the present war, between Saarlouis and Landau, and advancing, or
  accepting battle, on the line of road between Mayence and Metz. While the
  mass of the German troops is stationed there, any French army advancing from
  Strasbourg into South Germany would be outflanked, and have its communication
  threatened. If the present campaign has proved anything, it is the facility
  of invading France from Germany. 
But, in good faith, is it not altogether an absurdity and an anachronism
  to make military considerations the principle by which the boundaries of
  nations are to be fixed? If this rule were to prevail, Austria would still be
  entitled to Venetia and the line of the Minicio, and France to the line of
  the Rhine, in order to protect Paris, which lies certainly more open to an
  attack from the northeast than Berlin does from the southwest. If limits are
  to be fixed by military interests, there will be no end to claims, because
  every military line is necessarily faulty, and may be improved by annexing
  some more outlying territory; and, moreover, they can never be fixed finally
  and fairly, because they always must be imposed by the conqueror upon the
  conquered, and consequently carry within them the seed of fresh wars. 
Such is the lesson of all history. 
Thus with nations as with individuals. To deprive them of the power of
  offence, you must deprive them of the means of defence. You must not only
  garrote, but murder. If every conqueror took “material guarantees" for
  breaking the sinews of a nation, the first Napoleon did so by the Tilsit
  Treaty, and the way he executed it against Prussia and the rest of
  Germany. Yet, a few years later, his gigantic power split like a rotten reed
  upon the German people. What are the “material guarantees”
  Prussia, in her wildest dreams, can or dare imposes upon France, compared to
  the “material guarantees” the first Napoleon had wrenched from
  herself? The result will not prove the less disastrous. History will measure
  its retribution, not by the intensity of the square miles conquered from
  France, but by the intensity of the crime of reviving, in the second half of
  the 19th century, the policy of conquest! 
But, say the mouthpieces of Teutonic [German] patriotism, you must not
  confound Germans with Frenchmen. What we want is not glory, but
  safety. The Germans are an essentially peaceful people. In their sober
  guardianship, conquest itself changes from a condition of future war into a
  pledge of perpetual peace. Of course, it is not Germans that invaded France
  in 1792, for the sublime purpose of bayonetting the revolution of the 18th
  century. It is not Germans that befouled their hands by the subjugation of
  Italy, the oppressions of Hungary, and the dismemberment of Poland. Their
  present military system, which divides the whole able-bodied male population
  into two parts – one standing army on service, and another standing
  army on furlough, both equally bound in passive obedience to rulers by divine
  right – such a military system is, of course, “a material
  guarantee,” for keeping the peace and the ultimate goal of civilizing
  tendencies! In Germany, as everywhere else, the sycophants of the powers that
  be poison the popular mind by the incense of mendacious self-praise. 
Indignant as they pretend to be at the sight of French fortresses in Metz
  and Strasbourg, those German patriots see no harm in the vast system of
  Moscovite fortifications at Warsaw, Modlin, and Ivangorod [All strongholds of the Russian Empire] . While gloating
  at the terrors of imperialist invasion, they blink at the infamy of
  autocratic tutelage. 
As in 1865, promises were exchanged between Gorchakov and Bismarck. As
  Louis Bonaparte flattered himself that the War of 1866, resulting in the
  common exhaustion of Austria and Prussia, would make him the supreme arbiter
  of Germany, so Alexander [II of Russia] flattered himself that the War of
  1870, resulting in the common exhaustion of Germany and France, would make
  him the supreme arbiter of the Western continent. As the Second Empire
  thought the North German Confederation incompatible with its existence, so
  autocratic Russia must think herself endangered by a German empire under
  Prussian leadership. Such is the law of the old political system. Within its
  pale the gain of one state is the loss of the other. The tsar’s
  paramount influence over Europe roots in his traditional hold on Germany. At
  a moment when in Russia herself volcanic social agencies threaten to shake
  the very base of autocracy, could the tsar afford to bear with such a loss of
  foreign prestige? Already the Moscovite journals repeat the language of the
  Bonapartist journals of the War of 1866. Do the Teuton patriots really
  believe that liberty and peace will be guaranteed to Germany by forcing
  France into the arms of Russia? If the fortune of her arms, the arrogance of
  success, and dynastic intrigue lead Germany to a dismemberment of French
  territory, there will then only remain two courses open to her. She must at all risks become the avowed tool of
  Russian aggrandizement, or, after some short respite, make again ready for
  another “defensive” war, not one of those new-fangled
  “localized” wars, but a war of races – a war with
  the Slavonic and Roman races.[D]

The German working class have resolutely supported the war, which it was
  not in their power to prevent, as a war for German independence and the
  liberation of France and Europe from that pestilential incubus, the Second
  Empire. It was the German workmen who, together with the rural laborers,
  furnished the sinews and muscles of heroic hosts, leaving behind their
  half-starved families. Decimated by the battles abroad, they will be once
  more decimated by misery at home. In their turn, they are now coming forward
  to ask for “guarantees” – guarantees that their immense
  sacrifices have not been bought in vain, that they have conquered liberty,
  that the victory over the imperialist armies will not, as in 1815, be turned
  into the defeat of the German people[E]; and, as the first of these guarantees, they claim an
  honorable peace for France, and the recognition of the French
  republic. 
The Central Committee of the German Social-Democratic Workmen’s
  Party issued, on September 5, a manifesto, energetically insisting upon these
  guarantees. 
 
“We,” they say, “protest against the
  annexation of Alsace and Lorraine. And we are conscious of speaking in the
  name of the German working class. In the common interest of France and
  Germany, in the interest of western civilization against eastern barbarism,
  the German workmen will not patiently tolerate the annexation of Alsace and
  Lorraine.... We shall faithfully stand by our fellow workmen in all countries
  for the common international cause of the proletariat!” 
Unfortunately, we cannot feel sanguine of their immediate success. If the
  French workmen amidst peace failed to stop the aggressor, are the German
  workmen more likely to stop the victor amidst the clamour of arms? The German
  workmen’s manifesto demands the extradition of Louis Bonaparte as a
  common felon to the French republic. Their rulers are, on the contrary,
  already trying hard to restore him to the Tuileries[F] as the best man to ruin France. However
  that may be, history will prove that the German working class are not made of
  the same malleable stuff as the German middle class. They will do their duty.
  
Like them, we hail the advent of the republic in France, but at the same
  time we labor under misgivings which we hope will prove groundless. That
  republic has not subverted the throne, but only taken its place, become
  vacant. It has been proclaimed, not as a social conquest, but as a national
  measure of defence. It is in the hands of a Provisional Government composed
  partly of notorious Orleanists, partly
  of middle class republicans, upon some of whom the insurrection of June
  1848 has left its indelible stigma. The division of labor amongst the
  members of that government looks awkward. The Orleanists have seized the
  strongholds of the army and the police, while to the professed republicans
  have fallen the talking departments. Some of their acts go far to show that
  they have inherited from the empire, not only ruins, but also its dread of
  the working class. If eventual impossibilities are, in wild phraseology,
  promised in the name of the republic, is it not with a view to prepare the
  cry for a “possible” government? Is the republic, by some of its
  middle class undertakers, not intended to serve as a mere stop-gap and bridge
  over an Orleanist restoration? 
The French working class moves, therefore, under circumstances of extreme
  difficulty. Any attempt at upsetting the new government in the present
  crisis, when the enemy is almost knocking at the doors of Paris, would be a
  desperate folly. The French workmen must perform their duties as citizens;
  but, at the same time, they must not allow themselves to be swayed by the
  national souvenirs of 1792, as the French peasant allowed themselves
  to be deluded by the national souvenirs of the First Empire. They
  have not to recapitulate the past, but to build up the future. Let them
  calmly and resolutely improve the opportunities of republican liberty, for
  the work of their own class organization. It will gift them with fresh
  herculean powers for the regeneration of France, and our common task –
  the emancipation of labor. Upon their energies and wisdom hinges the fate of
  the republic. 
The English workmen have already taken measures to overcome, by a
  wholesome pressure from without, the reluctance of their government to
  recognize the French republic.[G] The present dilatoriness of the British government is
  probably intended to atone for the Anti-Jacobin war [1792] and the former
  indecent haste in sanctioning the coup d’etat.[H] The English workmen call also upon their
  government to oppose by all its power the dismemberment of France, which a
  part of the English press is shameless enough to howl for. It is the same
  press that for 20 years deified Louis Bonaparte as the providence of Europe,
  that frantically cheered on the slaveholders’ rebellion.[I] Now, as then, it drudges
  for the slaveholder. 
Let the sections of the International Working Men’s Association in
  every country stir the working classes to action. If they forsake their duty,
  if they remain passive, the present tremendous war will be but the harbinger
  of still deadlier international feuds, and lead in every nation to a renewed
  triumph over the workman by the lords of the sword, of the soil, and of
  capital. 
Vive la Republique!
 
Chapter 3: [France Capitulates & the
  Government of Thiers] 
 

[A] The Holy Roman Empire of the German nation, founded in
  the 10th century and constituting a union of feudal principalities and free
  towns which recognized the supreme of authority of an emperor. 
[B] In 1618 the Electorate of Brandenburg united with the
  Prussian Dutchy (East Prussia), which had been formed early in the 16th
  century out of the Teutonic Order possessions and which was still a feudal
  vessel of the Kingdom of Poland. The Elector of Brandenburg, a Prussian Duke
  at the same time, remained a Polish vassal until 1657 when, taking advantage
  of Poland’s difficulties in the war against Sweden, he secured
  sovereign rights to Prussian possessions. 
[C] The Treaty of Basle concluded by Prussia, a member of
  the first anti-French coalition of the European states, with the French
  Republic on April 5, 1795. 
[D] Marx’s clear assessment of Germany’s
  historical position took some time to completely fulfill itself, but when it
  did Germany’s war on races occurred in full force. 
[E] Marx refers here to the triumph of feudal reaction in
  Germany after the downfall of Napoleon. The feudalist unity of Germany was
  restored, the feudal-monarchist system was established in the German states,
  which retained all the privileges of the nobility and intensified the
  semi-feudal exploitation of the peasantry. 
[F] The Tuileries Palace in Paris, a residence of
  Napoleon III. 
[G] Campaigns by English workers to secure recognition of
  the French Republic proclaimed on Sept. 4, 1870. On Sept. 5 a series of
  meetings and demonstrations began in London and other big cities, at which
  resolutions and petitions were passed demanding that the British Government
  immediately recognize the French Republic. The General Council of the First
  International took a direct part in the organization of this movement. 
[H] Marx is alluding to England’s active part in
  forming a coalition of feudal monarchies which started a war against
  revolutionary France in 1792, and also to the fact that the English oligarchy
  was the first in Europe to recognize the Bonapartist regime in France,
  established as a result of the coup d’etat, by Louis Bonaparte on
  December 2, 1851. 
[I] During the American Civil War (1861-65) between the
  industrial North and the slave-owning South, the English bourgeois press took
  the side of the South. 

Table of Contents: The Civil War in
  France 
 






==========

## The Civil War in France. Address of the General Council of the International









The Civil War in France



Marx/Engels Internet Archive


Karl Marx
The Civil War in France

Written: July 1870 - May 1871;
First Published: 1871;
Source: English Edition of 1871;
Transcription/Markup: Zodiac & Brian Baggins;
Proofed: and corrected by Matthew Carmody 2009.

 
Contents

Introduction
[The Begining of the Franco-Prussian
  War] 
[Prussian Occupation of France] 
[France Capitulates & the Government
  of Thiers] 
[Paris Workers’ Revolution &
  Thiers’ Reactionary Massacres] 
[The Paris Commune] 
[The Fall of Paris] 

Appendix
Engels 1891 Postscript
News stories describing some of the last massacres
Marx’s Letters to Dr.
  Kugelmann (April, 1871)

Franco-Prussian
  War
Timeline
  of the Civil War
History
  of Paris Commune by Lissagaray, 1876
Picture Gallery;
[First and Second Drafts]

Notes on Publication
The Civil War in France in mobi eBook format



Communards: The Story of the Paris Commune of 1871, 
As Told by Those Who Fought for It.
Revolutionary France | Letters on France
Marx/Engels on France | Marx/Engels Library 
 






==========

## I. [France Capitulates & the Government of Thiers]







The Civil War in France



Karl Marx: The Civil War in France


The Third Address
  May, 1871 
[France Capitulates & the Government of Thiers] 

 
In September 4, 1870, when the working men of Paris proclaimed the
  republic, which was almost instantaneously acclaimed throughout France,
  without a single voice of dissent, a cabal of place-hunting barristers, with
  Thiers for their statesman, and Trochu for their general, took hold of the
  Hotel de Ville. At that time they were imbued with so fanatical a faith in
  the mission of Paris to represent France in all epochs of historical crisis
  that, to legitimate their usurped titles as governors of France, they thought
  it quite sufficient to produce their lapsed mandates as representatives of
  Paris. 
In our second address on the late war, five days
  after the rise of these men, we told you who they were. Yet, in the turmoil
  of surprise, with the real leaders of the working class still shut up in
  Bonapartist prisons and the Prussians already marching on Paris, Paris bore
  with their assumption of power, on the express condition that it was to be
  wielded for the single purpose of national defence. Paris, however, was not
  to be defended without arming its working class, organizing them into an
  effective force, and training their ranks by the war itself. But Paris armed
  was the revolution armed. A victory of Paris over the Prussian aggressor
  would have been a victory of the French workmen over the French capitalist
  and his state parasites. In this conflict between national duty and class
  interest, the Government of National Defence did not hesitate one moment to
  turn into a Government of National Defection. 
The first step they took was to send Thiers on a roving tour to all the
  courts of Europe, there to beg mediation by offering the barter of the
  republic for a king. Four months after the commencement of the siege [of
  Paris], when they thought the opportune moment came for breaking the first
  word of capitulation, Trochu, in the presence of Jules Favre, and others of
  his colleagues, addressed the assembled mayors of Paris in these terms: 
“The first question put to me by my colleagues on the
  very evening of the 4th of September was this: Paris, can it, with any chance
  of success, stand a siege by the Prussian army? I did not hesitate to answer
  in the negative. Some of my colleagues here present will warrant the truth of
  my words and the persistence of my opinion. I told them, in these very terms,
  that, under the existing state of things, the attempt of Paris to hold out a
  siege by the Prussian army would be a folly. Without doubt, I added, it would
  be an heroic folly; but that would be all.... The events [managed by himself]
  have not given the lie to my prevision.” 
This nice little speech of Trochu was afterwards published by M. Carbon,
  one of the mayors present. 
Thus, on the very evening of the proclamation of the republic,
  Trochu’s “plan” was known to his colleagues to be the
  capitulation of Paris. If national defence has been more than a pretext for
  the personal government of Thiers, Favre, and Co., the upstarts of September
  4 would have abdicated on the 5th – would have initiated the Paris
  people into Trochu’s “plan,” and called upon them to
  surrender at once, or to take their own fate into their own hands. Instead of
  this, the infamous impostors resolved upon curing the heroic folly of Paris
  by a regimen of famine and broken heads, and to dupe her in the meanwhile by
  ranting manifestos, holding forth that Trochu, “the governor of Paris,
  will never capitulate", and Jules Favre, the foreign minister, will
  “not cede an inch of our territory, nor a stone of our
  fortresses.” 
In a letter to Gambetta, the very same Jules Favre avows that what they
  were “defending” against were not the Prussian soldiers, but the
  working men of Paris. During the whole continuance of the siege, the
  Bonapartist cut-throats, whom Trochu had wisely entrusted with the command of
  the Paris army, exchanged, in their intimate correspondence, ribald jokes at
  the well-understood mockery of defence. (See, for instance, the
  correspondence of Alphonse Simon Guiod, supreme commander of the artillery of
  the Army of Defence of Paris and Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor, to
  Suzanne, general of division of artillery, a correspondence published by the
  Journal
  officiel of the Commune.) The mask of the true heroism was at last
  dropped on January
  28, 1871. With the true heroism of utter self-debasement, the Government
  of National Defence, in their capitulation, came out as the government of
  France by Bismarck’s prisoners – a part so base that Louis
  Bonaparte himself had, at Sedan, shrunk from accepting it. After the events
  of March 18 on their wild flight to Versailles, the capitulards left
  in the hands of Paris the documentary evidence of their treason, to destroy
  which, as the Commune says in its manifesto to the provinces, “those
  men would not recoil from battering Paris into a heap of ruins washed by a
  sea of blood." 
To be eagerly bent upon such a consummation, some of the leading members
  of the Government of Defence had, besides, most peculiar reasons of their
  own. 
Shortly after the conclusion of the armistice, M. Milliere, one of the
  representatives of Paris to the National Assembly, now shot by express orders
  of Jules Favre, published a series of authentic legal documents in proof that
  Jules Favre, living in concubinage with the wife of a drunken resident at
  Algiers, had, by a most daring concoction of forgeries, spread over many
  years, contrived to grasp, in the name of the children of his adultery, a
  large succession, which made him a rich man, and that, in a lawsuit
  undertaken by the legitimate heirs, he only escaped exposure by the
  connivance of the Bonapartist tribunals. As these dry legal documents were
  not to be got rid of by any amount of rhetorical horse-power, Jules Favre,
  for the first time in his life, held his tongue, quietly awaiting the
  outbreak of the civil war, in order, then, frantically to denounce the people
  of Paris as a band of escaped convicts in utter revolt against family,
  religion, order, and property. This same forger had hardly got into power,
  after September 4, when he sympathetically let loose upon society Pic and
  Taillefer, convicted, even under the empire, of forgery in the scandalous
  affair of “Etendard.”
  One of these men, Taillefer, having dared to return to Paris under the
  Commune, was at once reinstated in prison; and then Jules Favre exclaimed,
  from the tribune of the National Assembly, that Paris was setting free all
  her jailbirds! 
Ernest Picard, the Joe Miller of the Government of National Defence, who
  appointed himself Finance Minister of the republic after having in vain
  striven to become home minister of the empire, is the brother of one Arthur
  Picard, an individual expelled from the Paris Bourse as a blackleg
  (see report of the Prefecture of Police, dated July 13, 1867), and convicted,
  on his own confession, of theft of 300,000 francs, while manager of one of
  the branches of the Societe Generale,[A] Rue Palestro, No.5 (see report of the
  Prefecture of Police, dated December 11, 1868). This Arthur Picard was made
  by Ernest Picard the editor of his paper, l’Electeur
  Libre. While the common run of stockjobbers were led astray by the
  official lies of this finance office paper, Arthur was running backwards and
  forwards between the finance office and the Bourse, there to
  discount the disasters of the French army. The whole financial correspondence
  of that worthy pair of brothers fell into the hands of the Commune. 
Jules Ferry, a penniless barrister before September 4, contrived, as mayor
  of Paris during the siege, to job a fortune out of famine. The day on which
  he would have to give an account of his maladministration would be the day of
  his conviction. 
These men, then, could find in the ruins of Paris only their
  tickets-of-leave[1]; they
  were the very men Bismarck wanted. With the help of some shuffling of cards,
  Thiers, hitherto the secret prompter of the government, now appeared at its
  head, with the tickets-of-leave men for his ministers. 
Theirs, that monstrous gnome, has charmed the French bourgeoisie for
  almost half a century, because he is the most consummate intellectual
  expression of their own class corruption. Before he became a statesman, he
  had already proved his lying powers as an historian. The chronicle of his
  public life is the record of the misfortunes of France. Banded, before 1830,
  with the republicans, he slipped into office under Louis Philippe by
  betraying his protector Lafitte, ingratiating himself with the king by
  exciting mob riots against the clergy, during which the church of Saint
  Germain l’Auxerrois and the Archbishop’s palace were plundered,
  and by acting the minister-spy upon, and the jail-accoucheur of the
  Duchess de Berry.[B] The
  massacre of the republicans in the Rue Transnonian, and the subsequent
  infamous laws of September against the press and the right of association,
  were his work.[C]
  Reappearing as the chief of the cabinet in March 1840, he astonished France
  with his plan for fortifying France.[D] To the republicans, who denounced this plan as a
  sinister plot against the liberty of Paris, he replied from the tribune of
  the Chamber of Deputies: 
“What! To fancy that any works of fortification could
  ever endanger liberty! And first of all you calumniate any possible
  government in supposing that it could some day attempt to maintain itself by
  bombarding the capital; [...] but that the government would be a hundred
  times more impossible after its victory than before.” 
Indeed, no government would ever have dared to bombard Paris from the
  forts, save that government which had previously surrendered these forts to
  the Prussians. 
When King Bomba [Ferdinand II of Spain] tried his hand at Palermo, in
  January 1848, Thiers, then long since out of office, again rose in the
  Chamber of Deputies: 
“You know, gentlemen, what is happening at Palermo.
  You, all of you, shake with horror [in the parliamentary sense] on hearing
  that during 48 hours a large town has been bombarded – by whom? Was it
  a foreign enemy exercising the rights of war? No, gentlemen, it was by its
  own government. And why? Because the unfortunate town demanded its rights.
  Well, then, for the demand of its rights it has got 48 hours of
  bombardment.... Allow me to appeal to the opinion of Europe. It is doing a
  service to mankind to arise, and to make reverberate, from what is perhaps
  the greatest tribune in Europe, some words [indeed words] of indignation
  against such acts.... When the Regent Espartero, who had rendered services to
  his country [which M. Thiers never did] intended bombarding Barcelona, in
  order to suppress its insurrection, there arose from all parts of the world a
  general outcry of indignation.” 
Eighteen months afterwards, M. Thiers was amongst the fiercest defenders
  of the bombardment of Rome by a French army.[E] In fact, the fault of King Bomba seems to have
  consisted in this only – that he limited his bombardment to 48 hours.
  
A few days before the February Revolution, fretting at the long exile from
  place and pelf to which Guizot had condemned him, and sniffing in the air the
  scent of an approaching popular commotion, Thiers, in that pseudo-heroic
  style which won him the nickname Mirabeau-mouche [Mirabeau the fly],
  declared, to the Chamber of Deputies: 
“I am of the party of revolution, not only in France,
  but in Europe. I wish the government of the revolution to remain in the hands
  of moderate men... but if that government should fall into the hand of ardent
  minds, even into those of radicals, I shall, for all that, not desert my
  cause. I shall always be of the party of the revolution.” 
The February Revolution came. Instead of displacing the Guizot Cabinet by
  the Thiers Cabinet, as the little man had dreamt, it superseded Louis
  Philippe by the republic. On the first day of the popular victory, he
  carefully hid himself, forgetting that the contempt of the working men
  screened him from their hatred. Still, with his legendary courage, he
  continued to shy the public stage, until the June [1848] massacres had
  cleared it for his sort of action. Then he became the leading mind of the
  “Party of Order”[F] and its parliamentary republic, that anonymous
  interregnum, in which all the rival factions of the ruling class conspired
  together to crush the people, and conspired against each other to restore to
  each of them its own monarchy. Then, as now, Thiers denounced the republicans
  as the only obstacle to the consolidation of the republic; then, as now, he
  spoke to the republic as the hangman spoke to Don Carlos: “I shall
  assassinate thee, but for thy own good.” Now, as then, he will have to
  exclaim on the day after his victory: L’Empire est fait
  – the empire is consummated. 
Despite his hypocritical homilies about the necessary liberties and his
  personal grudge against Louis Bonaparte, who had made a dupe of him, and
  kicked out parliamentarism – and, outside of its factitious atmosphere,
  the little man is conscious of withering into nothingness – he had a
  hand in all the infamies of the Second Empire, from the occupation of Rome by
  French troops to the war with Prussia, which he incited by his fierce
  invective against German unity – not as a cloak of Prussian despotism,
  but as an encroachment upon the vested right of France in German disunion.
  Fond of brandishing, with his dwarfish arms in the face of Europe, the sword
  of the first Napoleon, whose historical shoeblack he had become, his foreign
  policy always culminated in the utter humiliation of France – from the
  London convention[G] of
  1840 to the Paris capitulation of 1871, and the present civil war, where he
  hounds on the prisoners of Sedan and Metz[H] against Paris by special permission of Bismarck. 
Despite his versatility of talent and shiftiness of purpose, this man has
  his whole lifetime been wedded to the most fossil routine. It is self-evident
  that to him the deeper undercurrents of modern society remained forever
  hidden; but even the most palpable changes on its surface were abhorrent to a
  brain (all the vitality of which) had fled to the tongue. Thus, he never
  tired of denouncing as a sacrilege any deviation from the old French
  protective system. 
When a minister of Louis Philippe, he railed at railways as a wild
  chimera; and when in opposition under Louis Bonaparte, he branded as a
  profanation every attempt to reform the rotten French army system. Never in
  his long political career has he been guilty of a single – even the
  smallest – measure of any practical use. Thiers was consistent only in
  his greed for wealth and his hatred of the men that produce it. Having
  entered his first ministry, under Louis Philippe, poor as Job, he left it a
  millionaire. His last ministry under the same king (of March 1, 1840) exposed
  him to public taunts of peculation in the Chamber of Deputies, to which he
  was content to reply by tears – a commodity he deals in as freely as
  Jules Favre, or any other crocodile. At Bordeaux, his first measure for
  saving France from impending financial ruin was to endow himself with three
  millions a year, the first and the last word of the “Economical
  Republic,” the vista of which he had opened to his Paris electors in
  1869. One of his former colleagues of the Chamber of Deputies of 1830,
  himself a capitalist and, nevertheless, a devoted member of the Paris
  Commune, M. Beslay, lately addressed Thiers thus in a public placard: 
“The enslavement of labor by capital has always been
  the cornerstone of your policy, and from the very day you saw the Republic of
  Labor installed at the Hotel de Ville, you have never ceased to cry out to
  France: ‘These are criminals!’” 
A master in small state roguery, a virtuoso in perjury and treason, a
  craftsman in all the petty strategems, cunning devices, and base perfidies of
  parliamentary warfare; never scrupling, when out of office, to fan a
  revolution, and to stifle it in blood when at the helm of the state; with
  class prejudices standing him in the place of ideas, and vanity in the place
  of a heart; his private life as infamous as his public life is odious –
  even now, when playing the part of a French Sulla, he cannot help setting off
  the abomination of his deeds by the ridicule of his ostentation. 
The capitulation of Paris, by surrendering to Prussia not only Paris, but
  all France, closed the long-continued intrigues of treason with the enemy,
  which the usurpers of September 4 had begun, as Trochu himself said, on the
  very same day. On the other hand, it initiated the civil war they were now to
  wage, with the assistance of Prussia, against the republic and Paris. The
  trap was laid in the very terms of the capitulation. At that time, above
  one-third of the territory was in the hands of the enemy, the capital was cut
  off from the provinces, all communications were disorganized. To elect, under
  such circumstances, a real representation of France was impossible, unless
  ample time were given for preparation. In view of this, the capitulation
  stipulated that a National Assembly must be elected within eight days; so
  that in many parts of France the news of the impending election arrived on
  its eve only. This assembly, moreover, was, by an express clause of the
  capitulation, to be elected for the sole purpose of deciding on peace or war,
  and, eventually, to conclude a treaty of peace. The population could not but
  feel that the terms of the armistice rendered the continuation of the war
  impossible, and that for sanctioning the peace imposed by Bismarck, the worst
  men in France were the best. But not content with these precautions, Thiers
  even before the secret of the armistice had been broached to Paris, set out
  for an electioneering tour through the provinces, there to galvanize back
  into life the Legitimist party, which now, along with the Orleanists, had to
  take the place of the then impossible Bonapartists. He was not afraid of
  them. Impossible as a government of modern France, and, therefore,
  contemptible as rivals, what party were more eligible as tools of
  counter-revolution than the party whose action, in the words of Thiers
  himself (Chamber of Deputies, January 5, 1833), “Had always been
  confined to the three resources of foreign invasion, civil war, and
  anarchy”? They verily believed in the advent of their long-expected
  retrospective millennium. There were the heels of foreign invasion trampling
  upon France; there was the downfall of an empire, and the captivity of
  Bonaparte; and there they were themselves. The wheel of history had evidently
  rolled back to stop at the “Chambers introuvable” of 1816.[I] In the assemblies of the
  republic, 1848 to 1851, they had been represented by their educated and
  trained parliamentary champions; it was the rank-and-file of the party which
  now rushed in – all the Pourceaugnacs of France. [a
  character in one of Molière’s comedies, typifying the dull-witted,
  narrow-minded petty landed gentry.] 
As soon as this Assembly of “Rurals"[J] had met at Bordeaux, Thiers made it clear to them
  that the peace preliminaries must be assented to at once, without even the
  honors of a parliamentary debate, as the only conditions on which Prussia
  would permit them to open the war against the republic and Paris, its
  stronghold. The counter-revolution had, in fact, no time to lose. The Second
  Empire had more than doubled the national debt, and plunged all the large
  towns into heavy municipal debts. The war had fearfully swelled the
  liabilities, and mercilessly ravaged the resources of the nation. To complete
  the ruin, the Prussian Shylock was there with his bond for the keep of half a
  million of his soldiers on French soil, his indemnity for five milliards[K], and interest at 5 per
  cent on the unpaid instalments thereof. Who was to pay this bill? It was only
  by the violent overthrow of the republic that the appropriators of wealth
  could hope to shift onto the shoulders of its producers the cost of a war
  which they, the appropriators, had themselves originated. Thus, the immense
  ruin of France spurred on these patriotic representatives of land and
  capital, under the very eyes and patronage of the invader, to graft upon the
  foreign war a civil war – a slaveholders’ rebellion. 
There stood in the way of this conspiracy one great obstacle –
  Paris. To disarm Paris was the first condition of success. Paris was
  therefore summoned by Thiers to surrender its arms. Then Paris was
  exasperated by the frantic anti-republican demonstrations of the
  “Rural” Assembly and by Thiers’ own equivocations about the
  legal status of the republic; by the threat to decapitate and decapitalize
  Paris; the appointment of Orleanist ambassadors; Dufaure’s laws on
  over-due commercial bills and house rents[L], inflicting ruin on the commerce and industry of
  Paris; Pouyer-Quertier’s tax of two centimes upon every copy of every
  imaginable publication; the sentences of death against Blanqui and Flourens;
  the suppression of the republican journals; the transfer of the National
  Assembly to Versailles; the renewal of the state of siege declared by
  Palikao, and expired on September 4; the appointment of Vinoy, the
  Décembriseur[M], as governor of Paris – of Valentin, the
  imperialist gendarme, as its prefect of police – and of
  D’Aurelles de Paladine, the Jesuit general, as the commander-in-chief
  of its National Guard. 
And now we have to address a question to M. Thiers and the men of national
  defence, his under-strappers. It is known that, through the agency of M.
  Pouyer-Quertier, his finance ministers, Thiers had contracted a loan of two
  milliards. Now, is it true or not – 
1. That the business was so managed that a consideration
  of several hundred millions was secured for the private benefit of Thiers,
  Jules Favre, Ernest Picard, Pouyer-Quertier, and Jules Simon? and – 
2. That no money was to be paid down until after the
  “pacification” of Paris?[N] 
At all events, there must have been something very pressing in the matter,
  for Thiers and Jules Favre, in the name of the majority of the Bordeaux
  Assembly, unblushingly solicited the immediate occupation of Paris by
  Prussian troops. Such, however, was not the game of Bismarck, as he
  sneeringly, and in public, told the admiring Frankfort philistines on his
  return to Germany. 
 
Chapter 4: [Paris Workers’
  Revolution
  & Thiers’ Reactionary Massacres] 
 

(1) In England common criminals are often discharged on
  parole after serving the greater part of their term, and are placed under
  police surveillance. On such discharge they receive a certificate called
  ticket-of-leave, their possessor is being referred to as ticket-of-leave-men.
  

[A] Société Générale du Credit Mobilier – A
  large French joint-stock bank founded in 1852. Its main source of income was
  speculation in securities. The bank was closely linked with the government
  circles of the Second Empire. In 1867 it went bankrupt and was liquidated in
  1871. 
[B] On February 14 and 15, 1831 the Paris mob plundered
  the church of St. Germain l’ Auxerroisand Archbishop Quélen’s
  palace in protest against the Legitimist demonstration during the Requiem
  mass for the Duke de Barry. Thiers, who was present among the rioting crowd
  while it was committing excesses in the church and in the Archbishop’s
  palace, persuaded the French National Guards not to interfere. 
In 1832, by the order of Thiers, who was at that time
  minister of the Interior, the Duchesse de Berry (mother of the Comte de
  Chambord) – the Legitimist pretender to the French throne – was
  arrested and subjected to a humiliating medical examination aimed at giving
  publicity to her secret marriage and in this way ruling her political career.
  
[C] An allusion to the ignominious role of Thiers, then
  Minister of the Interior, in suppressing the people’s insurrection in
  Paris against the July monarchy on April 13-14, 1834. The insurrection was
  put down with savage brutality by the military who, for example, massacred
  the inhabitants of one of the houses on Rue Transnonain. 
September Laws  – reactionary laws
  against the press introduced by the French Government in September 1835. They
  provided for imprisonment and large fines for publications criticizing the
  existing social and political system. 
[D] In January 1841, Thiers submitted to the Chamber of
  Deputies a plan for building a range of military fortifications around Paris.
  Revolutionary-democratic sections saw this move as a preparatory step for the
  crushing of popular demonstrations. The plan provided for the building of
  particularly strong fortifications in the vicinity of the workers districts.
  
[E] In April 1849 France, in conjunction with Austria and
  Naples, organized an intervention campaign against the republic of Rome in
  order to crush it and restore the pope’s temporal power. French troops
  severely bombarded Rome. Despite heroic resistance, the Republic was crushed
  and Rome occupied by French troops. 
[F] Party of Order – A party of the
  influential conservative bourgeoisie founded in 1848. It was a coalition of
  the two French monarchist factions – the Legitimists and Orleanists;
  from 1849 until the coup d’etat of December 2, 1851, it held the
  leading position in the Legislative Assembly of the Second Republic. 
[G] On July 15, 1840, England, Russia, Prussia, Austria
  and Turkey signed the London Convention, without the participation of France,
  on rendering aid to the Turkish Sultan against the Egyptian ruler Mohammed
  Ali, who had the support of France. As a result, a threat of war arose
  between France and the coalition of European powers, but King Louis Philippe
  did not dare begin hostilities and abandoned his support of Mohammed Ali. 
[H] In order to suppress the Paris Commune Thiers appealed
  to Bismarck for permission to supplement the Versailles Army with French
  prisoners of war, most of whom had been serving in the armies that
  surrendered at Sedan and Metz. 
[I] Chamber of Deputies in France in 1815 and 1816 (during
  the early years of the Restoration), which consisted of extreme
  reactionaries. 
[J] Landlord Chamber, the Assembly of
  “Rurals” – A nickname of the National Assembly of
  1871, which met in Bordeaux and was largely made up of reactionary
  monarchists, provincial landlords, officials, rentiers and traders
  “elected” in rural districts. There were about 430 monarchists
  among the Assembly’s 630 deputies. 
[K] The preliminary peace treaty between France and
  Germany signed at Versailles on February 26, 1871 by Thiers and Jules Favre,
  on the one hand, and Bismarck, on the other. According to the terms of this
  treaty, France ceded Alsace and East Lorraine to Germany and paid it
  indemnities to the sum of 5 billion francs. The final peace treaty was signed
  in Frankfort-on-Main on May 10, 1871. 
[L] On March 10, 1871, the National Assembly passed a law
  on the deferred payment of overdue bills; under this law the payment of debts
  on obligations concluded between August 13 and November 12, 1870 could be
  deferred. Thus, law led to the bankruptcy of many petty bourgeoisie. 
[M] Décembriseur – a participant in the Bonapartist
  coup d’etat of December 2, 1851 and supporter of acts in the spirit of
  this coup. 
[N] According to the newspapers, the internal loan, which
  the Thiers government wanted to float, gave Thiers and members of his
  government over 300 million francs “commission.” On June 20,
  1871, after the suppression of the Paris Commune, the law on the loan was
  passed. 

Table of Contents: The Civil War in
  France 
 






==========

## II. Paris Workers' Revolution & Thiers' Reactionary Massacres] 







The Civil War in France



Karl Marx: The Civil War in France


The Third Address
  May, 1871 
[Paris Workers’ Revolution
  & Thiers’ Reactionary Massacres] 

 
Armed Paris was the only serious obstacle in the way of the
  counter-revolutionary conspiracy. Paris was, therefore, to be disarmed. 
On this point, the Bordeaux Assembly [National Assembly] was sincerity
  itself. If the roaring rant of its Rurals had not been audible enough, the
  surrender of Paris by Thiers to the tender mercies of the triumvirate of
  Vinoy the Decembriseur, Valentin the Bonapartist gendarme,
  and Aurelles de Paladine the Jesuit general, would have cut off even the last
  subterfuge of doubt. 
But while insultingly exhibiting the true purpose of the disarmament of
  Paris, the conspirators asked her to lay down her arms on a pretext which was
  the most glaring, the most barefaced of lies. The artillery of the Paris
  National Guard, said Thiers, belonged to the state, and to the state it must
  be returned. The fact was this: From the very day of the capitulation, by
  which Bismarck’s prisoners had signed the surrender of France, but
  reserved to themselves a numerous bodyguard for the express purpose of cowing
  Paris, Paris stood on the watch. The National Guard reorganized themselves
  and entrusted their supreme control to a Central Committee elected by their
  whole body, save some fragments of the old Bonapartist formations. On the eve
  of the entrance of the Prussians into Paris, the Central Committee took
  measures for the removal to Montmartre, Belleville, and La Villette, of the
  cannon and mitrailleuses treacherously abandoned by the
  capitulards in and about the very quarters the Prussians were to
  occupy. That artillery had been furnished by the subscriptions of the
  National Guard. As their private property, it was officially recognized in
  the capitulation of January 28, and on that very title exempted from the
  general surrender, into the hands of the conqueror, or arms belonging to the
  government. And Thiers was so utterly destitute of even the flimsiest pretext
  for initiating the war against Paris, that he had to resort to the flagrant
  lie of the artillery of the National Guard being state property! 
The seizure of her artillery was evidently but to serve as the preliminary
  to the general disarmament of Paris, and, therefore, of the Revolution of
  September 4. But that revolution had become the legal status of France. The
  republic, its work, was recognized by the conqueror in the terms of the
  capitulation. After the capitulation, it was acknowledged by all foreign
  powers, and in its name, the National Assembly had been summoned. The Paris
  working men’s revolution of September 4 was the only legal title of the
  National Assembly seated at Bordeaux, and of its executive. Without it, the
  National Assembly would at once have to give way to the Corps
  Legislatif elected in 1869 by universal suffrage under French, not under
  Prussian, rule, and forcibly dispersed by the arm of the revolution. Thiers
  and his ticket-of-leave men would have had to capitulate for safe conducts
  signed by Louis Bonaparte, to save them from a voyage to Cayenne[A]. The National Assembly,
  with its power of attorney to settle the terms of peace with Prussia, was but
  an incident of that revolution, the true embodiment of which was still armed
  Paris, which had initiated it, undergone for it a five-months’ siege,
  with its horrors of famine, and made her prolonged resistance, despite
  Trochu’s plan, the basis of an obstinate war of defence in the
  provinces. And Paris was now either to lay down her arms at the insulting
  behest of the rebellious slaveholders of Bordeaux, and acknowledge that her
  Revolution of September 4 meant nothing but a simple transfer of power from
  Louis Bonaparte to his royal rivals; or she had to stand forward as the
  self-sacrificing champion of France, whose salvation from ruin and whose
  regeneration were impossible without the revolutionary overthrow of the
  political and social conditions that had engendered the Second Empire, and
  under its fostering care, matured into utter rottenness. Paris, emaciated by
  a five-months’ famine, did not hesitate one moment. She heroically
  resolved to run all the hazards of a resistance against French conspirators,
  even with Prussian cannon frowning upon her from her own forts. Still, in its
  abhorrence of the civil war into which Paris was to be goaded, the Central
  Committee continued to persist in a merely defensive attitude, despite the
  provocations of the Assembly, the usurpations of the Executive, and the
  menacing concentration of troops in and around Paris. 
Thiers opened the civil war by sending Vinoy, at the head of a multitude
  of sergents-de-ville, and some regiments of the line, upon a
  nocturnal expedition against Montmartre, there to seize, by surprise, the
  artillery of the National Guard. It is well known how this attempt broke down
  before the resistance of the National Guard and the fraternization of the
  line with the people. Aurelles de Paldine had printed beforehand his bulletin
  of victory, and Thiers held ready the placards announcing his measures of
  coup d’etat. Now these had to be replaced by Thiers’ appeals,
  imparting his magnanimous resolve to leave the National Guard in the
  possession of their arms, with which, he said, he felt sure they would rally
  round the government against the rebels. Out of 300,000 National guards, only
  300 responded to this summons to rally around little Thiers against
  themselves. The glorious working men’s Revolution of March 18 took
  undisputed sway of Paris. The Central Committee was its provisional
  government. Europe seemed, for a moment, to doubt whether its recent
  sensational performances of state and war had any reality in them, or whether
  they were the dreams of a long bygone past. 
From March 18 to the entrance of the Versailles troops into Paris, the
  proletarian revolution remained so free from the acts of violence in which
  the revolutions – and still more the counter-revolutions – of the
  “better classes” abound, that no facts were left to its opponents
  to cry out about, but the executions of Generals Lecomte and Clement Thomas,
  and the affair of the Place Vendome. 
One of the Bonapartist officers engaged in the nocturnal attempt against
  Montmartre, General Lecomte, had four times ordered the 81st line regiment to
  fire at an unarmed gathering in the Place Pigalle, and on their refusal
  fiercely insulted them. Instead of shooting women and children, his own men
  shot him. The inveterate habits acquired by the soldiery under the training
  of the enemies of the working class are, of course, not likely to change the
  very moment these soldiers change sides. The same men executed Clement
  Thomas. 
“General” Clement Thomas, a malcontent
  ex-quartermaster-sergeant, had, in the latter times of Louis Philippe’s
  reign, enlisted at the office of the republican newspaper Le
  National, there to serve in the double capacity of responsible
  man-of-straw (gerant responsable) and of duelling bully to that very
  combative journal. After the February Revolution, the men of the
  National having got into power, they metamorphosed this old
  quarter-master-sergeant into a general on the eve of the butchery of June
  – of which he, like Jules Favre, was one of the sinister plotters, and
  became one of the most dastardly executioners. Then he and his generalship
  disappeared for a long time, to again rise to the surface on November 1,
  1870. The day before, the Government of National Defence, caught at the Hotel
  de Ville, had solemnly pledged their parole to Blanqui, Flourens, and other
  representatives of the working class, to abdicate their usurped power into
  the hands of a commune to be freely elected by Paris.[B] Instead of keeping their word, they let
  loose on Paris the Bretons of Trochu, who now replaced the Corsicans of
  Bonaparte.[C] General
  Tamisier alone, refusing to sully his name by such a breach of faith,
  resigned the commandership-in-chief of the National Guard, and in his place
  Clement Thomas for once became again a general. During the whole of his
  tenure of command, he made war, not upon the Prussians, but upon the Paris
  National Guard. He prevented their general armament, pitted the bourgeois
  battalions against the working men’s battalions, weeded out officers
  hostile to Trochu’s “plan,” and disbanded, under the stigma
  of cowardice, the very same proletarian battalions whose heroism has now
  astonished their most inveterate enemies. Clement Thomas felt quite proud of
  having reconquered his June pre-eminence as the personal enemy of the working
  class of Paris. Only a few days before March 18, he laid before the War
  Minister, Leflo, a plan of his own for “finishing off la fine
  fleur [the cream] of the Paris canaille.” After Vinoy’s
  rout, he must needs appear upon the scene of action in the quality of an
  amateur spy. The Central Committee and the Paris working men were as much
  responsible for the killing of Clement Thomas and Lecomte as the Princess of
  Wales for the fate of the people crushed to death on the day of her entrance
  into London. 
The massacre of unarmed citizens in Place Vendome is a myth which M.
  Thiers and the Rurals persistently ignored in the Assembly, entrusting its
  propagation exclusively to the servants’ hall of European journalism.
  “The men of order,” the reactionists of Paris, trembled at the
  victory of March 18. To them, it was the signal of popular retribution at
  last arriving. The ghosts of the victims assassinated at their hands from the
  days of June 1848, down to January 22, 1871,[D] arose before their faces. Their panic was their only
  punishment. Even the sergents-de-ville, instead of being disarmed
  and locked up, as ought to have been done, had the gates of Paris flung open
  wide for their safe retreat to Versailles. The men of order were left not
  only unharmed, but allowed to rally and quietly seize more than one
  stronghold in the very centre of Paris. This indulgence of the Central
  Committee – this magnanimity of the armed working men – so
  strangely at variance with the habits of the “Party of Order,”
  the latter misinterpreted as mere symptoms of conscious weakness. Hence their
  silly plan to try, under the cloak of an unarmed demonstration, what Vinoy
  had failed to perform with his cannon and mitrailleuses. On March
  22, a riotous mob of swells started from the quarters of luxury, all the
  petits creves in their ranks, and at their head the notorious
  familiars of the empire – the Heeckeren, Coetlogon, Henri de Pene, etc.
  Under the cowardly pretence of a pacific demonstration, this rabble, secretly
  armed with the weapons of the bravo [i.e. hired
  assassin], fell into marching order, ill-treated and disarmed the
  detached patrols and sentries of the National Guard they met with on their
  progress, and, on debouching from the Rue de la Paix, with the cry of
  “Down with the Central Committee! Down with the assassins! The National
  Assembly forever!” attempted to break through the line drawn up there,
  and thus to carry by surprise the headquarters of the National Guard in the
  Place Vendome. In reply to their pistol-shots, the regular
  sommations (the French equivalent of the English Riot Act)[E] were made, and, proving
  ineffective, fire was commanded by the general [Bergeret] of the National
  Guard. One volley dispersed into wild flight the silly coxcombs, who expected
  that the mere exhibition of their “respectability” would have the
  same effect upon the Revolution of Paris as Joshua’s trumpets upon the
  walls of Jericho. The runaways left behind them two National Guards killed,
  nine severely wounded (among them a member of the Central Committee
  [Maljournal]), and the whole scene of their exploit strewn with revolvers,
  daggers, and sword-canes, in evidence of the “unarmed” character
  of their “pacific” demonstration. When, on June 13, 1849, the
  National Guard made a really pacific demonstration in protest against the
  felonious assault of French troops upon Rome, Changarnier, then general of
  the Party of Order, was acclaimed by the National Assembly, and especially by
  M. Thiers, as the savior of society, for having launched his troops from all
  sides upon these unarmed men, to shoot and sabre them down, and to trample
  them under their horses’ feet. Paris, then was placed under a state of
  siege. Dufaure hurried through the Assembly new laws of repression. New
  arrests, new proscriptions – a new reign of terror set in. But the
  lower orders manage these things otherwise. The Central Committee of 1871
  simply ignored the heroes of the “pacific demonstration"; so much so,
  that only two days later, they were enabled to muster under Admiral Saisset,
  for that armed demonstration, crowned by the famous stampede to
  Versailles. In their reluctance to continue the civil war opened by
  Thiers’ burglarious attempt on Montmartre, the Central Committee made
  themselves, this time, guilty of a decisive mistake in not at once marching
  upon Versailles, then completely helpless, and thus putting an end to the
  conspiracies of Thiers and his Rurals. Instead of this, the Party of Order
  was again allowed to try its strength at the ballot box, on March 26, the day
  of the election of the Commune. Then, in the mairies of Paris, they
  exchanged bland words of conciliation with their too generous conquerors,
  muttering in their hearts solemn vows to exterminate them in due time. 
Now, look at the reverse of the medal. Thiers opened his second campaign
  against Paris in the beginning of April. The first batch of Parisian
  prisoners brought into Versailles was subjected to revolting atrocities,
  while Ernest Picard, with his hands in his trousers’ pockets, strolled
  about jeering them, and while Mesdames Thiers and Favre, in the midst of
  their ladies of honor (?) applauded, from the balcony, the outrages of the
  Versailles mob. The captured soldiers of the line were massacred in cold
  blood; our brave friend, General Duval, the iron-founder, was shot without
  any form of trial. Galifet, the kept man of his wife, so notorious for her
  shameless exhibitions at the orgies of the Second Empire, boasted in a
  proclamation of having commanded the murder of a small troop of National
  Guards, with their captain and lieutenant, surprised and disarmed by his
  Chasseurs. Vinoy, the runaway, was appointed by Thiers, Grand Cross of the
  Legion of Honor, for his general order to shoot down every soldier of the
  line taken in the ranks of the Federals. Desmaret, the Gendarme, was
  decorated for the treacherous butcher-like chopping in pieces of the
  high-souled and chivalrous Flourens, who had saved the heads of the
  Government of Defence on October 31, 1870.[F] “The encouraging particulars” of his
  assassination were triumphantly expatiated upon by Thiers in the National
  Assembly. With the elated vanity of a parliamentary Tom Thumb permitted to
  play the part of a Tamerlane, he denied the rebels the right of neutrality
  for ambulances. Nothing more horrid than that monkey allowed for a time to
  give full fling to his tigerish instincts, as foreseen by
  Voltaire.[Candide, Ch. 22](See news articles)
  
After the decree of the Commune of April 7, ordering reprisals and
  declaring it to be the duty “to protect Paris against the cannibal
  exploits of the Versailles banditti, and to demand an eye for an eye, a tooth
  for a tooth,” [G]
  Thiers did not stop the barbarous treatment of prisoners, moreover, insulting
  them in his bulletins as follows: “Never have more degraded
  countenances of a degraded democracy met the afflicted gazes of honest
  men” – honest, like Thiers himself and his ministerial
  ticket-of-leave men. Still, the shooting of prisoners was suspended for a
  time. Hardly, however, had Thiers and his Decembrist generals [of the December 2, 1851 coup by Louis Bonaparte]
  become aware that the Communal decree of reprisals was but an empty threat,
  that even their gendarme spies caught in Paris under the disguise of National
  Guards, that even sergents-de-ville, taken with incendiary shells
  upon them, were spared – when the wholesale shooting of prisoners was
  resumed and carried on uninterruptedly to the end. Houses to which National
  Guards had fled were surrounded by gendarmes, inundated with petroleum (which
  here occurs for the first time in this war), and then set fire to, the
  charred corpses being afterwards brought out by the ambulance of the Press at
  the Ternes. Four National Guards having surrendered to a troop of mounted
  Chasseurs at Belle Epine, on April 25, were afterwards shot down, one after
  another, by the captain, a worthy man of Gallifet’s. One of his four
  victims, left for dead, Scheffer, crawled back to the Parisian outposts, and
  deposed to this fact before a commission of the Commune. When Tolain
  interpellated the War Minister upon the report of this commission, the Rurals
  drowned his voice and forbade Leflo to answer. It would be an insult to their
  “glorious” army to speak of its deeds. The flippant tone in which
  Thiers’ bulletin announced the bayoneting of the Federals, surprised
  asleep at Moulin Saquet, and the wholesale fusillades at Clamart shocked the
  nerves even of the not over-sensitive London Times. But it would be
  ludicrous today to attempt recounting the merely preliminary atrocities
  committed by the bombarders of Paris and the fomenters of a
  slaveholders’ rebellion protected by foreign invasion. Amidst all these
  horrors, Thiers, forgetful of his parliamentary laments on the terrible
  responsibility weighing down his dwarfish shoulders, boasts in his bulletins
  that l’Assemblee siege paisiblement (the Assembly continues
  meeting in peace), and proves by his constant carousals, now with Decembrist
  generals, now with German princes, that his digestion is not troubled in the
  least, not even by the ghosts of Lecomte and Clement Thomas. 
 
Chapter 5: [The Paris Commune] 
 

[A] A town in French Guiana (Northern South America),
  penal settlement and place of exile. 
[B] On October 31, 1870, upon the receipt of news that the
  Government of National Defense had decided to start negotiations with the
  Prussians, the Paris workers and revolutionary sections of the National Guard
  rose up in revolt. They seized the town hall and set up their revolutionary
  government – the Committee of Public Safety, headed by Blanqui. Under
  pressure from the workers the Government of National Defense promised to
  resign and schedule national elections to the Commune for November 1. The
  government then, with the aid of some loyal battalions of the National Guard,
  seized the town hall by force of arms and re-established its domination. 
[C] Bretons  – Breton Mobile Guard which
  Trochu used as gendarmes to put down the revolutionary movement in Paris.
Corsicans – constituted a considerable part of the gendarmes
  corps during the Second Empire. 
[D] On January 22, 1871, the Paris proletariat and the
  National Guards held a revolutionary demonstration initiated by the
  Blanquists. They demanded the overthrow of the government and the
  establishment of a Commune. By order of the Government of National Defense,
  the Breton Mobile Guard, which was defending the town hall, opened fire on
  the demonstrators. After massacring the workers, the government began
  preparations to surrender Paris to the Germans. 
[E] Sommations (a preliminary demand to disburse) –
  under the laws of most bourgeois states, this demand is repeated three times,
  following which the armed police are entitled to resort to force. The
  Riot Act  was introduced in England in 1715. It prohibited “rebel
  gatherings” of more than 12 people in a group, giving the authorities
  the right to use force if the crowd did not disperse within an hour after the
  reading out of the sommations three times. 
[F] On October 31, Flourens prevented the members of the
  Government of National Defense from being shot, as had been demanded by one
  of the insurrectionists. 
[G] A reference to the decree on hostages adopted by the
  Commune on April 5, 1871. (Marx gives the date of its publication in the
  English press.) Under this decree, all persons found guilty of being in
  contact with Versailles were declared hostages. By this decree the Commune
  sought to prevent Communards from being shot by the Versaillists. 

Table of Contents: The Civil War in
  France 
 






==========

## III. [The Paris Commune] 







The Civil War in France



Karl Marx: The Civil War in France


The Third Address
  May, 1871 
[The Paris Commune] 

 
On the dawn of March 18, Paris arose to the thunder-burst of “Vive
  la Commune!” What is the Commune, that sphinx so tantalizing to the
  bourgeois mind? 
“The proletarians of Paris,” said the Central
  Committee in its manifesto of March 18, “amidst the failures and
  treasons of the ruling classes, have understood that the hour has struck for
  them to save the situation by taking into their own hands the direction of
  public affairs.... They have understood that it is their imperious duty, and
  their absolute right, to render themselves masters of their own destinies, by
  seizing upon the governmental power.” 
But the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state
  machinery, and wield it for its own purposes. 
The centralized state power, with its ubiquitous organs of standing army,
  police, bureaucracy, clergy, and judicature – organs wrought after the
  plan of a systematic and hierarchic division of labor – originates from
  the days of absolute monarchy, serving nascent middle class society as a
  mighty weapon in its struggle against feudalism. Still, its development
  remained clogged by all manner of medieval rubbish, seignorial rights, local
  privileges, municipal and guild monopolies, and provincial constitutions. The
  gigantic broom of the French Revolution of the 18th century swept away all
  these relics of bygone times, thus clearing simultaneously the social soil of
  its last hinderances to the superstructure of the modern state edifice raised
  under the First Empire, itself the offspring of the coalition wars of old
  semi-feudal Europe against modern France. 
During the subsequent regimes, the government, placed under parliamentary
  control – that is, under the direct control of the propertied classes
  – became not only a hotbed of huge national debts and crushing taxes;
  with its irresistible allurements of place, pelf, and patronage, it became
  not only the bone of contention between the rival factions and adventurers of
  the ruling classes; but its political character changed simultaneously with
  the economic changes of society. At the same pace at which the progress of
  modern industry developed, widened, intensified the class antagonism between
  capital and labor, the state power assumed more and more the character of the
  national power of capital over labor, of a public force organized for social
  enslavement, of an engine of class despotism. 
After every revolution marking a progressive phase in the class struggle,
  the purely repressive character of the state power stands out in bolder and
  bolder relief. The Revolution of 1830, resulting in the transfer of
  government from the landlords to the capitalists, transferred it from the
  more remote to the more direct antagonists of the working men. The bourgeois
  republicans, who, in the name of the February Revolution, took the state
  power, used it for the June [1848] massacres, in order to convince the
  working class that “social” republic means the republic
  entrusting their social subjection, and in order to convince the royalist
  bulk of the bourgeois and landlord class that they might safely leave the
  cares and emoluments of government to the bourgeois
  “republicans.” 
However, after their one heroic exploit of June, the bourgeois republicans
  had, from the front, to fall back to the rear of the “Party of
  Order” – a combination formed by all the rival fractions and
  factions of the appropriating classes. The proper form of their joint-stock
  government was the parliamentary republic, with Louis Bonaparte for its
  president. Theirs was a regime of avowed class terrorism and deliberate
  insult towards the “vile multitude.” 
If the parliamentary republic, as M. Thiers said, “divided them [the
  different fractions of the ruling class] least", it opened an abyss between
  that class and the whole body of society outside their spare ranks. The
  restraints by which their own divisions had under former regimes still
  checked the state power, were removed by their union; and in view of the
  threatening upheaval of the proletariat, they now used that state power
  mercilessly and ostentatiously as the national war engine of capital against
  labor. 
In their uninterrupted crusade against the producing masses, they were,
  however, bound not only to invest the executive with continually increased
  powers of repression, but at the same time to divest their own parliamentary
  stronghold – the National Assembly – one by one, of all its own
  means of defence against the Executive. The Executive, in the person of Louis
  Bonaparte, turned them out. The natural offspring of the “Party of
  Order” republic was the Second Empire. 
The empire, with the coup d’etat for its birth certificate,
  universal suffrage for its sanction, and the sword for its sceptre, professed
  to rest upon the peasantry, the large mass of producers not directly involved
  in the struggle of capital and labor. It professed to save the working class
  by breaking down parliamentarism, and, with it, the undisguised subserviency
  of government to the propertied classes. It professed to save the propertied
  classes by upholding their economic supremacy over the working class; and,
  finally, it professed to unite all classes by reviving for all the chimera of
  national glory. 
In reality, it was the only form of government possible at a time when the
  bourgeoisie had already lost, and the working class had not yet acquired, the
  faculty of ruling the nation. It was acclaimed throughout the world as the
  savior of society. Under its sway, bourgeois society, freed from political
  cares, attained a development unexpected even by itself. Its industry and
  commerce expanded to colossal dimensions; financial swindling celebrated
  cosmopolitan orgies; the misery of the masses was set off by a shameless
  display of gorgeous, meretricious and debased luxury. The state power,
  apparently soaring high above society and the very hotbed of all its
  corruptions. Its own rottenness, and the rottenness of the society it had
  saved, were laid bare by the bayonet of Prussia, herself eagerly bent upon
  transferring the supreme seat of that regime from Paris to Berlin.
  Imperialism is, at the same time, the most prostitute and the ultimate form
  of the state power which nascent middle class society had commenced to
  elaborate as a means of its own emancipation from feudalism, and which
  full-grown bourgeois society had finally transformed into a means for the
  enslavement of labor by capital. 
The direct antithesis to the empire was the Commune. The cry of
  “social republic,” with which the February Revolution was ushered
  in by the Paris proletariat, did but express a vague aspiration after a
  republic that was not only to supercede the monarchical form of class rule,
  but class rule itself. The Commune was the positive form of that republic.
  
Paris, the central seat of the old governmental power, and, at the same
  time, the social stronghold of the French working class, had risen in arms
  against the attempt of Thiers and the Rurals to restore and perpetuate that
  old governmental power bequeathed to them by the empire. Paris could resist
  only because, in consequence of the siege, it had got rid of the army, and
  replaced it by a National Guard, the bulk of which consisted of working men.
  This fact was now to be transformed into an institution. The first decree of
  the Commune, therefore, was the suppression of the standing army, and the
  substitution for it of the armed people. 
The Commune was formed of the municipal councillors, chosen by universal
  suffrage in the various wards of the town, responsible and revocable at short
  terms. The majority of its members were naturally working men, or
  acknowledged representatives of the working class. The Commune was to be a
  working, not a parliamentary body, executive and legislative at the same
  time. 
Instead of continuing to be the agent of the Central Government, the
  police was at once stripped of its political attributes, and turned into the
  responsible, and at all times revocable, agent of the Commune. So were the
  officials of all other branches of the administration. From the members of
  the Commune downwards, the public service had to be done at
  workman’s wage. The vested interests and the representation
  allowances of the high dignitaries of state disappeared along with the high
  dignitaries themselves. Public functions ceased to be the private property of
  the tools of the Central Government. Not only municipal administration, but
  the whole initiative hitherto exercised by the state was laid into the hands
  of the Commune. 
Having once got rid of the standing army and the police – the
  physical force elements of the old government – the Commune was anxious
  to break the spiritual force of repression, the “parson-power", by the
  disestablishment and disendowment of all churches as proprietary bodies. The
  priests were sent back to the recesses of private life, there to feed upon
  the alms of the faithful in imitation of their predecessors, the apostles.
  
The whole of the educational institutions were opened to the people
  gratuitously, and at the same time cleared of all interference of church and
  state. Thus, not only was education made accessible to all, but science
  itself freed from the fetters which class prejudice and governmental force
  had imposed upon it. 
The judicial functionaries were to be divested of that sham independence which had but served to mask their abject
  subserviency to all succeeding governments to which, in turn, they had taken,
  and broken, the oaths of allegiance. Like the rest of public servants,
  magistrates and judges were to be elective, responsible, and revocable. 
The Paris Commune was, of course, to serve as a model to all the great
  industrial centres of France. The communal regime once established in Paris
  and the secondary centres, the old centralized government would in the
  provinces, too, have to give way to the self-government of the producers. 
In a rough sketch of national organization, which the Commune had no time
  to develop, it states clearly that the Commune was to be the political form
  of even the smallest country hamlet, and that in the rural districts the
  standing army was to be replaced by a national militia, with an extremely
  short term of service. The rural communities of every district were to
  administer their common affairs by an assembly of delegates in the central
  town, and these district assemblies were again to send deputies to the
  National Delegation in Paris, each delegate to be at any time revocable and
  bound by the mandat imperatif (formal instructions) of his
  constituents. The few but important functions which would still remain for a
  central government were not to be suppressed, as has been intentionally
  misstated, but were to be discharged by Communal and thereafter responsible
  agents. 
The unity of the nation was not to be broken, but, on the contrary, to be
  organized by Communal Constitution, and to become a reality by the
  destruction of the state power which claimed to be the embodiment of that
  unity independent of, and superior to, the nation itself, from which it was
  but a parasitic excresence. 
While the merely repressive organs of the old governmental power were to
  be amputated, its legitimate functions were to be wrested from an authority
  usurping pre-eminence over society itself, and restored to the responsible
  agents of society. Instead of deciding once in three
  or six years which member of the ruling class was to misrepresent the people
  in Parliament, universal suffrage was to serve the people, constituted in
  Communes, as individual suffrage serves every other employer in the search
  for the workmen and managers in his business. And it is well-known that
  companies, like individuals, in matters of real business generally know how
  to put the right man in the right place, and, if they for once make a
  mistake, to redress it promptly. On the other hand, nothing could be more
  foreign to the spirit of the Commune than to supercede universal suffrage by
  hierarchical investiture.[A] 
It is generally the fate of completely new historical creations to be
  mistaken for the counterparts of older, and even defunct, forms of social
  life, to which they may bear a certain likeness. Thus, this new Commune,
  which breaks with the modern state power, has been mistaken for a
  reproduction of the medieval Communes, which first preceded, and afterward
  became the substratum of, that very state power. The Communal Constitution
  has been mistaken for an attempt to break up into the federation of small
  states, as dreamt of by Montesquieu and the Girondins,[B] that unity of great nations which, if
  originally brought about by political force, has now become a powerful
  coefficient of social production. The antagonism of the Commune against the
  state power has been mistaken for an exaggerated form of the ancient struggle
  against over-centralization. Peculiar historical circumstances may have
  prevented the classical development, as in France, of the bourgeois form of
  government, and may have allowed, as in England, to complete the great
  central state organs by corrupt vestries, jobbing councillors, and ferocious
  poor-law guardians in the towns, and virtually hereditary magistrates in the
  counties. 
The Communal Constitution would have restored to the social body all the
  forces hitherto absorbed by the state parasite feeding upon, and clogging the
  free movement of, society. By this one act, it would have initiated the
  regeneration of France. 
The provincial French middle class saw in the Commune an attempt to
  restore the sway their order had held over the country under Louis Philippe,
  and which, under Louis Napoleon, was supplanted by the pretended rule of the
  country over the towns. In reality, the Communal Constitution brought the
  rural producers under the intellectual lead of the central towns of their
  districts, and there secured to them, in the working men, the natural
  trustees of their interests. The very existence of the Commune involved, as a
  matter of course, local municipal liberty, but no longer as a check upon the
  now superseded state power. It could only enter into the head of a Bismarck
  – who, when not engaged on his intrigues of blood and iron, always
  likes to resume his old trade, so befitting his mental calibre, of
  contributor to Kladderadatsch (the Berlin Punch)[C] – it could only
  enter into such a head to ascribe to the Paris Commune aspirations after the
  caricature of the old French municipal organization of 1791, the Prussian
  municipal constitution which degrades the town governments to mere secondary
  wheels in the police machinery of the Prussian state. The Commune made that
  catchword of bourgeois revolutions – cheap government – a reality
  by destroying the two greatest sources of expenditure: the standing army and
  state functionarism. Its very existence presupposed the non-existence of
  monarchy, which, in Europe at least, is the normal incumbrance and
  indispensable cloak of class rule. It supplied the republic with the basis of
  really democratic institutions. But neither cheap government nor the
  “true republic” was its ultimate aim; they were its mere
  concomitants. 
The multiplicity of interpretations to which the Commune has been
  subjected, and the multiplicity of interests which construed it in their
  favor, show that it was a thoroughly expansive political form, while all the
  previous forms of government had been emphatically repressive. Its true
  secret was this: 
It was essentially a working class government, the product
  of the struggle of the producing against the appropriating class, the
  political form at last discovered under which to work out the economical
  emancipation of labor. 
Except on this last condition, the Communal Constitution would have been
  an impossibility and a delusion. The political rule of the producer cannot
  co-exist with the perpetuation of his social slavery. The Commune was
  therefore to serve as a lever for uprooting the economical foundation upon
  which rests the existence of classes, and therefore of class rule. With labor
  emancipated, every man becomes a working man, and productive labor ceases to
  be a class attribute. 
It is a strange fact. In spite of all the tall talk and all the immense
  literature, for the last 60 years, about emancipation of labor, no sooner do
  the working men anywhere take the subject into their own hands with a will,
  than uprises at once all the apologetic phraseology of the mouthpieces of
  present society with its two poles of capital and wages-slavery (the landlord
  now is but the sleeping partner of the capitalist), as if the capitalist
  society was still in its purest state of virgin innocence, with its
  antagonisms still undeveloped, with its delusions still unexploded, with its
  prostitute realities not yet laid bare. The Commune, they exclaim, intends to
  abolish property, the basis of all civilization! 
Yes, gentlemen, the Commune intended to abolish that class property which
  makes the labor of the many the wealth of the few. It aimed at the
  expropriation of the expropriators. It wanted to make individual property a
  truth by transforming the means of production, land, and capital, now chiefly
  the means of enslaving and exploiting labor, into mere instruments of free
  and associated labor. But this is communism, “impossible”
  communism! Why, those members of the ruling classes who are intelligent
  enough to perceive the impossibility of continuing the present system –
  and they are many – have become the obtrusive and full-mouthed apostles
  of co-operative production. If co-operative production is not to remain a
  sham and a snare; if it is to supersede the capitalist system; if united
  co-operative societies are to regulate national production upon common plan,
  thus taking it under their own control, and putting an end to the constant
  anarchy and periodical convulsions which are the fatality of capitalist
  production – what else, gentlemen, would it be but communism,
  “possible” communism? 
The working class did not expect miracles from the Commune. They have no
  ready-made utopias to introduce par décret du peuple. They know that
  in order to work out their own emancipation, and along with it that higher
  form to which present society is irresistably tending by its own economical
  agencies, they will have to pass through long struggles, through a series of
  historic processes, transforming circumstances and men. They have no ideals
  to realize, but to set free the elements of the new society with which old
  collapsing bourgeois society itself is pregnant. In the full consciousness of
  their historic mission, and with the heroic resolve to act up to it, the
  working class can afford to smile at the coarse invective of the
  gentlemen’s gentlemen with pen and inkhorn, and at the didactic
  patronage of well-wishing bourgeois-doctrinaires, pouring forth their
  ignorant platitudes and sectarian crotchets in the oracular tone of
  scientific infallibility. 
When the Paris Commune took the management of the revolution in its own
  hands; when plain working men for the first time dared to infringe upon the
  governmental privilege of their “natural superiors,” and, under
  circumstances of unexampled difficulty, performed it at salaries the highest
  of which barely amounted to one-fifth of what, according to high scientific
  authority,(1) is the
  minimum required for a secretary to a certain metropolitan school-board
  – the old world writhed in convulsions of rage at the sight of the Red
  Flag, the symbol of the Republic of Labor, floating over the Hôtel de Ville.
  
And yet, this was the first revolution in which the working class was
  openly acknowledged as the only class capable of social initiative, even by
  the great bulk of the Paris middle class – shopkeepers, tradesmen,
  merchants – the wealthy capitalist alone excepted. The Commune had
  saved them by a sagacious settlement of that ever recurring cause of dispute
  among the middle class themselves – the debtor and creditor
  accounts.[D] The same
  portion of the middle class, after they had assisted in putting down the
  working men’s insurrection of June 1848, had been at once
  unceremoniously sacrificed to their creditors[E] by the then Constituent Assembly. But this was not
  their only motive for now rallying around the working class. They felt there
  was but one alternative – the Commune, or the empire – under
  whatever name it might reappear. The empire had ruined them economically by
  the havoc it made of public wealth, by the wholesale financial swindling it
  fostered, by the props it lent to the artificially accelerated centralization
  of capital, and the concomitant expropriation of their own ranks. It had
  suppressed them politically, it had shocked them morally by its orgies, it
  had insulted their Voltairianism by handing over the education of their
  children to the fréres Ignorantins,[F] it had revolted their national feeling as Frenchmen
  by precipitating them headlong into a war which left only one equivalent for
  the ruins it made – the disappearance of the empire. In fact, after the
  exodus from Paris of the high Bonapartist and capitalist bohème, the
  true middle class Party of Order came out in the shape of the “Union
  Republicaine,”[G]
  enrolling themselves under the colors of the Commune and defending it against
  the wilful misconstructions of Thiers. Whether the gratitude of this great
  body of the middle class will stand the present severe trial, time must show.
  
The Commune was perfectly right in telling the peasants that “its
  victory was their only hope.” Of all the lies hatched at Versailles and
  re-echoed by the glorious European penny-a-liner, one of the most tremendous
  was that the Rurals represented the French peasantry. Think only of the love
  of the French peasant for the men to whom, after 1815, he had to pay the
  milliard indemnity.[H]
  In the eyes of the French peasant, the very existence of a great landed
  proprietor is in itself an encroachment on his conquests of 1789. The
  bourgeois, in 1848, had burdened his plot of land with the additional tax of
  45 cents in the franc; but then he did so in the name of the revolution;
  while now he had fomented a civil war against revolution, to shift on to the
  peasant’s shoulders the chief load of the 5 milliards of indemnity to
  be paid to the Prussian. The Commune, on the other hand, in one of its first
  proclamations, declared that the true originators of the war would be made to
  pay its cost. The Commune would have delivered the peasant of the blood tax
  – would have given him a cheap government – transformed his
  present blood-suckers, the notary, advocate, executor, and other judicial
  vampires, into salaried communal agents, elected by, and responsible to,
  himself. It would have freed him of the tyranny of the garde
  champêtre, the gendarme, and the prefect; would have put enlightenment
  by the schoolmaster in the place of stultification by the priest. And the
  French peasant is, above all, a man of reckoning. He would find it extremely
  reasonable that the pay of the priest, instead of being extorted by the
  tax-gatherer, should only depend upon the spontaneous action of the
  parishioners’ religious instinct. Such were the great immediate boons
  which the rule of the Commune – and that rule alone – held out to
  the French peasantry. It is, therefore, quite superfluous here to expatiate
  upon the more complicated but vital problems which the Commune alone was
  able, and at the same time compelled, to solve in favor of the peasant
  – viz., the hypothecary debt, lying like an incubus upon his parcel of
  soil, the prolétariat foncier (the rural proletariat), daily growing
  upon it, and his expropriation from it enforced, at a more and more rapid
  rate, by the very development of modern agriculture and the competition of
  capitalist farming. 
The French peasant had elected Louis Bonaparte president of the Republic;
  but the Party of Order created the empire. What the French peasant really
  wants he commenced to show in 1849 and 1850, by opposing his maire
  to the government’s prefect, his school-master to the
  government’s priest, and himself to the government’s gendarme.
  All the laws made by the Party of Order in January and February 1850 were
  avowed measures of repression against the peasant. The peasant was a
  Bonapartist, because the Great Revolution, with all its benefits to him, was,
  in his eyes, personified in Napoleon. This delusion, rapidly breaking down
  under the Second Empire (and in its very nature hostile to the Rurals), this
  prejudice of the past, how could it have withstood the appeal of the Commune
  to the living interests and urgent wants of the peasantry? 
The Rurals – this was, in fact, their chief apprehension –
  knew that three months’ free communication of Communal Paris with the
  provinces would bring about a general rising of the peasants, and hence their
  anxiety to establish a police blockade around Paris, so as to stop the spread
  of the rinderpest [cattle pest – contagious
  disease]. 
If the Commune was thus the true representative of all the healthy
  elements of French society, and therefore the truly national government, it
  was, at the same time, as a working men’s government, as the bold
  champion of the emancipation of labor, emphatically international. Within
  sight of that Prussian army, that had annexed to Germany two French
  provinces, the Commune annexed to France the working people all over the
  world. 
The Second Empire had been the jubilee of cosmopolitan blackleggism, the
  rakes of all countries rushing in at its call for a share in its orgies and
  in the plunder of the French people. Even at this moment, the right hand of
  Thiers is Ganessco, the foul Wallachian, and his left hand is Markovsky, the
  Russian spy. The Commune admitted all foreigners to the honor of dying for an
  immortal cause. Between the foreign war lost by their treason, and the civil
  war fomented by their conspiracy with the foreign invader, the bourgeoisie
  had found the time to display their patriotism by organizing police hunts
  upon the Germans in France. The Commune made a German working man [Leo
  Frankel] its Minister of Labor. Thiers, the bourgeoisie, the Second Empire,
  had continually deluded Poland by loud professions of sympathy, while in
  reality betraying her to, and doing the dirty work of, Russia. The Commune
  honored the heroic sons of Poland [J. Dabrowski and W. Wróblewski] by placing
  them at the head of the defenders of Paris. And, to broadly mark the new era
  of history it was conscious of initiating, under the eyes of the conquering
  Prussians on one side, and the Bonapartist army, led by Bonapartist generals,
  on the other, the Commune pulled down that colossal symbol of martial glory,
  the Vendôme Column.[I]

The great social measure of the Commune was its own working existence. Its
  special measures could but betoken the tendency of a government of the people
  by the people. Such were the abolition of the nightwork of journeymen bakers;
  the prohibition, under penalty, of the employers’ practice to reduce
  wages by levying upon their workpeople fines under manifold pretexts –
  a process in which the employer combines in his own person the parts of
  legislator, judge, and executor, and filches the money to boot. Another
  measure of this class was the surrender to associations of workmen, under
  reserve of compensation, of all closed workshops and factories, no matter
  whether the respective capitalists had absconded or preferred to strike work.
  
The financial measures of the Commune, remarkable for their sagacity and
  moderation, could only be such as were compatible with the state of a
  besieged town. Considering the colossal robberies committed upon the city of
  Paris by the great financial companies and contractors, under the protection
  of Haussman,[J] the
  Commune would have had an incomparably better title to confiscate their
  property than Louis Napoleon had against the Orleans family. The Hohenzollern
  and the English oligarchs, who both have derived a good deal of their estates
  from church plunders, were, of course, greatly shocked at the Commune
  clearing but 8,000F out of secularization. 
While the Versailles government, as soon as it had recovered some spirit
  and strength, used the most violent means against the Commune; while it put
  down the free expression of opinion all over France, even to the forbidding
  of meetings of delegates from the large towns; while it subjected Versailles
  and the rest of France to an espionage far surpassing that of the Second
  Empire; while it burned by its gendarme inquisitors all papers printed at
  Paris, and sifted all correspondence from and to Paris; while in the National
  Assembly the most timid attempts to put in a word for Paris were howled down
  in a manner unknown even to the Chambre introuvable of 1816; with
  the savage warfare of Versailles outside, and its attempts at corruption and
  conspiracy inside Paris – would the Commune not have shamefully
  betrayed its trust by affecting to keep all the decencies and appearances of
  liberalism as in a time of profound peace? Had the government of the Commune
  been akin to that of M. Thiers, there would have been no more occasion to
  suppress Party of Order papers at Paris that there was to suppress Communal
  papers at Versailles. 
It was irritating indeed to the Rurals that at the very same time they
  declared the return to the church to be the only means of salvation for
  France, the infidel Commune unearthed the peculiar mysteries of the Picpus
  nunnery, and of the Church of St. Laurent.[K] It was a satire upon M. Thiers that, while he
  showered grand crosses upon the Bonapartist generals in acknowledgment of
  their mastery in losing battles, signing capitulations, and turning
  cigarettes at Wilhelmshöhe,[L] the Commune dismissed and arrested its generals
  whenever they were suspected of neglecting their duties. The expulsion from,
  and arrest by, the Commune of one of its members [Blanchet] who had slipped
  in under a false name, and had undergone at Lyons six days’
  imprisonment for simple bankruptcy, was it not a deliberate insult hurled at
  the forger, Jules Favre, then still the foreign minister of France, still
  selling France to Bismarck, and still dictating his orders to that paragon
  government of Belgium? But indeed the Commune did not pretend to
  infallibility, the invariable attribute of all governments of the old stamp.
  It published its doings and sayings, it initiated the public into all its
  shortcomings. 
In every revolution there intrude, at the side of its true agents, men of
  different stamp; some of them survivors of and devotees to past revolutions,
  without insight into the present movement, but preserving popular influence
  by their known honesty and courage, or by the sheer force of tradition;
  others mere brawlers who, by dint of repeating year after year the same set
  of stereotyped declarations against the government of the day, have sneaked
  into the reputation of revolutionists of the first water. After March 18,
  some such men did also turn up, and in some cases contrived to play
  pre-eminent parts. As far as their power went, they hampered the real action
  of the working class, exactly as men of that sort have hampered the full
  development of every previous revolution. They are an unavoidable evil: with
  time they are shaken off; but time was not allowed to the Commune. 
Wonderful, indeed, was the change the Commune had wrought in Paris! No
  longer any trace of the meretricious Paris of the Second Empire! No longer
  was Paris the rendezvous of British landlords, Irish absentees,[M] American ex-slaveholders
  and shoddy men, Russian ex-serfowners, and Wallachian boyards. No more
  corpses at the morgue, no nocturnal burglaries, scarcely any robberies; in
  fact, for the first time since the days of February 1848, the streets of
  Paris were safe, and that without any police of any kind. 
“We,” said a member of the Commune, “hear
  no longer of assassination, theft, and personal assault; it seems indeed as
  if the police had dragged along with it to Versailles all its Conservative
  friends.” 
The cocottes [‘chickens’ – prostitutes] had refound the scent of their protectors –
  the absconding men of family, religion, and, above all, of property. In their
  stead, the real women of Paris showed again at the surface – heroic,
  noble, and devoted, like the women of antiquity. Working, thinking fighting,
  bleeding Paris – almost forgetful, in its incubation of a new society,
  of the Cannibals at its gates – radiant in the enthusiasm of its
  historic initiative! 
Opposed to this new world at Paris, behold the old world at Versailles
  – that assembly of the ghouls of all defunct regimes, Legitimists and
  Orleanists, eager to feed upon the carcass of the nation – with a tail
  of antediluvian republicans, sanctioning, by their presence in the Assembly,
  the slaveholders’ rebellion, relying for the maintenance of their
  parliamentary republic upon the vanity of the senile mountebank at its head,
  and caricaturing 1789 by holding their ghastly meetings in the Jeu de
  Paume.(2) There it
  was, this Assembly, the representative of everything dead in France, propped
  up to the semblance of life by nothing but the swords of the generals of
  Louis Bonaparte. Paris all truth, Versailles all lie; and that lie vented
  through the mouth of Thiers. 
Thiers tells a deputation of the mayors of the Seine-et-Oise –
  “You may rely upon my word, which I have never broken!” 
He tells the Assembly itself that “it was the most freely elected
  and most liberal Assembly France ever possessed"; he tells his motley
  soldiery that it was “the admiration of the world, and the finest army
  France ever possessed”; he tells the provinces that the bombardment of Paris
  by him was a myth: “If some cannon-shots have been fired, it was not
  the deed of the army of Versailles, but of some insurgents trying to make
  believe that they are fighting, while they dare not show their faces.”
  He again tells the provinces that “the artillery of Versailles does not
  bombard Paris, but only cannonades it". He tells the Archbishop of Paris that
  the pretended executions and reprisals (!) attributed to the Versailles
  troops were all moonshine. He tells Paris that he was only anxious “to
  free it from the hideous tyrants who oppress it,” and that, in fact,
  the Paris of the Commune was “but a handful of criminals.” 
The Paris of M. Thiers was not the real Paris of the “vile
  multitude,” but a phantom Paris, the Paris of the
  francs-fileurs,[N] the Paris of the Boulevards, male and female –
  the rich, the capitalist, the gilded, the idle Paris, now thronging with its
  lackeys, its blacklegs, its literary bonhome, and its
  cocottes at Versailles, Saint-Denis, Rueil, and Saint-Germain;
  considering the civil war but an agreeable diversion, eyeing the battle going
  on through telescopes, counting the rounds of cannon, swearing by their own
  honor and that of their prostitutes, that the performance was far better got
  up than it used to be at the Porte St. Martin. The men who fell were really
  dead; the cries of the wounded were cries in good earnest; and, besides, the
  whole thing was so intensely historical. 
This is the Paris of M. Thiers, as the emigration of Coblenz was the
  France of M. de Calonne.[O] 
 
Chapter 6: [The Fall of Paris] 
 

Authors Notes 
(1) Professor Huxley. [Note to the German addition of
  1871.] 
(2) The tennis court where the National Assembly of 1789
  adopted its famous decisions. [Note to the German addition of 1871.] 

Editorial Notes 
[A] A top-down system of appointing officials in bourgeois
  systems, where high-up officials appoint many or all lower officials. 
[B] The party of the influential bourgeoisie during the
  French revolution at the end of the 18th century. (The name is derived from
  the Department of Gironde.) It came out against the Jacobin government and
  the revolutionary masses which supported it, under the banner of defending
  the departments’ right to autonomy and federation. 
[C] Satirical/humorous liberal weekly papers. 
[D] A reference to the Paris Commune’s decree of
  April 16, 1871, providing for payment of all debts in installments over three
  years and abolition of interest on them. 
[E] On Aug. 22, 1848, the Constituent Assembly rejected
  the bill on “amiable agreements” (“concordats á
  l’ amiable ”) aimed to introduce the deferred payment of
  debts. As a result of this measure, a considerable section of the
  petty-bourgeoisie were utterly ruined and found themselves completely
  dependent on the creditors of the richest bourgeoisie. 
[F] (Ignorant Brothers) – a nickname for a religious
  order, founded in Rheims in 1680, whose members pledged themselves to educate
  children of the poor. The pupils received a predominantly religious education
  and barely any knowledge otherwise. 
[G] This refers to the Alliance républicaine des
  Départements  – a political association of petty-bourgeois
  representatives from the various departments of France, who lived in Paris;
  calling on the people to fight against the Versailles government and the
  monarchist National Assembly and to support the Commune throughout the
  country. 
[H] The law of April 27, 1825 on the payment of
  compensation to the former emigres for the landed states confiscated from
  them during the preceding French Revolution. 
[I] The Vendôme Column was erected between 1806 and 1810
  in Paris in honor of the victories of Napoleonic France; it was made out of
  the bronze captured from enemy guns and was crowned by a statue of Napoleon.
  On May 16, 1871, by order of the Paris Commune, the Vendôme Column was pulled
  down. 
[J] During the Second Empire, Baron Haussmann was Prefect
  of the Department of the Seine (the City of Paris). He introduced a number of
  changes in the layout of the city for the purpose of crushing workers’
  revolts. 
[K] In the Picpus nunnery cases of the nuns being
  incarcerated in cells for many years were exposed and instruments of torture
  were found; in the church of St. Laurent a secret cemetery was found
  attesting to the murders that had been committed there. These facts were
  finally exposed by the Commune’s newspaper Mot d’Ordre
  on May 5, 1871, and also in the pamphlet Les Crimes des congreégations
  religieuses. 
[L] The chief occupation of the French prisoners of war in
  Wilhelmshöhe (those captured after the Battle of Sedan) was making cigars for
  their own use. 
[M] Rich landowners who hardly ever visited their estates,
  but instead had their land managed by agents or leased it to petty-bourgeois
  who, in their turn, sub-leased the land at high rents. 
[N] (litterly rendered: “free absconder”)
  – the nickname given to the Paris bourgeois who fled from the city
  during the siege. The name carried brazen historical irony as a result of its
  resemblance to the word “francs-tireurs ” (“free
  sharpshooters”) – French guerrillas who actively fought against
  the Prussians. 
[O] A city in Germany; during the French Revolution at the
  end of the 18th-century it was the center where the landlord monarchist
  emigres made preparations for intervention against revolutionary France.
  Coblenz was the seat of the emigre government headed by the rabid reactionary
  de Calonne, a former minister of Louis XVI. 

Table of Contents: The Civil War in
  France 
 






==========

## IV. [The Fall of Paris] 







The Civil War in France



Karl Marx: The Civil War in France


The Third Address
  May, 1871 
[The Fall of Paris] 

 
The first attempt of the slaveholders’ conspiracy to put down Paris
  by getting the Prussians to occupy it was frustrated by Bismarck’s
  refusal. 
The second attempt, that of March 18, ended in the rout of the army and
  the flight to Versailles of the government, which ordered the whole
  administration to break up and follow in its track. 
By the semblance of peace negotiations with Paris, Thiers found the time
  to prepare for war against it. But where to find an army? The remnants of the
  line regiments were weak in number and unsafe in character. His urgent appeal
  to the provinces to succour Versailles, by their National Guards and
  volunteers, met with a flat refusal. Brittany alone furnished a handful of
  Chouans[A]
  fighting under a white flag, every one of them wearing on his breast the
  heart of Jesus in white cloth, and shouting “Vive le Roi!” (Long
  live the King!) 
Thiers was, therefore, compelled to collect, in hot haste, a motley crew,
  composed of sailors, marines, Pontifical Zouaves, Valentin’s gendarmes,
  and Pietri’s sergents-de-ville and mouchards. This
  army, however, would have been ridiculously ineffective without the
  instalments of imperialist war prisoners, which Bismarck granted in numbers
  just sufficient to keep the civil war a-going, and keep the Versailles
  government in abject dependence on Prussia. During the war itself, the
  Versailles police had to look after the Versailles army, while the gendarmes
  had to drag it on by exposing themselves at all posts of danger. The forts
  which fell were not taken, but bought. The heroism of the Federals convinced
  Thiers that the resistance of Paris was not to be broken by his own strategic
  genius and the bayonets at his disposal. 
Meanwhile, his relations with the provinces became more and more
  difficult. Not one single address of approval came in to gladden Thiers and
  his Rurals. Quite the contrary. Deputations and addresses demanding, in a
  tone anything but respectful, conciliation with Paris on the basis of the
  unequivocal recognition of the republic, the acknowledgment of the Communal
  liberties, and the dissolution of the National Assembly, whose mandate was
  extinct, poured in from all sides, and in such numbers that Dufaure,
  Thiers’ Minister of Justice, in his circular of April 23 to the public
  prosecutors, commanded them to treat “the cry of conciliation” as
  a crime! In regard, however, of the hopeless prospect held out by his
  campaign, Thiers resolved to shift his tactics by ordering, all over the
  country, municipal elections to take place on April 30, on the basis of the
  new municipal law dictated by himself to the National Assembly. What with the
  intrigues of his prefects, what with police intimidation, he felt quite
  sanguine of imparting, by the verdict of the provinces, to the National
  Assembly that moral power it had never possessed, and of getting at last from
  the provinces the physical force required for the conquest of Paris. 
His bandit-warfare against Paris, exalted in his own bulletins, and the
  attempts of his ministers at the establishment, throughout France, of a reign
  of terror, Thiers was from the beginning anxious to accompany with a little
  by-play of conciliation, which had to serve more than one purpose. It was to
  dupe the provinces, to inveigle the middle class elements in Paris, and above
  all, to afford the professed republicans in the National Assembly the
  opportunity of hiding their treason against Paris behind their faith in
  Thiers. 
On March 21, when still without an army, he had declared to the Assembly:
  “Come what may, I will not send an army to Paris.” 
On March 27, he rose again: “I have found the republic an
  accomplished fact, and I am firmly resolved to maintain it.” 
In reality, he put down the revolution at Lyons and Marseilles[B] in the name of the
  republic, while the roars of his Rurals drowned the very mention of his name
  at Versailles. After this exploit, he toned down the “accomplished
  fact” into a hypothetical fact. The Orleans princes, whom he had
  cautiously warned off Bordeaux, were now, in flagrant breach of the law,
  permitted to intrigue at Dreux. The concessions held out by Thiers in his
  interminable interviews with the delegates from Paris and the provinces,
  although constantly varied in tone and color, according to time and
  circumstances, did in fact never come to more than the prospective
  restriction of revenge to the “handful of criminals implicated in the
  murder of Lecomte and Clement Thomas,” on the well-understood premise
  that Paris and France were unreservedly to accept M. Thiers himself as the
  best of possible Republics, as he, in 1830, had done with Louis Philippe, and
  in 1849 under Louis Bonaparte’s presidency. While out of office, he
  made a fortune by pleading for the Paris capitalists, and made political
  capital by pleading against the laws he had himself originated. He now
  hurried through the National Assembly not only a set of repressive laws which
  were, after the fall of Paris, to extirpate the last remnants of republican
  liberty in France; he foreshadowed the fate of Paris by abridging what was
  for him the too slow procedure of courts-martial,[C] and by a new-fangled, Draconic code of
  deportation. The Revolution of 1848, abolishing the penalty of death for
  political crimes, had replaced it by deportation. Louis Bonaparte did not
  dare, at least not in theory, to re-establish the regime of the guillotine.
  The Rural Assembly, not yet bold enough even to hint that the Parisians were
  not rebels, but assassins, had therefore to confine its prospective vengeance
  against Paris to Dufaure’s new code of deportation. Under all these
  circumstances, Thiers himself could not have gone on with his comedy of
  conciliation, had it not, as he intended it to do, drawn forth shrieks of
  rage from the Rurals, whose ruminating mind did neither understand the play,
  nor its necessities of hypocrisy, tergiversation, and procrastination. 
In sight of the impending municipal elections of April 30, Thiers enacted
  one of his great conciliation scenes on April 27. Amidst a flood of sentiment
  rhetoric, he exclaimed from the tribune of the Assembly: 
“There exists no conspiracy against the republic but
  that of Paris, which compels us to shed French blood. I repeat it again and
  again. Let those impious arms fall from the hands which hold them, and
  chastisement will be arrested at once by an act of peace excluding only the
  small number of criminals.” 
To the violent interruption of the Rurals, he replied: 
“Gentlemen, tell me, I implore you, am I wrong? Do
  you really regret that I could have stated the truth that the criminals are
  only a handful? Is it not fortunate in the midst of our misfortunes that
  those who have been capable to shed the blood of Clement Thomas and General
  Lecomte are but rare exceptions?” 
France, however, turned a deaf ear to what Thiers flattered himself to be
  a parliamentary siren’s song. Out of 700,000 municipal councillors
  returned by the 35,000 communes still left to France, the united Legitimists,
  Orleanists, and Bonapartists did not carry 8,000. 
The supplementary elections which followed were still more decidedly
  hostile. 
Thus, instead of getting from the provinces the badly-needed physical
  force, the National Assembly lost even its last claim to moral force, that of
  being the expression of the universal suffrage of the country. To complete
  the discomfiture, the newly-chosen municipal councils of all the cities of
  France openly threatened the usurping Assembly at Versailles with a counter
  assembly at Bordeaux. 
Then the long-expected moment of decisive action had at last come for
  Bismarck. He peremptorily summoned Thiers to send to Frankfort
  plenipotentiaries for the definitive settlement of peace. In humble obedience
  to the call of his master, Thiers hastened to despatch his trusty Jules
  Favre, backed by Pouyer-Quertier. Pouyer-Quertier, an “eminent”
  Rouen cotton-spinner, a fervent and even servile partisan of the Second
  Empire, had never found any fault with it save its commercial treaty with
  England,[D] prejudicial
  to his own shop-interest. Hardly installed at Bordeaux as Thiers’
  Minister of Finance, he denounced that “unholy” treaty, hinted at
  its near abrogation, and had even the effrontery to try, although in vain
  (having counted without Bismarck), the immediate enforcement of the old
  protective duties against Alsace, where, he said, no previous international
  treaties stood in the way. This man who considered counter-revolution as a
  means to put down wages at Rouen, and the surrender of French provinces as a
  means to bring up the price of his wares in France, was he not the
  one predestined to be picked out by Thiers as the helpmate of Jules
  Favre in his last and crowning treason? 
On the arrival at Frankfurt of this exquisite pair of plenipotentiaries,
  bully Bismarck at once met them with the imperious alternative: Either the
  restoration of the empire or the unconditional acceptance of my own peace
  terms! These terms included a shortening of the intervals in which war
  indemnity was to be paid and the continued occupation of the Paris forts by
  Prussian troops until Bismarck should feel satisfied with the state of things
  in France; Prussia thus being recognized as the supreme arbiter in internal
  French politics! In return for this, he offered to let loose for the
  extermination of Paris the Bonapartist army, and to lend them the direct
  assistance of Emperor William’s troops. He pledged his good faith by
  making payment of the first installment of the indemnity dependent on the
  “pacification” of Paris. Such bait was, of course, eagerly
  swallowed by Thiers and his plenipotentiaries. They signed the treaty of
  peace on May 10 and had it endorsed by the Versailles Assembly on the 18th.
  
In the interval between the conclusion of peace and the arrival of the
  Bonapartist prisoners, Thiers felt the more bound to resume his comedy of
  conciliation, as his republican tools stood in sore need of a pretext for
  blinking their eyes at the preparations for the carnage of Paris. As late as
  May 18, he replied to a deputation of middle-class conciliators – 
“Whenever the insurgents will make up their minds for
  capitulation, the gates of Paris shall be flung wide open during a week for
  all except the murderers of Generals Clement Thomas and Lecomte.” 
A few days afterwards, when violently interpellated on these promises by
  the Rurals, he refused to enter into any explanations; not, however, without
  giving them this significant hint: 
“I tell you there are impatient men amongst you, men
  who are in too great a hurry. They must have another eight days; at the end
  of these eight days there will be no more danger, and the task will be
  proportionate to their courage and to their capacities.” 
As soon as MacMahon was able to assure him, that he could shortly enter
  Paris, Thiers declared to the Assembly that 
“he would enter Paris with the laws in his
  hands, and demand a full expiation from the wretches who had sacrificed the
  lives of soldiers and destroyed public monuments.” 
As the moment of decision drew near, he said – to the Assembly,
  “I shall be pitiless!” – to Paris, that it was doomed; and
  to his Bonapartist bandits, that they had state licence to wreak vengeance
  upon Paris to their hearts’ content. 
At last, when treachery had opened the gates of Paris to General Douai, on
  May 21, Thiers, on the 22nd, revealed to the Rurals the “goal” of
  his conciliation comedy, which they had so obstinately persisted in not
  understanding. 
“I told you a few days ago that we were approaching
  our goal; today I come to tell you the goal is
  reached. The victory of order, justice, and civilization is at last
  won!” 
So it was. The civilization and justice of bourgeois order comes out in
  its lurid light whenever the slaves and drudges of that order rise against
  their masters. Then this civilization and justice stand forth as undisguised
  savagery and lawless revenge. Each new crisis in the class struggle between
  the appropriator and the producer brings out this fact more glaringly. Even
  the atrocities of the bourgeois in June 1848 vanish before the infamy of
  1871. The self-sacrificing heroism with which the population of Paris –
  men, women, and children – fought for eight days after the entrance of
  the Versaillese, reflects as much the grandeur of their cause, as the
  infernal deeds of the soldiery reflect the innate spirit of that
  civilization, indeed, the great problem of which is how to get rid of the
  heaps of corpses it made after the battle was over! 
To find a parallel for the conduct of Thiers and his bloodhounds we must
  go back to the times of Sulla and the two Triumvirates of Rome.[E] The same wholesale
  slaughter in cold blood; the same disregard, in massacre, of age and sex, the
  same system of torturing prisoners; the same proscriptions, but this time of
  a whole class; the same savage hunt after concealed leaders, lest one might
  escape; the same denunciations of political and private enemies; the same
  indifference for the butchery of entire strangers to the feud. 
There is but this difference: that the Romans had no
  mitrailleuses for the despatch, in the lump, of the proscribed, and
  that they had not “the law in their hands,” nor on their lips the
  cry of “civilization.” 
And after those horrors look upon the other still more hideous face of the
  bourgeois civilization as described by its own press! 
“With stray shots,” writes the Paris
  correspondent of a London Tory paper, “still ringing in the distance,
  and unintended wounded wretches dying amid the tombstones of Pere la Chaise
  – with 6,000 terror-stricken insurgents wandering in an agony of
  despair in the labyrinth of the catacombs, and wretches hurried through the
  streets to be shot down in scores by the mitrailleuse – it is
  revolting to see the cafes filled with the votaries of absinthe, billiards,
  and dominoes; female profligacy perambulating the boulevards, and the sound
  of revelry disturbing the night from the cabinets particuliers of
  fashionable restaurants.” 
M. Edouard Herve writes in the Journal de Paris, a Versaillist
  journal pressed by the Commune: 
“The way in which the population of Paris [!]
  manifested its satisfaction yesterday was rather more than frivolous, and we
  fear it will grow worse as time progresses. Paris has now a fete day
  appearance, which is sadly out of place; and, unless we are to be called the
  Parisiens de la decadence, this sort of thing must come to an
  end.” 
And then he quotes the passage from Tacitus: 
“Yet, on the morrow of that horrible struggle, even
  before it was completely over, Rome – degraded and corrupt –
  began once more to wallow in the voluptuous slough which was destroying its
  body and pulling its soul – alibi proelia et vulnera, alibi balnea
  popinoeque [here fights and wounds, there baths and restaurants].”
  
M. Herve only forgets to say that the “population of Paris” he
  speaks of is but the population of the Paris of M. Thiers – the
  francs-fileurs returning in throngs from Versailles, Saint-Denis,
  Rueil, and Saint Germain – the Paris of the “Decline.” 
In all its bloody triumphs over the self-sacrificing champions of a new
  and better society, that nefarious civilization, based upon the enslavement
  of labor, drowns the moans of its victims in a hue-and-cry of calumny,
  reverberated by a world-wide echo. The serene working men’s Paris of
  the Commune is suddenly changed into a pandemonium by the bloodhounds of
  “order.” 
And what does this tremendous change prove to the bourgeois mind of all
  countries? Why, that the Commune has conspired against civilization! The
  Paris people die enthusiastically for the Commune in numbers unequally in any
  battle known to history. What does that prove? Why, that the Commune was not
  the people’s own government but the usurpation of a handful of
  criminals! The women of Paris joyfully give up their lives at the barricades
  and on the place of execution. What does this prove? Why, that the demon of
  the Commune has changed them into Megaera and Hecates! 
The moderation of the Commune during the two months of undisputed sway is
  equalled only by the heroism of its defence. 
What does that prove? Why, that for months the Commune carefully hid,
  under a mask of moderation and humanity, the bloodthirstiness of its fiendish
  instincts to be let loose in the hour of its agony! 
The working men’s Paris, in the act of its heroic self-holocaust,
  involved in its flames buildings and monuments. While tearing to pieces the
  living body of the proletariat, its rulers must no longer expect to return
  triumphantly into the intact architecture of their abodes. The government of
  Versailles cries, “Incendiarism!” and whispers this cue to all
  its agents, down to the remotest hamlet, to hunt up its enemies everywhere as
  suspect of professional incendiarism. The bourgeoisie of the whole world,
  which looks complacently upon the wholesale massacre after the battle, is
  convulsed by horror at the desecration of brick and mortar! 
When governments give state licences to their navies to “kill,
  burn, and destroy,” is that licence for incendiarism? When the
  British troops wantonly set fire to the Capitol at Washington and to the
  summer palace of the Chinese emperor,[F] was that incendiarism? When the Prussians not for
  military reasons, but out of the mere spite of revenge, burned down, by the
  help of petroleum, towns like Chateaudun and innumerable villages, was that
  incendiarism? When Thiers, during six weeks, bombarded Paris, under the
  pretext that he wanted to set fire to those houses only in which there were
  people, was that incendiarism? – In war, fire is an arm as legitimate
  as any. Buildings held by the enemy are shelled to set them on fire. If their
  defenders have to retire, they themselves light the flames to prevent the
  attack from making use of the buildings. To be burned down has always been
  the inevitable fate of all buildings situated in the front of battle of all
  the regular armies of the world. 
But in the war of the enslaved against their enslavers, the only
  justifiable war in history, this is by no means to hold good! The Commune
  used fire strictly as a means of defence. They used it to stop up to the
  Versailles troops those long, straight avenues which Haussman had expressly
  opened to artillery-fire; they used it to cover their retreat, in the same
  way as the Versaillese, in their advance, used their shells which destroyed
  at least as many buildings as the fire of the Commune. It is a matter of
  dispute, even now, which buildings were set fire to by the defence, and which
  by the attack. And the defence resorted to fire only then when the Versailles
  troops had already commenced their wholesale murdering of prisoners. 
Besides, the Commune had, long before, given full public notice that if
  driven to extremities, they would bury themselves under the ruins of Paris,
  and make Paris a second Moscow, as the Government of National Defence, but
  only as a cloak for its treason, had promised to do. For this purpose Trochu
  had found them the petroleum. The Commune knew that its opponents cared
  nothing for the lives of the Paris people, but cared much for their own Paris
  buildings. And Thiers, on the other hand, had given them notice that he would
  be implacable in his vengeance. No sooner had he got his army ready on one
  side, and the Prussians shutting the trap on the other, than he proclaimed:
  “I shall be pitiless! The expiation will be complete, and justice will
  be stern!” If the acts of the Paris working men were vandalism, it was
  the vandalism of defence in despair, not the vandalism of triumph, like that
  which the Christians perpetrated upon the really priceless art treasures of
  heathen antiquity; and even that vandalism has been justified by the
  historian as an unavoidable and comparatively trifling concomitant to the
  titanic struggle between a new society arising and an old one breaking down.
  It was still less the vandalism of Haussman, razing historic Paris to make
  place for the Paris of the sightseer! 
But the execution by the Commune of the 64 hostages, with the Archbishop
  of Paris at their head! The bourgeoisie and its army, in June 1848,
  re-established a custom which had long disappeared from the practice of war
  – the shooting of their defenceless prisoners. This brutal custom has
  since been more or less strictly adhered to by the suppressors of all popular
  commotions in Europe and India; thus proving that it constitutes a real
  “progress of civilization”! 
On the other hand, the Prussians in France, had re-established the
  practice of taking hostages – innocent men, who, with their lives, were
  to answer to them for the acts of others. When Thiers, as we have seen, from
  the very beginning of the conflict, enforced the human practice of shooting
  down the Communal prisoners, the Commune, to protect their lives, was obliged
  to resort to the Prussian practice of securing hostages. The lives of the
  hostages have been forfeited over and over again by the continued shooting of
  prisoners on the part of the Versaillese. How could they be spared any longer
  after the carnage with which MacMahon’s praetorians[G] celebrated their entrance
  into Paris? 
Was even the last check upon the unscrupulous ferocity of bourgeois
  governments – the taking of hostages – to be made a mere sham of?
  
The real murderer of Archbishop Darboy is Thiers. The Commune again and
  again had offered to exchange the archbishop, and ever so many priests in the
  bargain, against the single Blanqui, then in the hands of Thiers. Thiers
  obstinately refused. He knew that with Blanqui he would give the Commune a
  head; while the archbishop would serve his purpose best in the shape of a
  corpse. 
Thiers acted upon the precedent of Cavaignac. How, in June 1848, did not
  Cavaignac and his men of order raise shouts of horror by stigmatizing the
  insurgents as the assassins of Archbishop Affre! They knew perfectly well
  that the archbishop had been shot by the soldiers of
  order. M. Jacquemet, the archbishop’s vicar-general, present on the
  spot, had immediately afterwards handed them in his evidence to that effect.
  
All the chorus of calumny, which the Party of Order never fail, in their
  orgies of blood, to raise against their victims, only proves that the
  bourgeois of our days considers himself the legitimate successor to the baron
  of old, who thought every weapon in his own hand fair against the plebeian,
  while in the hands of the plebeian a weapon of any kind constituted in itself
  a crime. 
The conspiracy of the ruling class to break down the revolution by a civil
  war carried on under the patronage of the foreign invader – a
  conspiracy which we have traced from the very 4th of September down to the
  entrance of MacMahon’s praetorians through the gate of St. Cloud
  – culminated in the carnage of Paris. Bismarck gloats over the ruins of
  Paris, in which he saw perhaps the first installment of that general
  destruction of great cities he had prayed for when still a simple Rural in
  the Prussian Chambre introuvable of 1849.[H] He gloats over the cadavers of the Paris
  proletariat. For him, this is not only the extermination of revolution, but
  the extinction of France, now decapitated in reality, and by the French
  government itself. With the shallowness characteristic of all successful
  statesmen, he sees but the surface of this tremendous historic event.
  Whenever before has history exhibited the spectacle of a conqueror crowning
  his victory by turning into, not only the gendarme, but the hired bravo of
  the conquered government? There existed no war between Prussia and the
  Commune of Paris. On the contrary, the Commune had accepted the peace
  preliminaries, and Prussia had announced her neutrality. Prussia was,
  therefore, no belligerent. She acted the part of a bravo, a cowardly bravo,
  because incurring no danger; a hired bravo, because stipulating beforehand
  the payment of her blood-money of 500 millions on the fall of Paris. And
  thus, at last, came out the true character of the war, ordained by
  Providence, as a chastisement of godless and debauched France by pious and
  moral Germany! And this unparalleled breach of the law of nations, even as
  understood by the old-world lawyers, instead of arousing the
  “civilized” governments of Europe to declare the felonious
  Prussian government, the mere tool of the St. Petersburg Cabinet, an outlaw
  amongst nations, only incites them to consider whether the few victims who
  escape the double cordon around Paris are not to be given up to the hangman
  of Versailles! 
That, after the most tremendous war of modern times, the conquering and
  the conquered hosts should fraternize for the common massacre of the
  proletariat – this unparalleled event does indicate, not, as Bismarck
  thinks, the final repression of a new society up heaving, but the crumbling
  into dust of bourgeois society. The highest heroic effort of which old
  society is still capable is national war; and this is now proved to be a mere
  governmental humbug, intended to defer the struggle of classes, and to be
  thrown aside as soon as that class struggle bursts out into civil war. Class
  rule is no longer able to disguise itself in a national uniform; the national
  governments are one as against the proletariat! 
After Whit-Sunday, 1871, there can be neither peace nor truce possible
  between the working men of France and the appropriators of their produce. The
  iron hand of a mercenary soldiery may keep for a time both classes tied down
  in common oppression. But the battle must break out again and again in
  ever-growing dimensions, and there can be no doubt as to who will be the
  victor in the end – the appropriating few, or the immense working
  majority. And the French working class is only the advanced guard of the
  modern proletariat. 
While the European governments thus testify, before Paris, to the
  international character of class rule, they cry down the International Working
  Men’s Association – the international counter-organization of
  labor against the cosmopolitan conspiracy of capital – as the head
  fountain of all these disasters. Thiers denounced it as the despot of labor,
  pretending to be its liberator. Picard ordered that all communications
  between the French Internationals and those abroad be cut off; Count Jaubert,
  Thiers’ mummified accomplice of 1835, declares it the great problem of
  all civilized governments to weed it out. The Rurals roar against it, and the
  whole European press joins the chorus. An honorable French writer [Robinet],
  completely foreign to our Association, speaks as follows:
“The members of the Central Committee of the National
  Guard, as well as the greater part of the members of the Commune, are the
  most active, intelligent, and energetic minds of the International Working
  Men’s Association... men who are thoroughly honest, sincere,
  intelligent, devoted, pure, and fanatical in the good sense of the
  word.” 
The police-tinged bourgeois mind naturally figures to itself the
  International Working Men’s Association as acting in the manner of a
  secret conspiracy, its central body ordering, from time to time, explosions
  in different countries. Our Association is, in fact, nothing but the
  international bond between the most advanced working men in the various
  countries of the civilized world. Wherever, in whatever shape, and under
  whatever conditions the class struggle obtains any consistency, it is but
  natural that members of our Association, should stand in the foreground. The
  soil out of which it grows is modern society itself. It cannot be stamped out
  by any amount of carnage. To stamp it out, the governments would have to
  stamp out the despotism of capital over labor – the condition of their
  own parasitical existence. 
Working men’s Paris, with its Commune, will be forever celebrated as
  the glorious harbinger of a new society. Its martyrs are enshrined in the
  great heart of the working class. Its exterminators history has already
  nailed to that eternal pillory from which all the prayers of their priest
  will not avail to redeem them. 

The General Council
M. J. Boon, Fred. Bradnick, G. H. Buttery, Caihil,
  Delayhaye, William Hales, A. Hermann, Kolb, Fred. Lessner, Lochner, T. P.
  Macdonnell, George Milner, Thomas Mottershead, Ch. Mills, Charles Murray,
  Pfander, Roach, Rochat, Ruhl, Sadler, A. Ser- Railler, Cowell Stepney, Alf.
  Taylor, William Townshend.
Corresponding Secretaries:
Eugene Dupont, For France Zevy Maurice, For Hungary Karl
  Marx, For Germany And Anton Zabicki, For Poland Holland James Cohen, For
  Denmark Fred. Engels, For Belgium And J.G. Eccarius, For The United Spain
  States Hermann Jung, For Switzerland P. Giovacchini, For Italy
Hermann Jung, Chairman John Weston, Treasurer George
  Harris, Financial Secretary J. George Eccarius, General Secretary
Office: 256 High Holborn Road, London, W.C., May 30, 1871
 
Postscript by Engels 
 

[A] This name was given to the Versailles soldiers of
  royalist sympathies recruited in Brittany, by analogy with those who took
  part in the counter-revolutionary royalist insurrection in North-Western
  France during the French Revolution at the end of the 18th century. 
[B] Under the impact of the proletarian revolution in
  Paris which led to the establishment of the Commune, revolutionary mass
  actions of a similar nature took place in Lyons and Marseilles. However,
  these were brutally crushed by French government troops. 
[C] Under the law concerning the procedure of military
  courts, submitted by Dufaure to the National Assembly, it was ruled that
  cases were to be investigated and sentences carried out within 48 hours. 
[D] This trade treaty between England and France was
  concluded on January 23, 1860. Under its terms France was to abandon her
  prohibitive Customs policy and replace it by introducing new import duties.
  As result of the influx of English goods to France, competition in the home
  market dramatically increased, causing dissatisfaction among some French
  manufacturers. 
[E] This refers to the reign of terror and bloody
  repression in Ancient Rome at the various stages of the crisis of the
  slave-owning Roman Republic in the first century B.C.E. – Sulla’s
  dictatorship (in 82-79 B.C.E.), and the first and second triumvirates:
  Pompey, Caesar, Crassus (60-53) and Octavian, Antonius, Lepidus (43-36
  B.C.E.) respectively. 
[F] In August 1814, during the war between Britain and the
  United States, British troops seized Washington and burned the Capitol, the
  White House and other public buildings to the ground. In October 1860, during
  the war waged by Britain and France against China (the first of the Opium
  Wars), British and French troops pillaged and burned down the summer palace
  of the Chinese emperors near Beijing, a treasure-house of Chinese art and
  architecture. 
[G] In ancient Rome the privileged life-guards of the
  general or emperor; they constantly took part in internal disturbances. Later
  the word “praetorians” became the symbol of the mercenary,
  tyrannical nature of the militarists. 
[H] This is what Marx called the Prussian Assembly by
  analogy with the French Chambre introuvable. The
  Assembly elected in January and February 1849 consisted of two chambers: the
  first was a privileged aristocratic “chamber of the gentry"; the
  composition of the second was determined by two-stage elections in which only
  the so-called “independent” Prussians took part. Elected to the
  second chamber, Bismarck became one of the leaders of the extremely
  reactionary Junker group. 

Table of Contents: The Civil War in
  France 
 






==========

## Apropos of Working-Class Political Action







Apropos Of Working-Class Political Action



International Workingmen's Association 1871
Apropos Of Working-Class Political Action
Reporter's record of the speech made at the London Conference of theInternational Working Men's Association, September 21, 1871


Spoken: in French September 21, 1871;
First Published in full: The Communist International No. 29, 1934;
Source: Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume 2 (1973), Progress Publishers;
Transcription/Markup: Brian Baggins;
Copyleft: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.


Complete abstention from political action is impossible. The abstentionist press participates in politics every day. It is only a question of how one does it, and of what politics one engages in. For the rest, to us abstention is impossible. The working-class party functions as a political party in most countries by now, and it is not for us to ruin it by preaching abstention. Living experience, the political oppression of the existing governments compels the workers to occupy themselves with politics whether they like it or not, be it for political or for social goals. To preach abstention to them is to throw them into the embrace of bourgeois politics. The morning after the Paris Commune, which has made proletarian political action an order of the day, abstention is entirely out of the question.

We want the abolition of classes. What is the means of achieving it? The only means is political domination of the proletariat. For all this, now that it is acknowledged by one and all, we are told not to meddle with politics. The abstentionists say they are revolutionaries, even revolutionaries par excellence. Yet revolution is a supreme political act and those who want revolution must also want the means of achieving it, that is, political action, which prepares the ground for revolution and provides the workers with the revolutionary training without which they are sure to become the dupes of the Favres and Pyats the morning after the battle. However, our politics must be working-class politics. The workers' party must never be the tagtail of any bourgeois party; it must be independent and have its goal and its own policy.

The political freedoms, the right of assembly and association, and the freedom of the press — those are our weapons. Are we to sit back and abstain while somebody tries to rob us of them? It is said that a political act on our part implies that we accept the exiting state of affairs. On the contrary, so long as this state of affairs offers us the means of protesting against it, our use of these means does not signify that we recognise the prevailing order.


International Workingmen's Association Index
Resolution on Working Class Political Action |
Speeches by Marx
Marx/Engels Internet Archive





==========

## Critique of the Gotha Programme









Critique of the Gotha Programme



Karl Marx 1875
Critique of the Gotha Programme


Written: April or early May, 1875;
Source: Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume Three, p. 13-30;
Publisher: Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1970;
First Published: Abridged in the journal Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 1, No. 18, 1890-91;
Online Version: mea; marxists.org 1999;
Transcribed: Zodiac and Brian Baggins;
HTML Markup: Brian Baggins.


Table of Contents:


Foreword
Marx to Bracke
Engels to Bebel
Part I
Part II
Part III
Part IV
Appendix


 

Background

Critique of the Gotha Programme is a critique of the draft programme of the United Workers' Party of Germany. In this document Marx address the dictatorship of the proletariat, the period of transition from capitalism to communism, the two phases of communist society, the production and distribution of the social goods, proletarian internationalism, and the party of the working class.

Lenin later wrote:

The great significance of Marx's explanation is, that here too, he consistently applies materialist dialectics, the theory of development, and regards communism as something which develops out of capitalism. Instead of scholastically invented, 'concocted' definitions and fruitless disputes over words (What is socialism? What is communism?), Marx gives analysis of what might be called the stages of the economic maturity of communism.

(Lenin Collected Works, Volume 25, p. 471)

Engels wrote a foreword when the document was first published in 1891. Together with the Critique of the Gotha Programme Engels published Marx's letter to Bracke, directly bound up with the work. 




Marx/Engels Archive



==========

## Part I.









Critique of the Gotha Programme-- I




Karl Marx

Critique of the Gotha Programme



I


 

1. "Labor is the source of wealth and all culture, and since useful
labor is possible only in society and through society, the proceeds of
labor belong undiminished with equal right to all members of society."


First part of the paragraph: "Labor is the source of all wealth and all
culture."
Labor is not the source of all wealth. Nature is
just as much the source of use values (and it is surely of such that material
wealth consists!) as labor, which itself is only the manifestation of a
force of nature, human labor power. The above phrase is to be found in
all children's primers and is correct insofar as it is implied that labor
is performed with the appurtenant subjects and instruments. But a socialist
program cannot allow such bourgeois phrases to pass over in silence the
conditions that lone give them meaning. And insofar as man from
the beginning behaves toward nature, the primary source of all instruments
and subjects of labor, as an owner, treats her as belonging to him, his
labor becomes the source of use values, therefore also of wealth. The bourgeois
have very good grounds for falsely ascribing supernatural creative power
to labor; since precisely from the fact that labor depends on nature it
follows that the man who possesses no other property than his labor power
must, in all conditions of society and culture, be the slave of other men
who have made themselves the owners of the material conditions of labor.
He can only work with their permission, hence live only with their permission.
Let us now leave the sentence as it stands, or rather limps. What
could one have expected in conclusion? Obviously this:
"Since labor is the source of all wealth, no one in society can
appropriate wealth except as the product of labor. Therefore, if he himself
does not work, he lives by the labor of others and also acquires his culture
at the expense of the labor of others."

Instead of this, by means of the verbal river "and since", a proposition
is added in order to draw a conclusion from this and not from the first
one.


Second part of the paragraph: "Useful labor is possible only in
society and through society."
According to the first proposition, labor was the source of all
wealth and all culture; therefore no society is possible without labor.
Now we learn, conversely, that no "useful" labor is possible without society.
One could just as well have said that only in society can useless
and even socially harmful labor become a branch of gainful occupation,
that only in society can one live by being idle, etc., etc. – in short,
once could just as well have copied the whole of Rousseau.
And what is "useful" labor? Surely only labor which produces the
intended useful result. A savage – and man was a savage after he had ceased
to be an ape – who kills an animal with a stone, who collects fruit, etc.,
performs "useful" labor.


Thirdly, the conclusion: "Useful labor is possible only in society
and through society, the proceeds of labor belong undiminished with equal
right to all members of society."
A fine conclusion! If useful labor is possible only in society
and through society, the proceeds of labor belong to society – and only
so much therefrom accrues to the individual worker as is not required to
maintain the "condition" of labor, society.
In fact, this proposition has at all times been made use of by
the champions of the state of society prevailing at any given time.
First comes the claims of the government and everything that sticks to
it, since it is the social organ for the maintenance of the social order;
then comes the claims of the various kinds of private property, for the
various kinds of private property are the foundations of society, etc.
One sees that such hollow phrases are the foundations of society, etc.
One sees that such hollow phrases can be twisted and turned as desired.
The first and second parts of the paragraph have some intelligible
connection only in the following wording:
"Labor becomes the source of wealth and culture only as social labor",
or, what is the same thing, "in and through society".

This proposition is incontestably correct, for although isolated labor
(its material conditions presupposed) can create use value, it can create
neither wealth nor culture.
But equally incontestable is this other proposition:
"In proportion as labor develops socially, and becomes thereby a
source of wealth and culture, poverty and destitution develop among the
workers, and wealth and culture among the nonworkers."

This is the law of all history hitherto. What, therefore, had to be done
here, instead of setting down general phrases about "labor" and "society",
was to prove concretely how in present capitalist society the material,
etc., conditions have at last been created which enable and compel the
workers to lift this social curse.
In fact, however, the whole paragraph, bungled in style and content,
is only there in order to inscribe the Lassallean catchword of the "undiminished
proceeds of labor" as a slogan at the top of the party banner. I shall
return later to the "proceeds of labor", "equal right", etc., since the
same thing recurs in a somewhat different form further on.


2. "In present-day society, the instruments of labor are the monopoly
of the capitalist class; the resulting dependence of the working class
is the cause of misery and servitude in all forms."

This sentence, borrowed from the Rules of the International, is incorrect
in this "improved" edition.
In present-day society, the instruments of labor are the monopoly
of the landowners (the monopoly of property in land is even the basis of
the monopoly of capital) and the capitalists. In the passage in
question, the Rules of the International do not mention either one or the
other class of monopolists. They speak of the "monopolizer of the means
of labor, that is, the sources of life." The addition, "sources
of life", makes it sufficiently clear that land is included in the instruments
of labor.
The correction was introduced because Lassalle, for reasons now
generally known, attacked only the capitalist class and not the
landowners. In England, the capitalist class is usually not even the owner
of the land on which his factory stands.


3. "The emancipation of labor demands the promotion of the instruments
of labor to the common property of society and the co-operative regulation
of the total labor, with a fair distribution of the proceeds of labor.

"Promotion of the instruments of labor to the common property" ought obviously
to read their "conversion into the common property"; but this is only passing.
What are the "proceeds of labor"? The product of labor, or its
value? And in the latter case, is it the total value of the product, or
only that part of the value which labor has newly added to the value of
the means of production consumed?
"Proceeds of labor" is a loose notion which Lassalle has put in
the place of definite economic conceptions.
What is "a fair distribution"?
Do not the bourgeois assert that the present-day distribution
is "fair"? And is it not, in fact, the only "fair" distribution on the
basis of the present-day mode of production? Are economic relations regulated
by legal conceptions, or do not, on the contrary, legal relations arise
out of economic ones? Have not also the socialist sectarians the most varied
notions about "fair" distribution?
To understand what is implied in this connection by the phrase
"fair distribution", we must take the first paragraph and this one together.
The latter presupposes a society wherein the instruments of labor are common
property and the total labor is co-operatively regulated, and from the
first paragraph we learn that "the proceeds of labor belong undiminished
with equal right to all members of society."
"To all members of society"? To those who do not work as well?
What remains then of the "undiminished" proceeds of labor? Only to those
members of society who work? What remains then of the "equal right" of
all members of society?
But "all members of society" and "equal right" are obviously mere
phrases. The kernel consists in this, that in this communist society every
worker must receive the "undiminished" Lassallean "proceeds of labor".
Let us take, first of all, the words "proceeds of labor" in the
sense of the product of labor; then the co-operative proceeds of labor
are the total social product.
From this must now be deducted: First, cover for replacement
of the means of production used up. Second, additional portion for
expansion of production. Third, reserve or insurance funds to provide
against accidents, dislocations caused by natural calamities, etc.
These deductions from the "undiminished" proceeds of labor are
an economic necessity, and their magnitude is to be determined according
to available means and forces, and partly by computation of probabilities,
but they are in no way calculable by equity.
There remains the other part of the total product, intended to
serve as means of consumption.
Before this is divided among the individuals, there has to be
deducted again, from it: First, the general costs of administration
not belonging to production. This part will, from the outset, be very considerably
restricted in comparison with present-day society, and it diminishes in
proportion as the new society develops. Second, that which is intended
for the common satisfaction of needs, such as schools, health services,
etc. From the outset, this part grows considerably in comparison with present-day
society, and it grows in proportion as the new society develops. Third,
funds for those unable to work, etc., in short, for what is included under
so-called official poor relief today.
Only now do we come to the "distribution" which the program, under
Lassallean influence, alone has in view in its narrow fashion – namely,
to that part of the means of consumption which is divided among the individual
producers of the co-operative society.
The "undiminished" proceeds of labor have already unnoticeably
become converted into the "diminished" proceeds, although what the producer
is deprived of in his capacity as a private individual benefits him directly
or indirectly in his capacity as a member of society.
Just as the phrase of the "undiminished" proceeds of labor has
disappeared, so now does the phrase of the "proceeds of labor" disappear
altogether.
Within the co-operative society based on common ownership of the
means of production, the producers do not exchange their products; just
as little does the labor employed on the products appear here as the value
of these products, as a material quality possessed by them, since now,
in contrast to capitalist society, individual labor no longer exists in
an indirect fashion but directly as a component part of total labor. The
phrase "proceeds of labor", objectionable also today on account of its
ambiguity, thus loses all meaning.
What we have to deal with here is a communist society, not as
it has developed on its own foundations, but, on the contrary, just
as it emerges from capitalist society; which is thus in every respect,
economically, morally, and intellectually, still stamped with the birthmarks
of the old society from whose womb it emerges. Accordingly, the individual
producer receives back from society – after the deductions have been made
– exactly what he gives to it. What he has given to it is his individual
quantum of labor. For example, the social working day consists of the sum
of the individual hours of work; the individual labor time of the individual
producer is the part of the social working day contributed by him, his
share in it. He receives a certificate from society that he has furnished
such-and-such an amount of labor (after deducting his labor for the common
funds); and with this certificate, he draws from the social stock of means
of consumption as much as the same amount of labor cost. The same amount
of labor which he has given to society in one form, he receives back in
another.
Here, obviously, the same principle prevails as that which regulates
the exchange of commodities, as far as this is exchange of equal values.
Content and form are changed, because under the altered circumstances no
one can give anything except his labor, and because, on the other hand,
nothing can pass to the ownership of individuals, except individual means
of consumption. But as far as the distribution of the latter among the
individual producers is concerned, the same principle prevails as in the
exchange of commodity equivalents: a given amount of labor in one form
is exchanged for an equal amount of labor in another form.
Hence, equal right here is still in principle – bourgeois
right, although principle and practice are no longer at loggerheads,
while the exchange of equivalents in commodity exchange exists only on
the average and not in the individual case.
In spite of this advance, this equal right is still constantly
stigmatized by a bourgeois limitation. The right of the producers is proportional
to the labor they supply; the equality consists in the fact that measurement
is made with an equal standard, labor.
But one man is superior to another physically, or mentally, and
supplies more labor in the same time, or can labor for a longer time; and
labor, to serve as a measure, must be defined by its duration or intensity,
otherwise it ceases to be a standard of measurement. This equal
right is an unequal right for unequal labor. It recognizes no class differences,
because everyone is only a worker like everyone else; but it tacitly recognizes
unequal individual endowment, and thus productive capacity, as a natural
privilege. It is, therefore, a right of inequality, in its content, like
every right. Right, by its very nature, can consist only in the application
of an equal standard; but unequal individuals (and they would not be different
individuals if they were not unequal) are measurable only by an equal standard
insofar as they are brought under an equal point of view, are taken from
one definite side only – for instance, in the present case, are regarded
only as workers and nothing more is seen in them, everything else
being ignored. Further, one worker is married, another is not; one has
more children than another, and so on and so forth. Thus, with an equal
performance of labor, and hence an equal in the social consumption fund,
one will in fact receive more than another, one will be richer than another,
and so on. To avoid all these defects, right, instead of being equal, would
have to be unequal.
But these defects are inevitable in the first phase of communist
society as it is when it has just emerged after prolonged birth pangs from
capitalist society. Right can never be higher than the economic structure
of society and its cultural development conditioned thereby.
In a higher phase of communist society, after the enslaving subordination
of the individual to the division of labor, and therewith also the antithesis
between mental and physical labor, has vanished; after labor has become
not only a means of life but life's prime want; after the productive forces
have also increased with the all-around development of the individual,
and all the springs of co-operative wealth flow more abundantly – only
then can the narrow horizon of bourgeois right be crossed in its entirety
and society inscribe on its banners: From each according to his ability,
to each according to his needs!
I have dealt more at length with the "undiminished" proceeds of
labor, on the one hand, and with "equal right" and "fair distribution",
on the other, in order to show what a crime it is to attempt, on the one
hand, to force on our Party again, as dogmas, ideas which in a certain
period had some meaning but have now become obsolete verbal rubbish, while
again perverting, on the other, the realistic outlook, which it cost so
much effort to instill into the Party but which has now taken root in it,
by means of ideological nonsense about right and other trash so common
among the democrats and French socialists.
Quite apart from the analysis so far given, it was in general
a mistake to make a fuss about so-called distribution and put the principal
stress on it.
Any distribution whatever of the means of consumption is only
a consequence of the distribution of the conditions of production themselves.
The latter distribution, however, is a feature of the mode of production
itself. The capitalist mode of production, for example, rests on the fact
that the material conditions of production are in the hands of nonworkers
in the form of property in capital and land, while the masses are only
owners of the personal condition of production, of labor power. If the
elements of production are so distributed, then the present-day distribution
of the means of consumption results automatically. If the material conditions
of production are the co-operative property of the workers themselves,
then there likewise results a distribution of the means of consumption
different from the present one. Vulgar socialism (and from it in turn a
section of the democrats) has taken over from the bourgeois economists
the consideration and treatment of distribution as independent of the mode
of production and hence the presentation of socialism as turning principally
on distribution. After the real relation has long been made clear, why
retrogress again?


4. "The emancipation of labor must be the work of the working class,
relative to which all other classes are only one reactionary mass."

The first strophe is taken from the introductory words of the Rules of
the International, but "improved". There it is said: "The emancipation
of the working class must be the act of the workers themselves"; here,
on the contrary, the "working class" has to emancipate – what? "Labor."
Let him understand who can.
In compensation, the antistrophe, on the other hand, is a Lassallean
quotation of the first water: "relative to which" (the working class) "all
other classes are only one reactionary mass."
In the Communist Manifesto it is said:
"Of all the classes that stand face-to-face with the bourgeoisie
today, the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The other
classes decay and finally disappear in the face of modern industry; the
proletariat is its special and essential product."

The bourgeoisie is here conceived as a revolutionary class – as the bearer
of large-scale industry – relative to the feudal lords and the lower middle
class, who desire to maintain all social positions that are the creation
of obsolete modes of production. thus, they do not form together with the
bourgeoisie "only one reactionary mass".
On the other hand, the proletariat is revolutionary relative to
the bourgeoisie because, having itself grown up on the basis of large-scale
industry, it strives to strip off from production the capitalist character
that the bourgeoisie seeks to perpetuate. But the Manifesto adds
that the "lower middle class" is becoming revolutionary "in view of [its]
impending transfer to the proletariat".
From this point of view, therefore, it is again nonsense to say
that it, together with the bourgeoisie, and with the feudal lords into
the bargain, "form only one reactionary mass" relative to the working class.
Has one proclaimed to the artisan, small manufacturers, etc.,
and peasants during the last elections: Relative to us, you, together with
the bourgeoisie and feudal lords, form one reactionary mass?
Lassalle knew the Communist Manifesto by heart, as his
faithful followers know the gospels written by him. If, therefore, he has
falsified it so grossly, this has occurred only to put a good color on
his alliance with absolutist and feudal opponents against the bourgeoisie.
In the above paragraph, moreover, his oracular saying is dragged
in by main force without any connection with the botched quotation from
the Rules of the International. Thus, it is simply an impertinence, and
indeed not at all displeasing to Herr Bismarck, one of those cheap pieces
of insolence in which the Marat of Berlin deals. [ Marat of Berlin a reference to Hasselmann, cheif editor of the Neuer Social-Demokrat]


5. "The working class strives for its emancipation first of all
within the framework of the present-day national states, conscious that
the necessary result of its efforts, which are common to the workers of
all civilized countries, will be the international brotherhood of peoples."

Lassalle, in opposition to the Communist Manifesto and to all earlier
socialism, conceived the workers' movement from the narrowest national
standpoint. He is being followed in this – and that after the work of
the International!
It is altogether self-evident that, to be able to fight at all,
the working class must organize itself at home as a class and that
its own country is the immediate arena of its struggle – insofar as its
class struggle is national, not in substance, but, as the Communist
Manifesto says, "in form". But the "framework of the present-day national
state", for instance, the German Empire, is itself, in its turn, economically
"within the framework" of the world market, politically "within the framework"
of the system of states. Every businessman knows that German trade is at
the same time foreign trade, and the greatness of Herr Bismarck consists,
to be sure, precisely in his pursuing a kind of international policy.
And to what does the German Workers' party reduce its internationalism?
To the consciousness that the result of its efforts will be "the international
brotherhood of peoples" – a phrase borrowed from the bourgeois League
of Peace and Freedom, which is intended to pass as equivalent to the international
brotherhood of working classes in the joint struggle against the ruling
classes and their governments. Not a word, therefore, about the international
functions of the German working class! And it is thus that it is to challenge
its own bourgeoisie – which is already linked up in brotherhood against
it with the bourgeois of all other countries – and Herr Bismarck's international
policy of conspiracy.
In fact, the internationalism of the program stands even infinitely
below that of the Free Trade party. The latter also asserts that
the result of its efforts will be "the international brotherhood of peoples".
But it also does something to make trade international and by no
means contents itself with the consciousness that all people are carrying
on trade at home.
The international activity of the working classes does not in
any way depend on the existence of the International Working Men's Association.
This was only the first attempt to create a central organ for the activity;
an attempt which was a lasting success on account of the impulse which
it gave but which was no longer realizable in its historical form after
the fall of the Paris Commune.
Bismarck's Norddeutsche was absolutely right when it announced,
to the satisfaction of its master, that the German Workers' party had sworn
off internationalism in the new program.

 


Next: Section II


Critique of the Gotha Programme




==========

## Part II.

  
     Critique of the Gotha Programme-- II    
Karl Marx

Critique of the Gotha Programme
  
II
   "Starting from these basic principles, the German workers' party
strives by all legal means for the free state—and—socialist society:
that abolition of the wage system together with the iron law of wages --
and—exploitation in every form; the elimination of all social and political
inequality."  
I shall return to the "free" state later. So, in future, the German Workers' party has got to believe in
Lassalle's "iron law of wages"! That this may not be lost, the nonsense
is perpetrated of speaking of the "abolition of the wage system" (it should
read: system of wage labor), "together with the iron law of wages". If
I abolish wage labor, then naturally I abolish its laws also, whether they
are of "iron" or sponge. But Lassalle's attack on wage labor turns almost
solely on this so-called law. In order, therefore, to prove that Lassalle's
sect has conquered, the "wage system" must be abolished "together with
the iron law of wages" and not without it. It is well known that nothing of the "iron law of wages" is Lassalle's
except the word "iron" borrowed from Goethe's "great, eternal iron laws". [1]
The word "iron" is a label by which the true believers recognize one another.
But if I take the law with Lassalle's stamp on it, and consequently in
his sense, then I must also take it with his substantiation for it. And
what is that? As Lange already showed, shortly after Lassalle's death,
it is the Malthusian theory of population (preached by Lange himself).
But if this theory is correct, then again I cannot abolish the law even
if I abolish wage labor a hundred times over, because the law then governs
not only the system of wage labor but every social system. Basing
themselves directly on this, the economists have been proving for 50 years
and more that socialism cannot abolish poverty, which has its basis in
nature, but can only make it general, distribute it simultaneously
over the whole surface of society! But all this is not the main thing. Quite apart from the false
Lassallean formulation of the law, the truly outrageous retrogression consists
in the following: Since Lassalle's death, there has asserted itself in our party
the scientific understanding that wages are not what they appear to be
-- namely, the value, or price, of labor—but only
a masked form for the value, or price, of labor power.
Thereby, the whole bourgeois conception of wages hitherto, as well as all
the criticism hitherto directed against this conception, was thrown overboard
once and for all. It was made clear that the wage worker has permission
to work for his own subsistence—that is, to live, only insofar
as he works for a certain time gratis for the capitalist (and hence also
for the latter's co-consumers of surplus value); that the whole capitalist
system of production turns on the increase of this gratis labor by extending
the working day, or by developing the productivity—that is, increasing
the intensity or labor power, etc.; that, consequently, the system of wage
labor is a system of slavery, and indeed of a slavery which becomes more
severe in proportion as the social productive forces of labor develop,
whether the worker receives better or worse payment. And after this understanding
has gained more and more ground in our party, some return to Lassalle's
dogma although they must have known that Lassalle did not know what
wages were, but, following in the wake of the bourgeois economists, took
the appearance for the essence of the matter. It is as if, among slaves who have at last got behind the secret
of slavery and broken out in rebellion, a slave still in thrall to obsolete
notions were to inscribe on the program of the rebellion: Slavery must
be abolished because the feeding of slaves in the system of slavery cannot
exceed a certain low maximum! Does not the mere fact that the representatives of our party were
capable of perpetrating such a monstrous attack on the understanding that
has spread among the mass of our party prove, by itself, with what criminal
levity and with what lack of conscience they set to work in drawing up
this compromise program! Instead of the indefinite concluding phrase of the paragraph,
"the elimination of all social and political inequality", it ought to have
been said that with the abolition of class distinctions all social and
political inequality arising from them would disappear of itself.
    
Footnotes
  [1]
Quoted from Goethe's Das Göttliche      Next: Part III   Critique of the Gotha Programme    

==========

## Part III.









Critique of the Gotha Programme-- III




Karl Marx

Critique of the Gotha Programme



III


 
"The German Workers' party, in order to pave the way to the solution
of the social question, demands the establishment of producers' co-operative
societies with state aid under the democratic control of the toiling people.
The producers' co-operative societies are to be called into being for industry
and agriculture on such a scale that the socialist organization of the
total labor will arise from them."

After the Lassallean "iron law of wages", the physic
of the prophet. The way to it is "paved" in worthy fashion. In place of
the existing class struggle appears a newspaper scribbler's phrase: "the
social question", to the "solution" of which one "paves the way".
Instead of arising from the revolutionary process of transformation
of society, the "socialist organization of the total labor" "arises" from
the "state aid" that the state gives to the producers' co-operative societies
and which the state, not the workers, "calls into being". It is
worthy of Lassalle's imagination that with state loans one can build a
new society just as well as a new railway!
From the remnants of a sense of shame, "state aid" has been put
-- under the democratic control of the "toiling people".
In the first place, the majority of the "toiling people" in Germany
consists of peasants, not proletarians.
Second, "democratic" means in German "Volksherrschaftlich" [by
the rule of the people]. But what does "control by the rule of the people
of the toiling people" mean? And particularly in the case of a toiling
people which, through these demands that it puts to the state, expresses
its full consciousness that it neither rules nor is ripe for ruling!
It would be superfluous to deal here with the criticism of the
recipe prescribed by Buchez in the reign of Louis Philippe, in opposition
to the French socialists and accepted by the reactionary workers, of the
Atelier. The chief offense does not lie in having inscribed this specific
nostrum in the program, but in taking, in general, a retrograde step from
the standpoint of a class movement to that of a sectarian movement.
That the workers desire to establish the conditions for co-operative
production on a social scale, and first of all on a national scale, in
their own country, only means that they are working to revolutionize the
present conditions of production, and it has nothing in common with the
foundation of co-operative societies with state aid. But as far as the
present co-operative societies are concerned, they are of value only
insofar as they are the independent creations of the workers and not protégés
either of the governments or of the bourgeois.
 


Next: Section IV


Critique of the Gotha Programme




==========

## Part IV.










Critique of the Gotha Programme-- IV




Karl Marx

Critique of the Gotha Programme



IV


 
I come now to the democratic section.



A. "The free basis of the state."



First of all, according to II, the German Workers' party strives for "the
free state".
Free state — what is this?
It is by no means the aim of the workers, who have got rid of
the narrow mentality of humble subjects, to set the state free. In the
German Empire, the "state" is almost as "free" as in Russia. Freedom consists
in converting the state from an organ superimposed upon society into one
completely subordinate to it; and today, too, the forms of state are more
free or less free to the extent that they restrict the "freedom of the
state".
The German Workers' party — at least if it adopts the program
— shows that its socialist ideas are not even skin-deep; in that, instead
of treating existing society (and this holds good for any future one) as
the basis of the existing state (or of the future state in the case
of future society), it treats the state rather as an independent entity
that possesses its own intellectual, ethical, and libertarian bases.
And what of the riotous misuse which the program makes of the
words "present-day state", "present-day society", and of the still more
riotous misconception it creates in regard to the state to which it addresses
its demands?
"Present-day society" is capitalist society, which exists in all
civilized countries, more or less free from medieval admixture, more or
less modified by the particular historical development of each country,
more or less developed. On the other hand, the "present-day state" changes
with a country's frontier. It is different in the Prusso-German Empire
from what it is in Switzerland, and different in England from what it is
in the United States. The "present-day state" is therefore a fiction.
Nevertheless, the different states of the different civilized
countries, in spite or their motley diversity of form, all have this in
common: that they are based on modern bourgeois society, only one more
or less capitalistically developed. They have, therefore, also certain
essential characteristics in common. In this sense, it is possible to speak
of the "present-day state" in contrast with the future, in which its present
root, bourgeois society, will have died off.
The question then arises: What transformation will the state undergo
in communist society? In other words, what social functions will remain
in existence there that are analogous to present state functions? This
question can only be answered scientifically, and one does not get a flea-hop
nearer to the problem by a thousand-fold combination of the word 'people'
with the word 'state'.
Between capitalist and communist society there lies the period
of the revolutionary transformation of the one into the other. Corresponding
to this is also a political transition period in which the state can be
nothing but the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat.
Now the program does not deal with this nor with the future state
of communist society.
Its political demands contain nothing beyond the old democratic
litany familiar to all: universal suffrage, direct legislation, popular
rights, a people's militia, etc. They are a mere echo of the bourgeois
People's party, of the League of Peace and Freedom. They are all demands
which, insofar as they are not exaggerated in fantastic presentation, have
already been realized. Only the state to which they belong does
not lie within the borders of the German Empire, but in Switzerland, the
United States, etc. This sort of "state of the future" is a present-day
state, although existing outside the "framework" of the German Empire.
But one thing has been forgotten. Since the German Workers' party
expressly declares that it acts within "the present-day national state",
hence within its own state, the Prusso-German Empire — its demands would
indeed be otherwise largely meaningless, since one only demands what one
has not got — it should not have forgotten the chief thing, namely, that
all those pretty little gewgaws rest on the recognition of the so-called
sovereignty of the people and hence are appropriate only in a democratic
republic.


Since one has not the courage — and wisely so, for the circumstances
demand caution — to demand the democratic republic, as the French workers'
programs under Louis Philippe and under Louis Napoleon did, one should
not have resorted, either, to the subterfuge, neither "honest" [1] nor decent,
of demanding things which have meaning only in a democratic republic from
a state which is nothing but a police-guarded military despotism, embellished
with parliamentary forms, alloyed with a feudal admixture, already influenced
by the bourgeoisie, and bureaucratically carpentered, and then to assure
this state into the bargain that one imagines one will be able to force
such things upon it "by legal means".
Even vulgar democracy, which sees the millennium in the democratic
republic, and has no suspicion that it is precisely in this last form of
state of bourgeois society that the class struggle has to be fought out
to a conclusion — even it towers mountains above this kind of democratism,
which keeps within the limits of what is permitted by the police and not
permitted by logic.
That, in fact, by the word "state" is meant the government machine,
or the state insofar as it forms a special organism separated from society
through division of labor, is shown by the words "the German Workers' party
demands as the economic basis of the state: a single progressive income
tax", etc. Taxes are the economic basis of the government machinery and
of nothing else. In the state of the future, existing in Switzerland, this
demand has been pretty well fulfilled. Income tax presupposes various sources
of income of the various social classes, and hence capitalist society.
It is, therefore, nothing remarkable that the Liverpool financial reformers
— bourgeois headed by Gladstone's brother — are putting forward the same
demand as the program.



B. "The German Workers' party demands as the intellectual and ethical
basis of the state:

"1. Universal and equal elementary education by the state.
Universal compulsory school attendance. Free instruction."

"Equal elementary education"? What idea lies behind these words? Is it
believed that in present-day society (and it is only with this one has
to deal) education can be equal for all classes? Or is it demanded
that the upper classes also shall be compulsorily reduced to the modicum
of education — the elementary school — that alone is compatible with
the economic conditions not only of the wage-workers but of the peasants
as well?
"Universal compulsory school attendance. Free instruction." The
former exists even in Germany, the second in Switzerland and in the United
States in the case of elementary schools. If in some states of the latter
country higher education institutions are also "free", that only means
in fact defraying the cost of education of the upper classes from the general
tax receipts. Incidentally, the same holds good for "free administration
of justice" demanded under A, 5. The administration of criminal justice
is to be had free everywhere; that of civil justice is concerned almost
exclusively with conflicts over property and hence affects almost exclusively
the possessing classes. Are they to carry on their litigation at the expense
of the national coffers?
This paragraph on the schools should at least have demanded technical
schools (theoretical and practical) in combination with the elementary
school.
"Elementary education by the state" is altogether objectionable.
Defining by a general law the expenditures on the elementary schools, the
qualifications of the teaching staff, the branches of instruction, etc.,
and, as is done in the United States, supervising the fulfillment of these
legal specifications by state inspectors, is a very different thing from
appointing the state as the educator of the people! Government and church
should rather be equally excluded from any influence on the school. Particularly,
indeed, in the Prusso-German Empire (and one should not take refuge in
the rotten subterfuge that one is speaking of a "state of the future";
we have seen how matters stand in this respect) the state has need, on
the contrary, of a very stern education by the people.
But the whole program, for all its democratic clang, is tainted
through and through by the Lassallean sect's servile belief in the state,
or, what is no better, by a democratic belief in miracles; or rather it
is a compromise between these two kinds of belief in miracles, both equally
remote from socialism.
"Freedom of science" says paragraph of the Prussian Constitution.
Why, then, here?.
"Freedom of conscience"! If one desired, at this time of the Kulturkampf
to remind liberalism of its old catchwords,
it surely could have been done only in the following form: Everyone should
be able to attend his religious as well as his bodily needs without the
police sticking their noses in. But the Workers' party ought, at any rate
in this connection, to have expressed its awareness of the fact that bourgeois
"freedom of conscience" is nothing but the toleration of all possible kinds
of religious freedom of conscience, and that for its part it endeavours rather to liberate the conscience from the witchery of religion. But one
chooses not to transgress the "bourgeois" level.
I have now come to the end, for the appendix that now follows
in the program does not constitute a characteristic component part of it.
Hence, I can be very brief.

 


Footnotes


[1]
Epitaph used by the Eisenachers. Here a play on words in German.

 


Appendix


Critique of the Gotha Programme




==========

## Letter to A. Bebel










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1875



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1875
Engels to August Bebel
In Zwickau


Written: London, March 18-28, 1875;
First Published: A. Bebel, Aus meinem Leben, Part 2, Stuttgart, 1911;
Translated: Peter and Betty Ross;
Transcribed: Zodiac;
HTML Markup: S. Ryan and B. Baggins.

London, March 18-28, 1875
Dear Bebel,
I have received your letter of February 23
and am glad to hear that you are in such good bodily health.
You ask me what we think of the unification affair. We are, unfortunately,
in exactly the same boat as yourself. Neither Liebknecht nor anyone else
has let us have any kind of information, and hence we too know only what
is in the papers  —  not that there was anything in them until a week or
so ago, when the draft programme appeared. That astonished us not a little,
I must say.
Our party had so often held out a conciliatory hand to the Lassalleans,
or at least proffered co-operation, only to be rebuffed so often and so
contemptuously by the Hasenclevers, Hasselmanns and Tolckes as to lead
any child to the conclusion that, should these gentlemen now come and themselves
proffer conciliation, they must be in a hell of a dilemma. Knowing full
well what these people are like, however, it behoves us to make the most
of that dilemma and insist on every conceivable guarantee that might prevent
these people from restoring, at our party’s expense, their shattered reputation
in general working-class opinion. They should be given an exceedingly cool
and cautious reception, and union be made dependent on the degree of their
readiness to abandon their sectarian slogans and their state aid, [2]
and to accept in its essentials the Eisenach Programme of 1869 [3]
or an improved edition of it adapted to the present day. Our party has
absolutely nothing to learn from the Lassalleans in the theoretical
sphere, i.e. the crux of the matter where the programme is concerned, but
the Lassalleans doubtless have something to learn from the party; the first
prerequisite for union was that they cease to be sectarians, Lassalleans,
i.e. that, first and foremost, they should, if not wholly relinquish the
universal panacea of state aid, at least admit it to be a secondary provisional
measure alongside and amongst many others recognised as possible. The draft
programme shows that our people, while infinitely superior to the Lassallean
leaders in matters of theory, are far from being a match for them where
political guile is concerned; once again the “honest men” [4]
have been cruelly done in the eye by the dishonest.
To begin with, they adopt the high-sounding but historically false
Lassallean dictum: in relation to the working class all other classes are
only one reactionary mass. This proposition is true only in certain exceptional
instances, for example in the case of a revolution by the proletariat,
e.g. the Commune, or in a country in which not only has the bourgeoisie
constructed state and society after its own image but the democratic petty
bourgeoisie, in its wake, has already carried that reconstruction to its
logical conclusion. If, for instance, in Germany, the democratic petty
bourgeoisie were part of this reactionary mass, then how could the Social-Democratic
Workers’ Party have gone hand in hand with it, with the People’s Party,
[5] for years on end? How could the Volksstaat
derive virtually all its political content from the petty-bourgeois democratic
Frankfurter Zeitung? And how can one explain the adoption in this
same programme of no less than seven demands that coincide exactly and
word for word with the programme of the People’s Party and of petty-bourgeois
democracy? I mean the seven political demands, 1 to 5 and 1 to 2, of which
there is not one that is not bourgeois-democratic. [6]
Secondly, the principle that the workers’ movement is an international
one is, to all intents and purposes, utterly denied in respect of the present,
and this by men who, for the space of five years and under the most difficult
conditions, upheld that principle in the most laudable manner. The German
workers’ position in the van of the European movement rests essentially
on their genuinely international attitude during the war [7];
no other proletariat would have behaved so well. And now this principle
is to be denied by them at a moment when, everywhere abroad, workers are
stressing it all the more by reason of the efforts made by governments
to suppress every attempt at its practical application in an organisation!
And what is left of the internationalism of the workers’ movement? The
dim prospect  —  not even of subsequent co-operation among European workers
with a view to their liberation  —  nay, but of a future “international
brotherhood of peoples”  —  of your Peace League bourgeois “United States
of Europe"! [8]
There was, of course, no need whatever to mention the International
as such. But at the very least there should have been no going back on
the programme of 1869, and some sort of statement to the effect that, though
first of all the German workers’ party is acting within the limits
set by its political frontiers (it has no right to speak in the name of
the European proletariat, especially when what it says is wrong), it is
nevertheless conscious of its solidarity with the workers of all other
countries and will, as before, always be ready to meet the obligations
that solidarity entails. Such obligations, even if one does not definitely
proclaim or regard oneself as part of the “International,”  consist for
example in aid, abstention from blacklegging during strikes, making sure
that the party organs keep German workers informed of the movement abroad,
agitation against impending or incipient dynastic wars and, during such
wars, an attitude such as was exemplarily maintained in 1870 and 1871,
etc.
Thirdly, our people have allowed themselves to be saddled with
the Lassallean “iron law of wages” which is based on a completely outmoded
economic view, namely that on average the workers receive only the minimum
wage because, according to the Malthusian theory of population, there are
always too many workers (such was Lassalle’s reasoning). Now in Capital
Marx has amply demonstrated that the laws governing wages are very complex,
that, according to circumstances, now this law, now that, holds sway, that
they are therefore by no means iron but are, on the contrary, exceedingly
elastic, and that the subject really cannot be dismissed in a few words,
as Lassalle imagined. Malthus’ argument, upon which the law Lassalle derived
from him and Ricardo (whom he misinterpreted) is based, as that argument
appears, for instance, on p. 5 of the Arbeiterlesebuch, where it
is quoted from another pamphlet of Lassalle’s, [9] is
exhaustively refuted by Marx in the section on “Accumulation of Capital.” 
Thus, by adopting the Lassallean “iron law” one commits oneself to a false
proposition and false reasoning in support of the same.
Fourthly, as its one and only social demand, the programme
puts forward  —  Lassallean state aid in its starkest form, as stolen by
Lassalle from Buchez. [10] And this, after Bracke has
so ably demonstrated the sheer futility of that demand; after almost all
if not all, of our party speakers have, in their struggle against the Lassalleans,
been compelled to make a stand against this “state aid"! Our party could
hardly demean itself further. Internationalism sunk to the level of Amand
Goegg, socialism to that of the bourgeois republican Buchez, who confronted
the socialists with this demand in order to supplant them!
But “state aid” in the Lassallean sense of the word is, after
all, at most only one measure among many others for the attainment
of an end here lamely described as “paving the way for the solution of
the social question,”  as though in our case there were still a social question
that remained unsolved in theory! Thus, if you were to say: The
German workers’ party strives to abolish wage labour and hence class distinctions
by introducing co-operative production into industry and agriculture, and
on a national scale; it is in favour of any measure calculated to attain
that end!  —  then no Lassallean could possibly object.
Fifthly, there is absolutely no mention of the organisation of
the working class as a class through the medium of trade unions. And that
is a point of the utmost importance, this being the proletariat’s true
class organisation in which it fights its daily battles with capital, in
which it trains itself and which nowadays can no longer simply be smashed,
even with reaction at its worst (as presently in Paris). Considering the
importance this organisation is likewise assuming in Germany, it would
in our view be indispensable to accord it some mention in the programme
and, possibly, to leave some room for it in the organisation of the party.
All these things have been done by our people to oblige the Lassalleans.
And what have the others conceded? That a host of somewhat muddled and
purely democratic demands should figure in the programme, some of
them being of a purely fashionable nature  —  for instance “legislation
by the people” such as exists in Switzerland and does more harm than good,
if it can be said to do anything at all. Administration by the people
 —  that would at least be something. Similarly omitted is the first prerequisite
of all liberty  —  that all officials be responsible for all their official
actions to every citizen before the ordinary courts and in accordance with
common law. That demands such as freedom of science and freedom of conscience
figure in every liberal bourgeois programme and seem a trifle out of place
here is something I shall not enlarge upon.

The free people’s state is transformed into the free state. Grammatically
speaking, a free state is one in which the state is free vis-à-vis its
citizens, a state, that is, with a despotic government. All the palaver
about the state ought to be dropped, especially after the Commune, which
had ceased to be a state in the true sense of the term. The people’s
state has been flung in our teeth ad nauseam by the anarchists,
although Marx’s anti-Proudhon piece and after it the Communist Manifesto
declare outright that, with the introduction of the socialist order of
society, the state will dissolve of itself and disappear. Now, since the
state is merely a transitional institution of which use is made in the
struggle, in the revolution, to keep down one’s enemies by force, it is
utter nonsense to speak of a free people’s state; so long as the proletariat
still makes use of the state, it makes use of it, not for the purpose
of freedom, but of keeping down its enemies and, as soon as there can be
any question of freedom, the state as such ceases to exist. We would therefore
suggest that Gemeinwesen ["commonalty"] be universally substituted
for state; it is a good old German word that can very well do service
for the French “Commune.” 
"The elimination of all social and political inequality,”  rather
than “the abolition of all class distinctions,”  is similarly a most dubious
expression. As between one country, one province and even one place and
another, living conditions will always evince a certain inequality
which may be reduced to a minimum but never wholly eliminated. The living
conditions of Alpine dwellers will always be different from those of the
plainsmen. The concept of a socialist society as a realm of equality
is a one-sided French concept deriving from the old “liberty, equality,
fraternity,”  a concept which was justified in that, in its own time and
place, it signified a phase of development, but which, like all
the one-sided ideas of earlier socialist schools, ought now to be superseded,
since they produce nothing but mental confusion, and more accurate ways
of presenting the matter have been discovered.
I shall desist, although almost every word in this programme,
a programme which is, moreover, insipidly written, lays itself open to
criticism. It is such that, should it be adopted, Marx and I could never
recognise a new party set up on that basis and shall have to consider
most seriously what attitude  —  public as well as private  —  we should
adopt towards it. [11] Remember that abroad we
are held responsible for any and every statement and action of the German
Social-Democratic Workers’ Party. E.g. by Bakunin in his work Statehood
and Anarchy, in which we are made to answer for every injudicious word
spoken or written by Liebknecht since the inception of the Demokratisches
Wochenblatt. People imagine that we run the whole show from here, whereas
you know as well as I do that we have hardly ever interfered in the least
with internal party affairs, and then only in an attempt to make good,
as far as possible, what we considered to have been blunders  —  and only
theoretical blunders at that. But, as you yourself will realise, this
programme marks a turning-point which may very well force us to renounce
any kind of responsibility in regard to the party that adopts it.
Generally speaking, less importance attaches to the official programme
of a party than to what it does. But a new programme is after all
a banner planted in public, and the outside world judges the party by it.
Hence, whatever happens there should be no going-back, as there is here,
on the Eisenach programme. It should further be considered what the workers
of other countries will think of this programme; what impression will be
created by this genuflection on the part of the entire German socialist
proletariat before Lassalleanism.
I am, moreover, convinced that a union on this basis would
not last a year. Are the best minds of our party to descend to repeating,
parrot-fashion, Lassallean maxims concerning the iron law of wages and
state aid? I’d like to see you, for one, thus employed! And were they to
do so, their audiences would hiss them off the stage. And I feel sure that
it is precisely on these bits of the programme that the Lassalleans
are insisting, like Shylock the Jew on his pound of flesh. The split will
come; but we shall have “made honest men” again of Hasselmann, Hasenclever
and Tolcke and Co.; we shall emerge from the split weaker and the Lassalleans
stronger; our party will have lost its political virginity and will never
again be able to come out whole-heartedly against the Lassallean maxims
which for a time it inscribed on its own banner; and then, should the Lassalleans
again declare themselves to be the sole and most genuine workers’ party
and our people to be bourgeois, the programme would be there to prove it.
All the socialist measures in it are theirs, and our party
has introduced nothing save the demands of that petty-bourgeois democracy
which it has itself described in that same programme as part of
the “reactionary mass"!
I had held this letter back in view of the fact that you would
only be released on April 1, in honour of Bismarck’s birthday, [12]
not wanting to expose it to the risk of interception in the course of an
attempt to smuggle it in. Well, I have just had a letter from Bracke, who
has also felt grave doubts about the programme and asks for our opinion.
I shall therefore send this letter to him for forwarding, so that he can
read it without my having to write the whole thing over again. I have,
by the way, also spoken my mind to Ramm; to Liebknecht I wrote but briefly.
I cannot forgive his not having told us a single word about the
whole business (whereas Ramm and others believed he had given us exact
information) until it was, in a manner of speaking, too late. True, this
has always been his wont  —  hence the large amount of disagreeable correspondence
which we, both Marx and myself, have had with him, but this time it really
is too bad, and we definitely shan’t act in concert with him.
Do see that you manage to come here in the summer; you would,
of course, stay with me and, if the weather is fine, we might spend a day
or two taking sea baths, which would really do you good after your long
spell in jail.

Ever your friend,

F. E.
Marx has just moved house. He is living at 41 Maitland Park Crescent,
NW London.


Footnotes

1. Engels’ letter to August Bebel written between
March 18 and 28, 1875 is closely connected with Marx’s Critique of the
Gotha Programme and is traditionally published together with the latter
work. It conveyed the joint opinion of Marx and Engels concerning the fusion
of two German workers’ parties, the Eisenachers and the Lassalleans, scheduled
for early 1875. The immediate reason for the letter was the publication
of the draft programme of the future united Social-Democratic Workers’
Party of Germany (Programm der deutschen Arbeiterpartei) in Der
Volksstaat (the organ of the Eisenachers) and the Neuer Social-Demokrat
(the organ of the Lassalleans) on March 7, 1875. The draft programme was
approved with slight changes by the unity congress at Gotha on May 22-27,
1875, and came to be known as the Gotha Programme.

This letter was first published by Bebel, after the lapse of 36
years, in his Aus meinem Leben, Zweiter Teil, Stuttgart, 1911. In
the present edition the letter is printed according to this book.

It was published in English for the first time in: K. Marx, Critique
of the Gotha Programme, Lawrence, London [1933], pp. 51-62.

2. A reference to one of Lassalle’s programme
theses on the establishment of workers’ producer associations with the
aid of the state. Lassalle and his followers repeatedly emphasised that
what they had in mind was a state in which power would pass into the hands
of the working people through universal suffrage.

3. Engels is referring to the Programm
und Statuten der sozial-demokratischen Arbeiter-Partei, adopted at
the general German workers’ congress in Eisenach in August 1869 and published
in the Demokratisches Wochenblatt on August 14, 1869. The congress
founded the Social-Democratic Workers’ Party of Germany. By and large the
programme complied with the principles of the International Working Men’s
Association.

4. The "honest men”  —  nickname
of the members of the Social-Democratic Workers’ Party (the Eisenachers),
as distinct from the members of the General Association of German Workers
(the Lassalleans), the “dishonest men.” 

5. The German People’s Party,
established in September 1868, embraced the democratic section of the bourgeoisie,
mostly in the South-German states. The party opposed the establishment
of Prussian hegemony in Germany and advocated the idea of a federative
German state.

6. A reference to the following articles
of the draft Gotha Programme:


"The German workers’ party demands as the free basis of the state:

"1. Universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot for
all males who have reached the age of 21, for all elections in the state
and in the community. 2. Direct legislation by the people with the right
to initiate and to reject bills. 3. Universal military training. A people’s
militia in place of the standing army. Decisions regarding war and peace
to be taken by a representative assembly of the people. 4. Abolition of
all exceptional laws, in particular the laws on the press, associations
and assembly. 5. Jurisdiction by the people. Administration of justice
without fees.

"The German workers’ party demands as the intellectual and moral
basis of the state:

"1. Universal and equal education of the people by the state.
Compulsory school attendance. Free instruction. 2. Freedom of science.
Freedom of conscience."


7. The reference is to the Franco-Prussian war
of 1870-71.

8. The League of Peace and Freedom
 —  A pacifist organisation set up in Switzerland in 1867 with the active
participation of Victor Hugo, Giuseppe Garibaldi and other democrats. The
League asserted that it was possible to prevent wars by creating the “United
States of Europe.” Its leaders did not disclose the social sources of wars
and often confined anti-militarist activity to mere declarations. At the
General Council meeting of August 13, 1867 Marx spoke against the International’s
official participation in the League’s Inaugural Congress, since this would
have meant solidarity with its bourgeois programme, but recommended that
some members of the International should attend the Congress in their personal
capacity in order to support revolutionary-democratic decisions (see Marx’s
letter to Engels of September 4, 1867).

9. On page 5 of his Arbeiterlesebuch
Lassalle quotes a passage about the “iron law of wages” from his pamphlet
Offnes Antwortschreiben an das Central-Comite zur Berufung eines
Allgemeinen Deutschen Arbeitercongresses zu Leipzig, Zurich, 1863, pp.
15-16.

10. Philippe Joseph Buchez, one of the
first ideologists of the so-called Christian socialism, advanced a plan
for the establishment of workers’ producer associations with the aid of
the state.

11. On October 12, 1875 Engels wrote
to Bebel concerning this programme that, since both workers and their political
opponents “interpreted it communistically,”  “it is this circumstance
alone which has made it possible for Marx and myself not to disassociate
ourselves publicly from a programme such as this. So long as our opponents
as well as the workers continue to read our views into that programme,
we are justified in saying nothing about it.” 

12. In March 1872 August Bebel and Wilhelm
Liebknecht were sentenced to two years’ confinement in a fortress for their
adhesion to the International Working Men’s Association and their socialist
views. In April Bebel was sentenced, in addition, to nine months’ imprisonment
and deprived of his mandate as a Reichstag member for “insulting His Majesty.” 
Liebknecht was released on April 15, 1874, while Bebel was freed on April
1, 1875.
 


Critique of the Gotha Programme
1875 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx/Engels Archive





==========

## Introduction to Dialectics of Nature






1883-Dialectics of Nature-Introduction






Dialectics of Nature. Frederick Engels (1883)

1. INTRODUCTION

MODERN natural science, which alone has achieved an all-round systematic and scientific
development, as contrasted with the brilliant natural-philosophical intuitions of antiquity
and the extremely important but sporadic discoveries of the Arabs, which for the most part
vanished without results – this modern natural science dates, like all more recent history,
from that mighty epoch which we Germans term the Reformation, from the national misfortune
that overtook us at that time, and which the French term the Renaissance and the Italians the
Cinquecento, although it is not fully expressed by any of these names. It is the epoch which
had its rise in the last half of the fifteenth century. Royalty, with the support of the
burghers of the towns, broke the power of the feudal nobility and established the great
monarchies, based essentially on nationality, within which the modern European nations and
modern bourgeois society came to development. And while the burghers and nobles were still
fighting one another, the peasant war in Germany pointed prophetically to future class
struggles, not only by bringing on to the stage the peasants in revolt – that was no longer
anything new – but behind them the beginnings of the modern proletariat, with the red flag in
their hands and the demand for common ownership of goods on their lips. In the manuscripts
saved from the fall of Byzantium, in the antique statues dug out of the ruins of Rome, a new
world was revealed to the astonished West, that of ancient Greece: the ghosts of the Middle
Ages vanished before its shining forms; Italy rose to an undreamt-of flowering of art, which
seemed like a reflection of classical antiquity and was never attained again. In Italy,
France, and Germany a new literature arose, the first, modern literature; shortly afterwards
came the classical epochs of English and Spanish literature. The bounds of the old orbis
terrarum were pierced. Only now for the first time was the world really discovered and
the basis laid for subsequent world trade and the transition from handicraft to manufacture,
which in its turn formed the starting-point for modern large scale industry. The dictatorship
of the Church over men's minds was shattered; it was directly cast off by the majority of the
Germanic peoples, who adopted Protestantism, while among the Latins a cheerful spirit of free
thought, taken over from the Arabs and nourished by the newly-discovered Greek philosophy,
took root more and more and prepared the way for the materialism of the eighteenth
century.

It was the greatest progressive revolution that mankind has so far experienced, a time
which called for giants and produced giants – giants in power of thought, passion, and
character, in universality and learning. The men who founded the modern rule of the
bourgeoisie had anything but bourgeois limitations. On the contrary, the adventurous
character of the time inspired them to a greater or less degree. There was hardly any man of
importance then living who had not travelled extensively, who did not command four or five
languages, who did not shine in a number of fields. Leonardo da Vinci was not only a great
painter but also a great mathematician, mechanician, and engineer, to whom the most diverse
branches of physics are indebted for important discoveries. Albrecht Dürer was painter,
engraver, sculptor, and architect, and in addition invented a system of fortification
embodying many of the ideas that much later were again taken up by Montalembert and the
modern German science of fortification. Machiavelli was statesman, historian, poet, and at
the same time the first notable military author of modern times. Luther not only cleaned the
Augean stable of the Church but also that of the German language; he created modern German
prose and composed the text and melody of that triumphal hymn which became the Marseillaise
of the sixteenth century. The heroes of that time had not yet come under the servitude of the
division of labour, the restricting effects of which, with its production of onesidedness, we
so often notice in their successors. But what is especially characteristic of them is that
they almost all pursue their lives and activities in the midst of the contemporary movements,
in the practical struggle; they take sides and join in the fight, one by speaking and
writing, another with the sword, many with both. Hence the fullness and force of character
that makes them complete men. Men of the study are the exception – either persons of second
or third rank or cautious philistines who do not want to burn their fingers.

At that time natural science also developed in the midst of the general revolution and was
itself thoroughly revolutionary; it had to win in struggle its right of existence. Side by
side with the great Italians from whom modern philosophy dates, it provided its martyrs for
the stake and the prisons of the Inquisition. And it is characteristic that Protestants
outdid Catholics in persecuting the free investigation of nature. Calvin had Servetus burnt
at the stake when the latter was on the point of discovering the circulation of the blood,
and indeed he kept him roasting alive during two hours; for the Inquisition at least it
sufficed to have Giordano Bruno simply burnt alive.

The revolutionary act by which natural science declared its independence and, as it were,
repeated Luther's burning of the Papal Bull was the publication of the immortal work by which
Copernicus, though timidly and, so to speak, only from his deathbed, threw down the gauntlet
to ecclesiastical authority in the affairs of nature. The emancipation of natural science
from theology dates from this act, although the fighting out of the particular antagonistic
claims has dragged out up to our day and in many minds is still far from completion.
Thenceforward, however, the development of the sciences proceeded with giant strides, and, it
might be said, gained in force in proportion to the square of the distance (in time) from its
point of departure. It was as if the world were to be shown that henceforth the reciprocal
law of motion would be as valid for the highest product of organic matter, the human mind, as
for inorganic substance.

The main work in the first period of natural science that now opened lay in mastering the
material immediately at hand. In most fields a start had to be made from the very beginning.
Antiquity had bequeathed Euclid and the Ptolemaic solar system; the Arabs had left behind the
decimal notation, the beginnings of algebra, the modern numerals, and alchemy; the Christian
Middle Ages nothing at all. Of necessity, in this situation the most fundamental natural
science, the mechanics of terrestrial and heavenly bodies, occupied first place, and
alongside of it, as handmaiden to it, the discovery and perfecting of mathematical methods.
Great work was achieved here. At the end of the period characterised by Newton and Linnaeus we
find these branches of science brought to a certain perfection. The basic features of the
most essential mathematical methods were established; analytical geometry by Descartes
especially, logarithms by Napier, and the differential and integral calculus by Leibniz and
perhaps Newton. The same holds good of the mechanics of rigid bodies, the main laws of which
were made clear once for all. Finally in the astronomy of the solar system Kepler discovered
the laws of planetary movement and Newton formulated them from the point of view of the
general laws of motion of matter. The other branches of natural science were far removed even
from this preliminary perfection. Only towards the end of the period did the mechanics of
fluid and gaseous bodies receive further treatment. Physics proper had still not gone beyond
its first beginnings, with the exception of optics, the exceptional progress of which was due
to the practical needs of astronomy. By the phlogistic theory, chemistry for the first time
emancipated itself from alchemy. Geology had not yet gone beyond the embryonic stage of
mineralogy; hence paleontology could not yet exist at all. Finally, in the field of biology
the essential preoccupation was still with the collection and first sifting of the immense
material, not only botanical and zoological but also anatomical and even physiological. There
could as yet be hardly any talk of the comparison of the various forms of life, of the
investigation of their geographical distribution and their climatic, etc., living conditions.
Here only botany and zoology arrived at an approximate completion owing to Linnaeus.

But what especially characterises this period is the elaboration of a peculiar general
outlook, in which the central point is the view of the absolute immutability of
nature. In whatever way nature itself might have come into being, once present it
remained as it was as long as it continued to exist. The planets and their satellites, once
set in motion by the mysterious "first impulse", circled on and on in their predestined
ellipses for all eternity, or at any rate until the end of all things. The stars remained for
ever fixed and immovable in their places, keeping one another therein by "universal
gravitation". The earth had persisted without alteration from all eternity, or,
alternatively, from the first day of its creation. The "five continents" of the present day
had always existed, and they had always had the same mountains, valleys, and rivers, the same
climate, and the same flora and fauna, except in so far as change or cultivation had taken
place at the hand of man. The species of plants and animals had been established once for all
when they came into existence; like continually produced like, and it was already a good deal
for Linnaeus to have conceded that possibly here and there new species could have arisen by
crossing. In contrast to the history of mankind, which develops in time, there was ascribed
to the history of nature only an unfolding in space. All change, all development in nature,
was denied. Natural science, so revolutionary at the outset, suddenly found itself confronted
by an out-and-out conservative nature in which even to-day everything was as it had been at
the beginning and in which – to the end of the world or for all eternity – everything would
remain as it had been since the beginning.

High as the natural science of the first half of the eighteenth century stood above Greek
antiquity in knowledge and even in the sifting of its material, it stood just as deeply below
Greek antiquity in the theoretical mastery of this material, in the general outlook on
nature. For the Greek philosophers the world was essentially something that had emerged from
chaos, something that had developed, that had come into being. For the natural scientists of
the period that we are dealing with it was something ossified, something immutable, and for
most of them something that had been created at one stroke. Science was still deeply enmeshed
in theology. Everywhere it sought and found its ultimate resort in an impulse from outside
that was not to be explained from nature itself. Even if attraction, by Newton pompously
baptised as "universal gravitation", was conceived as an essential property of matter, whence
comes the unexplained tangential force which first gives rise to the orbits of the planets?
How did the innumerable varieties of animals and plants arise? And how, above all, did man
arise, since after all it was certain that he was not present from all eternity? To such
questions natural science only too frequently answered by making the creator of all things
responsible. Copernicus, at the beginning of the period, writes a letter renouncing theology;
Newton closes the period with the postulate of a divine first impulse. The highest general
idea to which this natural science attained was that of the purposiveness of the arrangements
of nature, the shallow teleology of Wolff, according to which cats were created to eat mice,
mice to he eaten by cats, and the whole of nature to testify to the wisdom of the creator. It
is to the highest credit of the philosophy of the time that it did not let itself be led
astray by the restricted state of contemporary natural knowledge, and that – from Spinoza
right to the great French materialists – it insisted on explaining the world from the world
itself and left the justification in detail to the natural science of the future.

I include the materialists of the eighteenth century in this period because no natural
scientific material was available to them other than that above described. Kant's epoch-making work remained a secret to them, and Laplace came long after them. We should not forget
that this obsolete outlook on nature, although riddled through and through by the progress of
science, dominated the entire first half of the nineteenth century, and in substance is even
now still taught in all schools. 1

The first breach in this petrified outlook on nature was made not by a natural scientist
but by a philosopher. In 1755 appeared Kant's Allgemeine Naturgesehichte und Theorie des
Himmels [General Natural History and Theory of the Heavens]. The question of the first
impulse was abolished; the earth and the whole solar system appeared as something that had
come into being in the course of time. If the great majority of the natural scientists had
had a little less of the repugnance to thinking that Newton expressed in the warning: 
 "Physics, beware of metaphysics!", they would have been compelled from this single brilliant
discovery of Kant's to draw conclusions that would have spared them endless deviations and
immeasurable amounts of time and labour wasted in false directions. For Kant's discovery
contained the point of departure for all further progress. If the earth were something that
had come into being, then its present geological, geographical, and climatic state, and its
plants and animals likewise, must be something that had come into being; it must have had a
history not only of co-existence in space but also of succession in time. If at once further
investigations had been resolutely pursued in this direction, natural science would now be
considerably further advanced than it is. But what good could come of philosophy? Kant's work
remained without immediate results, until many years later Laplace and Herschel expounded its
contents and gave them a deeper foundation, thereby gradually bringing the "nebular
hypothesis" into favour. Further discoveries finally brought it victory; the most important
of these were: the proper motion of the fixed stars, the demonstration of a resistant medium
in universal space, the proof furnished by spectral analysis of the chemical identity of the
matter of the universe and the existence of such glowing nebular masses as Kant had
postulated.

It is, however, permissible to doubt whether the majority of natural scientists would so
soon have become conscious of the contradiction of a changing earth that bore immutable
organisms, had not the dawning conception that nature does not just exist, but
comes into being and passes away, derived support from another quarter. Geology
arose and pointed out, not only the terrestrial strata formed one after another and deposited
one upon another, but also the shells and skeletons of extinct animals and the trunks,
leaves, and fruits of no longer existing plants contained in these strata. It had finally to
be acknowledged that not only the earth as a whole but also its present surface and the
plants and animals living on it possessed a history in time. At first the acknowledgement
occurred reluctantly enough. Cuvier's theory of the revolutions of the earth was
revolutionary in phrase and reactionary in substance. In place of a single divine creation,
he put a whole series of repeated acts of creation, making the miracle an essential natural
agent. Lyell first brought sense into geology by substituting for the sudden revolutions due
to the moods of the creator the gradual effects of a slow transformation of the earth. 2

Lyell's theory was even more incompatible than any of its predecessors with the assumption
of constant organic species. Gradual transformation of the earth's surface and of all
conditions of life led directly to gradual transformation of the organisms and their
adaptation to the changing environment, to the mutability of species. But tradition is a
power not only in the Catholic Church but also in natural science. For years, Lyell himself
did not see the contradiction, and his pupils still less. This is only to be explained by the
division of labour that had meanwhile become dominant in natural science, which more or less
restricted each person to his special sphere, there being only a few whom it did not rob of a
comprehensive view. Meanwhile physics had made mighty advances, the results of which were
summed up almost simultaneously by three different persons in the year 1842, an epoch-making
year for this branch of natural investigation. Mayer in Heilbronn and Joule in Manchester
demonstrated the transformation of heat into mechanical energy and of mechanical energy into
heat. The determination of the mechanical equivalent of heat put this result beyond question.
Simultaneously, by simply working up the separate physical results already arrived at, Grove
- not a natural scientist by profession, but an English lawyer – proved that all so-called
physical energy, mechanical energy, heat, light, electricity magnetism, indeed even so-called
chemical energy, become transformed into one another under definite conditions without any
loss of energy occurring, and so proved post factum along physical lines Descartes'
principle that the quantity of motion present in the world is constant. With that the special
physical energies, the as it were immutable "species" of physics, were resolved into
variously differentiated forms of the motion of matter, convertible into one another
according to definite laws. The fortuitousness of the existence of a number of physical
energies was abolished from science by the proof of their interconnections and transitions.
Physics, like astronomy before it, had arrived at a result that necessarily pointed to the
eternal cycle of matter in motion as the ultimate reality.

The wonderfully rapid development of chemistry, since Lavoisier, and especially since
Dalton, attacked the old ideas of nature from another aspect. The preparation by inorganic
means of compounds that hitherto had been produced only in the living organism proved that
the laws of chemistry have the same validity for organic as for inorganic bodies, and to a
large extent bridged the gulf between inorganic and organic nature, a gulf that even Kant
regarded as for ever impassable.

Finally, in the sphere of biological research also the scientific journeys and expeditions
that had been systematically organised since the middle of the previous century, the more
thorough exploration of the European colonies in all parts of the world by specialists living
there, and further the progress of paleontology, anatomy, and physiology in general,
particularly since the systematic use of the microscope and the discovery of the cell, had
accumulated so much material that the application of the comparative method became possible
and at the same time indispensable. On the one hand the conditions of life of the various
floras and faunas were determined by means of comparative physical geography; on the other
hand the various organisms were compared with one another according to their homologous
organs, and this not only in the adult condition but at all stages of development. The more
deeply and exactly this research was carried on, the more did the rigid system of an



immutable, fixed organic nature crumble away at its touch. Not only did the separate species
of plants and animals become more and more inextricably intermingled, but animals turned up,
such as Amphioxus and Lepidosiren, that made a mockery of all previous
classification, and finally organisms were encountered of which it was not possible to say
whether they belonged to the plant or animal kingdom. More and more the gaps in the



paleontological record were filled up, compelling even the most reluctant to acknowledge the
striking parallelism between the evolutionary history of the organic world as a whole and
that of the individual organism, the Ariadne's thread that was to lead the way out of the
labyrinth in which botany and zoology appeared to have become more and more deeply lost. It
was characteristic that, almost simultaneously with Kant's attack on the eternity of the
solar system, C. F. Wolff in 1759 launched the first attack on the fixity of species and
proclaimed the theory of descent. But what in his case was still only a brilliant
anticipation took firm shape in the hands of Oken, Lamarck, Baer, and was victoriously
carried through by Darwin in 1859, exactly a hundred years later. Almost simultaneously it
was established that protoplasm and the cell, which had already been shown to be the ultimate
morphological constituents of all organisms, occurred independently as the lowest forms of
organic life. This not only reduced the gulf between inorganic and organic nature to a
minimum but removed one of the most essential difficulties that had previously stood in the
way of the theory of descent of organisms. The new conception of nature was complete in its
main features; all rigidity was dissolved, all fixity dissipated, all particularity that had
been regarded as eternal became transient, the whole of nature shown as moving in eternal
flux and cyclical course.

Thus we have once again returned to the point of view of the great founders of Greek
philosophy, the view that the whole of nature, from the smallest element to the greatest,



from grains of sand to suns, from protista to men, has its existence in eternal coming into
being and passing away, in ceaseless flux, in un-resting motion and change, only with the
essential difference that what for the Greeks was a brilliant intuition, is in our case the
result of strictly scientific research in accordance with experience, and hence also it
emerges in a much more definite and clear form. It is true that the empirical proof of this
motion is not wholly free from gaps, but these are insignificant in comparison with what has
already been firmly established, and with each year they become more and more filled up. And
how could the proof in detail be otherwise than defective when one bears in mind that the
most essential branches of science —trans-planetary astronomy, chemistry, geology— have a scientific existence of barely a hundred years, and the comparative method in physiology one
of barely fifty years, and that the basic form of almost all organic development, the cell,
is a discovery not yet forty years old?

The innumerable suns and solar systems of our island universe, bounded by the outermost
stellar rings of the Milky Way, developed from swirling, glowing masses of vapour, the laws
of motion of which will perhaps be disclosed after the observations of some centuries have
given us an insight into the proper motion of the stars. Obviously, this development did not
proceed everywhere at the same rate. Recognition of. the existence of dark bodies, not merely
planetary in nature, hence extinct suns in our stellar system, more and more forces itself on
astronomy (Mädler); on the other hand (according to Secchi) a part of the vaporous
nebular patches belong to our stellar system as suns not yet fully formed, whereby it is not
excluded that other nebulae, as Mädler maintains, are distant independent island
universes, the relative stage of development of which must be determined by the
spectroscope.

How a solar system develops from an individual nebular mass has been shown in detail by
Laplace in a manner still unsurpassed; subsequent science has more and more confirmed
him.

On the separate bodies so formed – suns as well as planets and satellites – the form of
motion of matter at first prevailing is that which we call heat. There can be no question of
chemical compounds of the elements even at a temperature like that still possessed by the
sun; the extent to which heat is transformed into electricity or magnetism under such
conditions, continued solar observations will show; it is already as good as proved that the
mechanical motion taking place in the sun arises solely from the conflict of heat with
gravity.

The smaller the individual bodies, the quicker they cool down, the satellites,
asteroids, and meteors first of all, just as our moon has long been extinct.
The planets cool more slowly, the central body slowest of all.

With progressive cooling the interplay of the physical forms of motion
which become transformed into one another comes more and more to the forefront
until finally a point is reached from when on chemical affinity begins
to make itself felt, the previously chemically indifferent elements become
differentiated chemically one after another, obtain chemical properties,
and enter into combination with one another. These compounds change continually
with the decreasing temperature, which affects differently not only each
element but also each separate compound of the elements, changing also
with the consequent passage of part of the gaseous matter first to the
liquid and then the solid state, and with the new conditions thus created.

The period when the planet has a firm shell and accumulations of water
on its surface coincides with that when its intrinsic heat diminishes more
and more in comparison to the heat emitted to it from the central body.
Its atmosphere becomes the arena of meteorological phenomena in the sense
in which we now understand the word; its surface becomes the arena of geological
changes in which the deposits resulting from atmospheric precipitation
become of ever greater importance in comparison to the slowly decreasing
external effects of the hot fluid interior.

If, finally, the temperature becomes so far equalised that over a considerable
portion of the surface at least it does not exceed the limits within which
protein is capable of life, then, if other chemical conditions are favourable,
living protoplasm is formed. What these conditions are, we do not yet know,
which is not to be wondered at since so far not even the chemical formula
of protein has been established – we do not even know how many chemically
different protein bodies there are – and since it is only about ten years
ago that the fact became known that completely structureless protein exercises
all the essential functions of life, digestion, excretion, movement, contraction,
reaction to stimuli, and reproduction.

Thousands of years may have passed before the conditions arose in which
the next advance could take place and this formless protein produce the
first cell by formation of nucleus and cell membrane. Rut this first cell
also provided the foundation for the morphological development of the whole
organic world; the first to develop, as it is permissible to assume from
the whole analogy of the palæontological record, were innumerable
species of non-cellular and cellular protista, of which Eozoon canadense
alone has come down to us, and of which some were gradually differentiated
into the first plants and others into the first animals. And from the first
animals were developed, essentially by further differentiation, the numerous
classes, orders, families, genera, and species of animals; and finally
mammals, the form in which the nervous system attains its fullest development;
and among these again finally that mammal in which nature attains consciousness
of itself – man.

Man too arises by differentiation. Not only individually, by differentiation
from a single egg cell to the most complicated organism that nature produces
- no, also historically. When after thousands of years of struggle the
differentiation of hand from foot, and erect gait, were finally established,
man became distinct from the monkey and the basis was laid for the development
of articulate speech and the mighty development of the brain that has since
made the gulf between man and monkey an unbridgeable one. The specialisation
of the hand – this implies the tool, and the tool implies specific human
activity, the transforming reaction of man on nature, production. Animals
in the narrower sense also have tools, but only as limbs of their bodies:
the ant, the bee, the beaver; animals also produce, but their productive
effect on surrounding nature in relation to the latter amounts to nothing
at all. Man alone has succeeded in impressing his stamp on nature, not
only by shifting the plant and animal world from one place to another,
but also by so altering the aspect and climate of his dwelling place, and
even the plants and animals themselves, that the consequences of his activity
can disappear only with the general extinction of the terrestrial globe.
And he has accomplished this primarily and essentially by means of the
hand. Even the steam engine, so far his most powerful tool for the transformation
of nature, depends, because it is a tool, in the last resort on the
hand. But step by step with the development of the hand went that of
the brain; first of all consciousness of the conditions for separate practically
useful actions, and later, among the more favoured peoples and arising
from the preceding, insight into the natural laws governing them. And with
the rapidly growing knowledge of the laws of nature the means for reacting
on nature also grew; the hand alone would never have achieved the steam
engine if the brain of man had not attained a correlative development with
it, and parallel to it, and partly owing to it.

With men we enter history. Animals also have a history, that
of their derivation and gradual evolution to their present position. This
history, however, is made for them, and in so far as they themselves take
part in it, this occurs without their knowledge or desire. On the other
hand, the more that human beings become removed from animals in the narrower
sense of the word, the more they make their own history consciously, the
less becomes the influence of unforeseen effects and uncontrolled forces
of this history, and the more accurately does the historical result correspond
to the aim laid down in advance. If, however, we apply this measure to
human history, to that of even the most developed peoples of the present
day, we find that there still exists here a colossal disproportion between
the proposed aims and the results arrived at, that unforeseen effects predominate,
and that the uncontrolled forces are far more powerful than those set into
motion according to plan. And this cannot be otherwise as long as the most
essential historical activity of men, the one which has raised them from
bestiality to humanity and which forms the material foundation of all their
other activities, namely the production of their requirements of life,
that is to-day social production, is above all subject to the interplay
of unintended effects from uncontrolled forces and achieves its desired
end only by way of exception and, much more frequently, the exact opposite.
In the most advanced industrial countries we have subdued the forces of
nature and pressed them into the service of mankind; we have thereby infinitely
multiplied production, so that a child now produces more than a hundred
adults previously did. And what is the result? Increasing overwork and
increasing misery of the masses, and every ten years a great collapse.
Darwin did not know what a bitter satire he wrote on mankind, and especially
on his countrymen, when he showed that free competition, the struggle for
existence, which the economists celebrate as the highest historical achievement,
is the normal state of the animal kingdom. Only conscious organisation
of social production, in which production and distribution are carried
on in a planned way, can lift mankind above the rest of the animal world
as regards the social aspect, in the same way that production in general
has done this for men in their aspect as species. Historical evolution
makes such an organisation daily more indispensable, but also with every
day more possible. From it will date a new epoch of history, in which mankind
itself, and with mankind all branches of its activity, and especially natural
science, will experience an advance that will put everything preceding
it in the deepest shade.

Nevertheless, "all that comes into being deserves to perish". Millions
of years may elapse, hundreds of thousands of generations be born and die,
but inexorably the time will come when the declining warmth of the sun
will no longer suffice to melt the ice thrusting itself forward from the
poles; when the human race, crowding more and more about the equator, will
finally no longer find even there enough heat for life; when gradually
even the last trace of organic life will vanish; and the earth, an extinct
frozen globe like the moon, will circle in deepest darkness and in an ever
narrower orbit about the equally extinct sun, and at last fall into it.
Other planets will have preceded it, others will follow it; instead of
the bright, warm solar system with its harmonious arrangement of members,
only a cold, dead sphere will still pursue its lonely path through universal
space. And what will happen to our solar system will happen sooner or later
to all the other systems of our island universe; it will happen to all
the other innumerable island universes, even to those the light of which
will never reach the earth while there is a living human eye to receive
it.

And when such a solar system has completed its life history and succumbs
to the fate of all that is finite, death, what then? Will the sun's corpse
roll on for all eternity through infinite space, and all the once infinitely
diverse, differentiated natural forces pass for ever into one single form
of motion, attraction ? "Or" – as Secchi asks – "do forces exist in nature
which can re-convert the dead system into its original state of an incandescent
nebula and re-awake it to new life? We do not know".

At all events we do not know in the sense that we know that 2 × 2 =
4, or that the attraction of matter increases and decreases according to
the square of the distance. In theoretical natural science, however, which
as far as possible builds up its view of nature into a harmonious whole,
and without which nowadays even the most thoughtless empiricist cannot
get anywhere, we have very often to reckon with incompletely known magnitudes;
and logical consistency of thought must at all times help to get over defective
knowledge. Modern natural science has had to take over from philosophy
the principle of the indestructibility of motion; it cannot any longer
exist without this principle. But the motion of matter is not merely crude
mechanical motion, mere change of place, it is heat and light, electric
and magnetic stress, chemical combination and dissociation, life and, finally,
consciousness. To say that matter during the whole unlimited time of its
existence has only once, and for what is an infinitesimally short period
in comparison to its eternity, found itself able to differentiate its motion
and thereby to unfold the whole wealth of this motion, and that before
and a.fter this remains restricted for eternity to mere change of place
- this is equivalent to maintaining that matter is mortal and motion transitory.
The indestructibility of motion cannot be merely quantitative, it must
also be conceived qualitatively; matter whose purely mechanical change
of place includes indeed the possibility under favourable conditions of
being transformed into heat, electricity, chemical action, or life, but
which is not capable of producing these conditions from out of itself,
such matter has forfeited motion; motion which has lost the capacity
of being transformed into the various forms appropriate to it may indeed
still have dynamis but no longer energeia, and so has become
partially destroyed. Both, however, are unthinkable.

This much is certain: there was a time when the matter of our island
universe had transformed a quantity of motion – of what kind we
do not yet know – into heat, such that there could be developed from it
the solar systems appertaining to (according to Mädler) at least twenty
million stars, the gradual extinction of which is likewise certain. How
did this transformation take place? We know just as little as Father Secchi
knows whether the future caput mortuum of our solar system will
once again be converted into the raw material of a new solar system. But
here either we must have recourse to a creator, or we are forced to the
conclusion that the incandescent raw material for the solar system of our
universe was produced in a natural way by transformations of motion which
are by nature inherent in moving matter, and the conditions of which
therefore also must be reproduced by matter, even if only after millions
and millions of years and more or less by chance but with the necessity
that is also inherent in chance.

The possibility of such a transformation is more and more being conceded.
The view is being arrived at that the heavenly bodies are ultimately destined
to fall into one another, and one even calculates the amount of heat which
must be developed on such collisions. The sudden flaring up of new stars,
and the equally sudden increase in brightness of familiar ones, of which
we are informed by astronomy, is most easily explained by such collisions.
Not only does our group of planets move about the sun, and our sun within
our island universe, but our whole island universe also moves in space
in temporary, relative equilibrium with the other island universes, for
even the relative equilibrium of freely moving bodies can only exist where
the motion is reciprocally determined; and it is assumed by many that the
temperature in space is not everywhere the same. Finally, we know that,
with the exception of an infinitesimal portion, the heat of the innumerable
suns of our island universe vanishes into space and fails to raise the
temperature of space even by a millionth of a degree centigrade. What becomes
of all this enormous quantity of heat? Is it for ever dissipated in the
attempt to heat universal space, has it ceased to exist practically, and
does it only continue to exist theoretically, in the fact that universal
space has become warmer by a decimal fraction of a degree beginning with
ten or more noughts? The indestructibility of motion forbids such an assumption,
but it allows the possibility that by the successive falling into one another
of the bodies of the universe all existing mechanical motion will be converted
into heat and the latter radiated into space, so that in spite of all "indestructibility
of force" all motion in general would have ceased. (Incidentally it is
seen here how inaccurate is the term "indestructibility of force" instead
of "indestructibility of motion".) Hence we arrive at the conclusion that
in some way, which it will later be the task of scientific research to
demonstrate, the heat radiated into space must be able to become transformed
into another form of motion, in which it can once more be stored up and
rendered active. Thereby the chief difficulty in the way of the reconversion
of extinct suns into incandescent vapour disappears.

For the rest, the eternally repeated succession of worlds in infinite
time is only the logical complement to the co-existence of innumerable
worlds in infinite space – a principle the necessity of which has forced
itself even on the anti-theoretical Yankee brain of Draper.
3

It is an eternal cycle in which matter moves, a cycle that certainly
only completes its orbit in periods of time for which our terrestrial year
is no adequate measure, a cycle in which the time of highest development,
the time of organic life and still more that of the life of beings conscious
of nature and of themselves, is just as narrowly restricted as the space
in which life and self-consciousness come into operation; a cycle in which
every finite mode of existence of matter, whether it be sun or nebular
vapour, single animal or genus of animals, chemical combination or dissociation,
is equally transient, and wherein nothing is eternal but eternally changing,
eternally moving matter and the laws according to which it moves and changes.
But however often, and however relentlessly, this cycle is completed in
time and space, however many millions of suns and earths may arise and
pass away, however long it may last before the conditions for organic life
develop, however innumerable the organic beings that have to arise and
to pass away before animals with a brain capable of thought are developed
from their midst, and for a short span of time find conditions suitable
for life, only to be exterminated later without mercy, we have the certainty
that matter remains eternally the same in all its transformations, that
none of its attributes can ever be lost, and therefore, also, that with
the same iron necessity that it will exterminate on the earth its highest
creation, the thinking mind, it must somewhere else and at another time
again produce it.


Notes

1.
How tenaciously even in 1861 this view could be held by a man whose scientific
achievements had provided highly important material for abolishing it is
shown by the following classic words: 𔄙All the arraignments of our solar
system, so far as we are capable of comprehending them, aim st preservation
of what exists and at unchanging continuance. Just as since the most ancient
times no animal and no plant on the earth has become more perfect or in
any way different, just as we find in all organisms only stages alongside
of one another and not following one another, just as our own race has
always remained the same in corporeal respects – so even the greatest diversity
in the co-existing heavenly bodies does not justify us in assuming that
these forms are merely different stages of development; it is rather that
everything created is equally perfect in itself.” (Mädler, Popular Astronomy
Berlin, 1861, 5th edition, p. 316.)

2. The defect
of Lyell's view – at least in its first form – lay in conceiving the forces
at work on the earth as constant, both in quality and quantity. The cooling
of the earth does not exist for him; the earth does not develop in a definite
direction but merely changes in an inconsequent fortuitous manner.

3. "The multiplicity
of worlds in infinite space leads to the conception of a succession of
worlds in infinite time." J. W. Draper, History of the Intellectual
Development of Europe, 1864. Vol. 2, p. 325.

 


Contents |
next section |
Marx Engels Archive




==========

## The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man







The Part Played by Labor in the Transition From Ape to Man


Works of Frederick Engels 1876
The Part played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man



Written: in May-June 1876;
First published: in Die Neue Zeit 1895-06;
Translated: from the German by Clemens Dutt;
First published in English: by Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1934;
Transcribed: by director@marx.org, Jan 1996.


This article was intended to introduce a larger work
which Engels planned to call Die drei Grundformen der Knechtschaft –
Outline of the General Plan. Engels never finished it, nor even this
intro, which breaks off at the end. It would be included in Dialectics
of Nature.

I
Labour is the source of all wealth, the political
economists assert. And it really is the source – next to nature, which
supplies it with the material that it converts into wealth. But it is even
infinitely more than this. It is the prime basic condition for all human
existence, and this to such an extent that, in a sense, we have to say
that labour created man himself.
Many hundreds of thousands of years ago, during an epoch, not
yet definitely determinable, of that period of the earth’s history known
to geologists as the Tertiary period, most likely towards the end of it,
a particularly highly-developed race of anthropoid apes lived somewhere
in the tropical zone – probably on a great continent that has now sunk
to the bottom of the Indian Ocean. [1] Darwin has given
us an approximate description of these ancestors of ours. They were completely
covered with hair, they had beards and pointed ears, and they lived in
bands in the trees.

First, owing to their way of living which meant that the hands
had different functions than the feet when climbing, these apes began to
lose the habit of using their hands to walk and adopted a more and more
erect posture. This was the decisive step in the transition from ape
to man.
All extant anthropoid apes can stand erect and move about on their
feet alone, but only in case of urgent need and in a very clumsy way. Their
natural gait is in a half-erect posture and includes the use of the hands.
The majority rest the knuckles of the fist on the ground and, with legs
drawn up, swing the body through their long arms, much as a cripple moves
on crutches. In general, all the transition stages from walking on all
fours to walking on two legs are still to be observed among the apes today.
The latter gait, however, has never become more than a makeshift for any
of them.
It stands to reason that if erect gait among our hairy ancestors
became first the rule and then, in time, a necessity, other diverse functions
must, in the meantime, have devolved upon the hands. Already among the
apes there is some difference in the way the hands and the feet are employed.
In climbing, as mentioned above, the hands and feet have different uses.
The hands are used mainly for gathering and holding food in the same way
as the fore paws of the lower mammals are used. Many apes use their hands
to build themselves nests in the trees or even to construct roofs between
the branches to protect themselves against the weather, as the chimpanzee,
for example, does. With their hands they grasp sticks to defend themselves
against enemies, or bombard their enemies with fruits and stones. In captivity
they use their hands for a number of simple operations copied from human
beings. It is in this that one sees the great gulf between the undeveloped
hand of even the most man-like apes and the human hand that has been highly
perfected by hundreds of thousands of years of labour. The number and general
arrangement of the bones and muscles are the same in both hands, but the
hand of the lowest savage can perform hundreds of operations that no simian
hand can imitate – no simian hand has ever fashioned even the crudest stone
knife.
The first operations for which our ancestors gradually learned
to adapt their hands during the many thousands of years of transition from
ape to man could have been only very simple ones. The lowest savages, even
those in whom regression to a more animal-like condition with a simultaneous
physical degeneration can be assumed, are nevertheless far superior to
these transitional beings. Before the first flint could be fashioned into
a knife by human hands, a period of time probably elapsed in comparison
with which the historical period known to us appears insignificant. But
the decisive step had been taken, the hand had become free and could
henceforth attain ever greater dexterity; the greater flexibility thus
acquired was inherited and increased from generation to generation.
Thus the hand is not only the organ of labour, it is also the
product of labour. Only by labour, by adaptation to ever new operations,
through the inheritance of muscles, ligaments, and, over longer periods
of time, bones that had undergone special development and the ever-renewed
employment of this inherited finesse in new, more and more complicated
operations, have given the human hand the high degree of perfection required
to conjure into being the pictures of a Raphael, the statues of a Thorwaldsen,
the music of a Paganini.
But the hand did not exist alone, it was only one member of an
integral, highly complex organism. And what benefited the hand, benefited
also the whole body it served; and this in two ways.
In the first place, the body benefited from the law of correlation
of growth, as Darwin called it. This law states that the specialised forms
of separate parts of an organic being are always bound up with certain
forms of other parts that apparently have no connection with them. Thus
all animals that have red blood cells without cell nuclei, and in which
the head is attached to the first vertebra by means of a double articulation
(condyles), also without exception possess lacteal glands for suckling
their young. Similarly, cloven hoofs in mammals are regularly associated
with the possession of a multiple stomach for rumination. Changes in certain
forms involve changes in the form of other parts of the body, although
we cannot explain the connection. Perfectly white cats with blue eyes are
always, or almost always, deaf. The gradually increasing perfection of
the human hand, and the commensurate adaptation of the feet for erect gait,
have undoubtedly, by virtue of such correlation, reacted on other parts
of the organism. However, this action has not as yet been sufficiently
investigated for us to be able to do more here than to state the fact in
general terms.
Much more important is the direct, demonstrable influence of the
development of the hand on the rest of the organism. It has already been
noted that our simian ancestors were gregarious; it is obviously impossible
to seek the derivation of man, the most social of all animals, from non-gregarious
immediate ancestors. Mastery over nature began with the development of
the hand, with labour, and widened man’s horizon at every new advance.
He was continually discovering new, hitherto unknown properties in natural
objects. On the other hand, the development of labour necessarily helped
to bring the members of society closer together by increasing cases of
mutual support and joint activity, and by making clear the advantage of
this joint activity to each individual. In short, men in the making arrived
at the point where they had something to say to each other. Necessity
created the organ; the undeveloped larynx of the ape was slowly but surely
transformed by modulation to produce constantly more developed modulation,
and the organs of the mouth gradually learned to pronounce one articulate
sound after another.
Comparison with animals proves that this explanation of the origin
of language from and in the process of labour is the only correct one.
The little that even the most highly-developed animals need to communicate
to each other does not require articulate speech. In its natural state,
no animal feels handicapped by its inability to speak or to understand
human speech. It is quite different when it has been tamed by man. The
dog and the horse, by association with man, have developed such a good
ear for articulate speech that they easily learn to understand any language
within their range of concept. Moreover they have acquired the capacity
for feelings such as affection for man, gratitude, etc., which were previously
foreign to them. Anyone who has had much to do with such animals will hardly
be able to escape the conviction that in many cases they now feel their
inability to speak as a defect, although, unfortunately, it is one that
can no longer be remedied because their vocal organs are too specialised
in a definite direction. However, where vocal organs exist, within certain
limits even this inability disappears. The buccal organs of birds are as
different from those of man as they can be, yet birds are the only animals
that can learn to speak; and it is the bird with the most hideous voice,
the parrot, that speaks best of all. Let no one object that the parrot
does not understand what it says. It is true that for the sheer pleasure
of talking and associating with human beings, the parrot will chatter for
hours at a stretch, continually repeating its whole vocabulary. But within
the limits of its range of concepts it can also learn to understand what
it is saying. Teach a parrot swear words in such a way that it gets an
idea of their meaning (one of the great amusements of sailors returning
from the tropics); tease it and you will soon discover that it knows how
to use its swear words just as correctly as a Berlin costermonger. The
same is true of begging for titbits.
First labour, after it and then with it speech – these were the
two most essential stimuli under the influence of which the brain of the
ape gradually changed into that of man, which, for all its similarity is
far larger and more perfect. Hand in hand with the development of the brain
went the development of its most immediate instruments – the senses. Just
as the gradual development of speech is inevitably accompanied by a corresponding
refinement of the organ of hearing, so the development of the brain as
a whole is accompanied by a refinement of all the senses. The eagle sees
much farther than man, but the human eye discerns considerably more in
things than does the eye of the eagle. The dog has a far keener sense of
smell than man, but it does not distinguish a hundredth part of the odours
that for man are definite signs denoting different things. And the sense
of touch, which the ape hardly possesses in its crudest initial form, has
been developed only side by side with the development of the human hand
itself, through the medium of labour.
The reaction on labour and speech of the development of the brain
and its attendant senses, of the increasing clarity of consciousness, power
of abstraction and of conclusion, gave both labour and speech an ever-renewed
impulse to further development. This development did not reach its conclusion
when man finally became distinct from the ape, but on the whole made further
powerful progress, its degree and direction varying among different peoples
and at different times, and here and there even being interrupted by local
or temporary regression. This further development has been strongly urged
forward, on the one hand, and guided along more definite directions, on
the other, by a new element which came into play with the appearance of
fully-fledged man, namely, society.
Hundreds of thousands of years – of no greater significance in
the history of the earth than one second in the life of man [Engels note:
A leading authority in this respect, Sir William Thomson, has calculated
that little more than a hundred million years could have elapsed
since the time when the earth had cooled sufficiently for plants and animals
to be able to live on it.] – certainly elapsed before human society arose
out of a troupe of tree-climbing monkeys. Yet it did finally appear. And
what do we find once more as the characteristic difference between the
troupe of monkeys and human society? Labour. The ape herd was satisfied
to browse over the feeding area determined for it by geographical conditions
or the resistance of neighbouring herds; it undertook migrations and struggles
to win new feeding grounds, but it was incapable of extracting from them
more than they offered in their natural state, except that it unconsciously
fertilised the soil with its own excrement. As soon as all possible feeding
grounds were occupied, there could be no further increase in the ape population;
the number of animals could at best remain stationary. But all animals
waste a great deal of food, and, in addition, destroy in the germ the next
generation of the food supply. Unlike the hunter, the wolf does not spare
the doe which would provide it with the young the next year; the goats
in Greece, that eat away the young bushes before they grow to maturity,
have eaten bare all the mountains of the country. This “predatory economy”
of animals plays an important part in the gradual transformation of species
by forcing them to adapt themselves to other than the usual food, thanks
to which their blood acquires a different chemical composition and the
whole physical constitution gradually alters, while species that have remained
unadapted die out. There is no doubt that this predatory economy contributed
powerfully to the transition of our ancestors from ape to man. In a race
of apes that far surpassed all others in intelligence and adaptability,
this predatory economy must have led to a continual increase in the number
of plants used for food and the consumption of more and more edible parts
of food plants. In short, food became more and more varied, as did also
the substances entering the body with it, substances that were the chemical
premises for the transition to man.

But all that was not yet labour in
the proper sense of the word. Labour begins with the making of tools. And
what are the most ancient tools that we find – the most ancient judging
by the heirlooms of prehistoric man that have been discovered, and by the
mode of life of the earliest historical peoples and of the rawest of contemporary
savages? They are hunting and fishing implements, the former at the same
time serving as weapons. But hunting and fishing presuppose the transition
from an exclusively vegetable diet to the concomitant use of meat, and
this is another important step in the process of transition from ape to
man. A meat diet contained in an almost ready state the most essential
ingredients required by the organism for its metabolism. By shortening
the time required for digestion, it also shortened the other vegetative
bodily processes that correspond to those of plant life, and thus gained
further time, material and desire for the active manifestation of animal
life proper. And the farther man in the making moved from the vegetable
kingdom the higher he rose above the animal. Just as becoming accustomed
to a vegetable diet side by side with meat converted wild cats and dogs
into the servants of man, so also adaptation to a meat diet, side by side
with a vegetable diet, greatly contributed towards giving bodily strength
and independence to man in the making. The meat diet, however, had its
greatest effect on the brain, which now received a far richer flow of the
materials necessary for its nourishment and development, and which, therefore,
could develop more rapidly and perfectly from generation to generation.
With all due respect to the vegetarians man did not come into existence
without a meat diet, and if the latter, among all peoples known to us,
has led to cannibalism at some time or other (the forefathers of the Berliners,
the Weletabians or Wilzians, used to eat their parents as late as the tenth
century), that is of no consequence to us today.
The meat diet led to two new advances of decisive importance – the
harnessing of fire and the domestication of animals. The first still further
shortened the digestive process, as it provided the mouth with food already,
as it were, half-digested; the second made meat more copious by opening
up a new, more regular source of supply in addition to hunting, and moreover
provided, in milk and its products, a new article of food at least as valuable
as meat in its composition. Thus both these advances were, in themselves,
new means for the emancipation of man. It would lead us too far afield
to dwell here in detail on their indirect effects notwithstanding the great
importance they have had for the development of man and society.
Just as man learned to consume everything edible, he also learned
to live in any climate. He spread over the whole of the habitable world,
being the only animal fully able to do so of its own accord. The other
animals that have become accustomed to all climates – domestic animals
and vermin – did not become so independently, but only in the wake of
man. And the transition from the uniformly hot climate of the original
home of man to colder regions, where the year was divided into summer and
winter, created new requirements – shelter and clothing as protection
against cold and damp, and hence new spheres of labour, new forms of activity,
which further and further separated man from the animal.
By the combined functioning of hand, speech organs and brain,
not only in each individual but also in society, men became capable of
executing more and more complicated operations, and were able to set themselves,
and achieve, higher and higher aims. The work of each generation itself
became different, more perfect and more diversified. Agriculture was added
to hunting and cattle raising; then came spinning, weaving, metalworking,
pottery and navigation. Along with trade and industry, art and science
finally appeared. Tribes developed into nations and states. Law and politics
arose, and with them that fantastic reflection of human things in the human
mind – religion. In the face of all these images, which appeared in the
first place to be products of the mind and seemed to dominate human societies,
the more modest productions of the working hand retreated into the background,
the more so since the mind that planned the labour was able, at a very
early stage in the development of society (for example, already in the
primitive family), to have the labour that had been planned carried out
by other hands than its own. All merit for the swift advance of civilisation
was ascribed to the mind, to the development and activity of the brain.
Men became accustomed to explain their actions as arising out of thought
instead of their needs (which in any case are reflected and perceived in
the mind); and so in the course of time there emerged that idealistic world
outlook which, especially since the fall of the world of antiquity, has
dominated men’s minds. It still rules them to such a degree that even the
most materialistic natural scientists of the Darwinian school are still
unable to form any clear idea of the origin of man, because under this
ideological influence they do not recognise the part that has been played
therein by labour.
Animals, as has already been pointed out, change the environment
by their activities in the same way, even if not to the same extent, as
man does, and these changes, as we have seen, in turn react upon and change
those who made them. In nature nothing takes place in isolation. Everything
affects and is affected by every other thing, and it is mostly because
this manifold motion and interaction is forgotten that our natural scientists
are prevented from gaining a clear insight into the simplest things. We
have seen how goats have prevented the regeneration of forests in Greece;
on the island of St. Helena, goats and pigs brought by the first arrivals
have succeeded in exterminating its old vegetation almost completely, and
so have prepared the ground for the spreading of plants brought by later
sailors and colonists. But animals exert a lasting effect on their environment
unintentionally and, as far as the animals themselves are concerned, accidentally.
The further removed men are from animals, however, the more their effect
on nature assumes the character of premeditated, planned action directed
towards definite preconceived ends. The animal destroys the vegetation
of a locality without realising what it is doing. Man destroys it in order
to sow field crops on the soil thus released, or to plant trees or vines
which he knows will yield many times the amount planted. He transfers useful
plants and domestic animals from one country to another and thus changes
the flora and fauna of whole continents. More than this. Through artificial
breeding both plants and animals are so changed by the hand of man that
they become unrecognisable. The wild plants from which our grain varieties
originated are still being sought in vain. There is still some dispute
about the wild animals from which our very different breeds of dogs or
our equally numerous breeds of horses are descended.
It goes without saying that it would not occur to us to dispute
the ability of animals to act in a planned, premeditated fashion. On the
contrary, a planned mode of action exists in embryo wherever protoplasm,
living albumen, exists and reacts, that is, carries out definite, even
if extremely simple, movements as a result of definite external stimuli.
Such reaction takes place even where there is yet no cell at all, far less
a nerve cell. There is something of the planned action in the way insect-eating
plants capture their prey, although they do it quite unconsciously. In
animals the capacity for conscious, planned action is proportional to the
development of the nervous system, and among mammals it attains a fairly
high level. While fox-hunting in England one can daily observe how unerringly
the fox makes use of its excellent knowledge of the locality in order to
elude its pursuers, and how well it knows and turns to account all favourable
features of the ground that cause the scent to be lost. Among our domestic
animals, more highly developed thanks to association with man, one can
constantly observe acts of cunning on exactly the same level as those of
children. For, just as the development history of the human embryo in the
mother’s womb is only an abbreviated repetition of the history, extending
over millions of years, of the bodily development of our animal ancestors,
starting from the worm, so the mental development of the human child is
only a still more abbreviated repetition of the intellectual development
of these same ancestors, at least of the later ones. But all the planned
action of all animals has never succeeded in impressing the stamp of their
will upon the earth. That was left for man.
In short, the animal merely uses its environment, and brings
about changes in it simply by its presence; man by his changes makes it
serve his ends, masters it. This is the final, essential distinction
between man and other animals, and once again it is labour that brings
about this distinction. 
Let us not, however, flatter ourselves overmuch on account of
our human victories over nature. For each such victory nature takes its
revenge on us. Each victory, it is true, in the first place brings about
the results we expected, but in the second and third places it has quite
different, unforeseen effects which only too often cancel the first. The
people who, in Mesopotamia, Greece, Asia Minor and elsewhere, destroyed
the forests to obtain cultivable land, never dreamed that by removing along
with the forests the collecting centres and reservoirs of moisture they
were laying the basis for the present forlorn state of those countries.
When the Italians of the Alps used up the pine forests on the southern
slopes, so carefully cherished on the northern slopes, they had no inkling
that by doing so they were cutting at the roots of the dairy industry in
their region; they had still less inkling that they were thereby depriving
their mountain springs of water for the greater part of the year, and making
it possible for them to pour still more furious torrents on the plains
during the rainy seasons. Those who spread the potato in Europe were not
aware that with these farinaceous tubers they were at the same time spreading
scrofula. Thus at every step we are reminded that we by no means rule over
nature like a conqueror over a foreign people, like someone standing outside
nature – but that we, with flesh, blood and brain, belong to nature, and
exist in its midst, and that all our mastery of it consists in the fact
that we have the advantage over all other creatures of being able to learn
its laws and apply them correctly.
And, in fact, with every day that passes we are acquiring a better
understanding of these laws and getting to perceive both the more immediate
and the more remote consequences of our interference with the traditional
course of nature. In particular, after the mighty advances made by the
natural sciences in the present century, we are more than ever in a position
to realise, and hence to control, also the more remote natural consequences
of at least our day-to-day production activities. But the more this progresses
the more will men not only feel but also know their oneness with nature,
and the more impossible will become the senseless and unnatural idea of
a contrast between mind and matter, man and nature, soul and body, such
as arose after the decline of classical antiquity in Europe and obtained
its highest elaboration in Christianity.
It required the labour of thousands of years for us to learn a
little of how to calculate the more remote natural effects of our actions
in the field of production, but it has been still more difficult in regard
to the more remote social effects of these actions. We mentioned the potato
and the resulting spread of scrofula. But what is scrofula compared to
the effects which the reduction of the workers to a potato diet had on
the living conditions of the popular masses in whole countries, or compared
to the famine the potato blight brought to Ireland in 1847, which consigned
to the grave a million Irishmen, nourished solely or almost exclusively
on potatoes, and forced the emigration overseas of two million more? When
the Arabs learned to distil spirits, it never entered their heads that
by so doing they were creating one of the chief weapons for the annihilation
of the aborigines of the then still undiscovered American continent. And
when afterwards Columbus discovered this America, he did not know that
by doing so he was giving a new lease of life to slavery, which in Europe
had long ago been done away with, and laying the basis for the Negro slave
trade. The men who in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries laboured
to create the steam-engine had no idea that they were preparing the instrument
which more than any other was to revolutionise social relations throughout
the world. Especially in Europe, by concentrating wealth in the hands of
a minority and dispossessing the huge majority, this instrument was destined
at first to give social and political domination to the bourgeoisie, but
later, to give rise to a class struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat
which can end only in the overthrow of the bourgeoisie and the abolition
of all class antagonisms. But in this sphere too, by long and often cruel
experience and by collecting and analysing historical material, we are
gradually learning to get a clear view of the indirect, more remote social
effects of our production activity, and so are afforded an opportunity
to control and regulate these effects as well.
This regulation, however, requires something more than mere knowledge.
It requires a complete revolution in our hitherto existing mode of production,
and simultaneously a revolution in our whole contemporary social order.
All hitherto existing modes of production have aimed merely at
achieving the most immediately and directly useful effect of labour. The
further consequences, which appear only later and become effective through
gradual repetition and accumulation, were totally neglected. The original
common ownership of land corresponded, on the one hand, to a level of development
of human beings in which their horizon was restricted in general to what
lay immediately available, and presupposed, on the other hand, a certain
superfluity of land that would allow some latitude for correcting the possible
bad results of this primeval type of economy. When this surplus land was
exhausted, common ownership also declined. All higher forms of production,
however, led to the division of the population into different classes and
thereby to the antagonism of ruling and oppressed classes. Thus the interests
of the ruling class became the driving factor of production, since production
was no longer restricted to providing the barest means of subsistence for
the oppressed people. This has been put into effect most completely in
the capitalist mode of production prevailing today in Western Europe. The
individual capitalists, who dominate production and exchange, are able
to concern themselves only with the most immediate useful effect of their
actions. Indeed, even this useful effect – inasmuch as it is a question
of the usefulness of the article that is produced or exchanged – retreats
far into the background, and the sole incentive becomes the profit to be
made on selling.
Classical political economy, the social science of the bourgeoisie,
in the main examines only social effects of human actions in the fields
of production and exchange that are actually intended. This fully corresponds
to the social organisation of which it is the theoretical expression. As
individual capitalists are engaged in production and exchange for the sake
of the immediate profit, only the nearest, most immediate results must
first be taken into account. As long as the individual manufacturer or
merchant sells a manufactured or purchased commodity with the usual coveted
profit, he is satisfied and does not concern himself with what afterwards
becomes of the commodity and its purchasers. The same thing applies to
the natural effects of the same actions. What cared the Spanish planters
in Cuba, who burned down forests on the slopes of the mountains and obtained
from the ashes sufficient fertiliser for one generation of very highly
profitable coffee trees – what cared they that the heavy tropical rainfall
afterwards washed away the unprotected upper stratum of the soil, leaving
behind only bare rock! In relation to nature, as to society, the present
mode of production is predominantly concerned only about the immediate,
the most tangible result; and then surprise is expressed that the more
remote effects of actions directed to this end turn out to be quite different,
are mostly quite the opposite in character; that the harmony of supply
and demand is transformed into the very reverse opposite, as shown by the
course of each ten years’ industrial cycle – even Germany has had a little
preliminary experience of it in the “crash”; that private ownership based
on one’s own labour must of necessity develop into the expropriation of
the workers, while all wealth becomes more and more concentrated in the
hands of non-workers; that [... the manuscript breaks off here.]

Notes
1. In the 1870s, when this was written, British
zoogeographer Philip Lutley Sclater put forth the theory that a continent
(he called "Lemuria") existed which reached from modern Madagascar to India
and Sumatra – and this continent has since submerged beneath the Indian
Ocean.
 


Dialectics of Nature |
Origin of the Family |
Marx and Engels on Natural Science
Marxism and Natural Science |
Marx Engels Archive




==========

## Karl Marx





Karl Marx by Frederick Engels 1877








Works of Frederick Engels 1877
Karl Marx


Written: mid-June 1877;
First published: in Volks-Kalender, Brunswick, 1878;
Source: On Marx;
Publisher: Foreign Languages Press, Peking (1975).


Karl Marx, the man who was first to give socialism, and thereby the whole labour movement of our day, a scientific foundation, was born at Trier in 1818. He studied in Bonn and Berlin, at first taking up law, but he soon devoted himsslf exclusively to the study of history and philosophy, and in 1842 was on the point of establishing himself as an assistant professor in philosophy when the political movement which had arisen since the death of Frederick William III directed his life into a different channel. With his collaboration, the leaders of the Rhenish liberal bourgeoisie, the Camphausens, Hansemanns, etc., had founded the Rheinische Zeitung  in Cologne, and in the autumn of 1842, Marx, whose criticism of the proceedings of the Rhenish Landtag (or Provincial Diet) had excited very great attention, was put at the head of the paper. The Rheinische Zeitung naturally appeared under censorship, but the censorship could not cope with it. [The first censor of the Rheinische Zeitung was Police Councillor Dolleschall, the same man who once struck out an advertisement in the Kölnische Zeittung of the translation of Dante's Divine Comedy by Philalethes (later King John of Saxony) with the remark: “One must not make a comedy of divine affairs.” [Note by Engels] The Rheinische Zeitung almost always got the articles which mattered through; the censor was first supplied with insignificant fodder for him to strike out, until he either gave way of himself or was compelled to give way by the threat that then the paper would not appear the next day. Ten newspapers with the same courage as the Rheinische Zeitung and whose publishers would have allowed a few hundred thalers extra to be expended on type setting — and the censorship would have been made impossible in Germany as early as 1843. But the German newspaper-owners were petty-minded, timid philistines and the Rheinische Zeitung carried on the struggle alone. It wore out one censor after another; finally it came under a double censorship; after the first censorship the Regierungspräsident  had once more, and finally, to censor it. That also was of no avail. In the beginning of 1843, the government declared that it was impossible to keep this newspaper in check and suppressed it without more ado.

Marx, who in the meanwhile had married the sister of von Westphalen, later a reactionary minister, removed to Paris, and there, in conjunction with A. Ruge, published the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, in which he opened the series of his socialist writings with a Criticism of the Hegelian Philosophy of Right ; and then, together with F. Engels, The Holy Family. Against Bruno Bauer and Co., a satirical criticism of one of the latest forms blunderingly assumed by the German philosophical idealism of that time. 

The study of political economy and of the history of the Great French Revolution still allowed Marx time enough for occasional attacks on the Prussian Government; the latter revenged itself in the spring of 1845 by securing from the Guizot ministry — Herr Alexander von Humboldt is said to have acted as intermediary — his expulsion from France. Marx shifted his domicile to Brussels and published there in French in 1847 The Poverty of Philosophy, a criticism of Proudhon's Philosophy of Poverty, and, in 1848, Discourse on Free Trade. At the same time he made use of the opportunity to found a German workers’ society in Brussels and so commenced practical agitation. The latter became still more important for him when he and his political friends in 1847 joined the secret Communist League, which had already been in existence for a number of years. Its whole structure was now radically changed; this association, which previously was more or less conspiratorial, was transformed into a simple organization for communist propaganda, which was only secret because necessity compelled it to be so, the first organization of the German Social-Democratic Party. The League existed wherever German workers’ societies were to be found; in almost all of these societies in England, Belgium, France and Switzerland, and in very many of the societies in Germany, the leading members belonged to the League and the share of the League in the incipient German labour movement was very considerable. Moreover, our League was the first which emphasized the international character of the whole labour movement and realized it in practice, which had Englishmen, Belgians, Hungarians, Poles, etc., as members and which organized international labour meetings, especially in London. 

The transformation of the League took place at two congresses held in 1847, the second of which resolved on the elaboration and publication of the fundamental principles of the Party in a manifesto to be drawn up by Marx and Engels. Thus arose the Manifesto of the Communist Party, which first appeared in 1848, shortly before the February Revolution, and has since been translated into almost all European languages. 

The Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung, in which Marx participated and which mercilessly exposed the blessings of the police regime of the Fatherland, caused the Prussian Government to try to effect Marx's expulsion once more, but in vain. When, however, the February Revolution resulted in popular movements in Brussels, too, and a radical change appeared to be imminent in Belgium, the Belgian Government arrested Marx without ceremony and deported him. In the meanwhile, the French Provisional Government had sent him an invitation through Flocon to return to Paris, and he accepted this call. 

In Paris he came out especially against the swindle, widespread among the Germans there, of wanting to form the German workers in France into armed legions in order to carry the revolution and the republic into Germany. On the one hand, Germany had to make her revolution herself, and, on the other hand, every revolutionary foreign legion formed in France was betrayed in advance by the Lamartines of the Provisional Government to the government which was to be overthrown, as occurred in Belgium and Baden.

After the March Revolution, Marx went to Cologne and founded there the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, which was in existence from June 1, 1848 to May 19, 1849 — the only paper which represented the standpoint of the proletariat within the democratic movement of the time, as shown in its unreserved championship of the Paris June insurgents of 1848, which cost the paper the defection of almost all its shareholders. In vain the Kreuz-Zeitung  pointed to the “Chimborazo impudence” with which the Neue Rheinische Zeitung attacked everything sacred, from the king and vice-regent of the realm down to the gendarme, and that, too, in a Prussian fortress with a garrison of 8,000 at the time. In vain was the rage of the Rhenish liberal philistines, who had suddenly become reactionary. In vain was the paper suspended by martial law in Cologne for a lengthy period in the autumn of 1848. In vain the Reich Ministry of Justice in Frankfort denounced article after article to the Cologne Public Prosecutor in order that judicial proceedings should be taken. Under the very eyes of the police the paper calmly went on being edited and printed, and its distribution and reputation increased with the vehemence of its attacks on the government and the bourgeoisie. When the Prussian coup d'etat took place in November 1848, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung called upon the people, at the head of each issue, to refuse to pay taxes and to meet violence with violence. In the spring of 1849, both on this account and because of another article, it was made to face a jury, but on both occasions was acquitted. Finally, when the May risings of 1849 in Dresden and the Rhine Province had been suppressed, and the Prussian campaign against the Baden-Palatinate rising had been inaugurated by the concentration and mobilization of considerable masses of troops, the government believed itself strong enough to suppress the Neue Rheinische Zeitung by force. The last number — printed in red ink — appeared on May 19.

An attempt to continue issuing the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in the form of a review (in Hamburg, 1850) had to be given up after a while in view of the ever-increasing violence of the reaction. Immediately after the coup d'etat in France in December 1851, Marx published The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (New York, 1852; second edition, Hamburg, 1869, shortly before the war). In 1853 he wrote Revelations About the Cologne Communist Trial (first printed in Basle, later in Boston, and again recently in Leipzig). 

After the conviction of the members of the Communist League in Cologne, Marx withdrew from political agitation and for ten years devoted himself, on the one hand, to the study of the rich treasures offered by the library of the British Museum in the sphere of political economy, and, on the other hand, to writing for the New York Tribune, which up to the outbreak of the American Civil War published not only contributions signed by him but also numerous leading articles from his pen on conditions in Europe and Asia. His attacks on Lord Palmerston, based on an exhaustive study of British official documents, were reprinted in London in pamphlet form. 

As the first fruit of his many years of study of economics, there appeared in 1859 A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Part I (Berlin, Duncker). This work contains the first coherent exposition of the Marxian theory of value, including the doctrine of money. During the Italian War Marx, in the German newspaper Das Volk, appearing in London, attacked Bonapartism, which at that time posed as liberal and playing the part of liberator of the oppressed nationalities, and also the Prussian policy of the day, which under the cover of neutrality was seeking to fish in troubled waters. In this connection it was necessary to attack also Herr Karl Vogt, who at that time, on the commission of Prince Napoleon (Plon Plon) and in the pay of Louis Napoleon, was carrying on agitation for the neutrality, and indeed the sympathy, of Germany. When Vogt heaped upon him the most abominable and deliberately false calumnies, Marx answered with Herr Vogt (London, 1860), in which Vogt and the other gentlemen of the imperialist sham-democratic gang were exposed, and Vogt himself on the basis of both external and internal evidence was proved guilty of taking bribes from the December empire. The confirmation came just ten years later: in the list of the Bonaparte hirelings, found in the Tuileries in 1870 and published by the September government, there was the following entry under the letter V: “Vogt — in August 1859 there were remitted to him — Frs. 40,000."

Finally, in 1861 there appeared in Hamburg Capital, a Critical Analysis of Capitalist Production, Volume I, Marx's chief work, which expounds the foundations of his economlc socialist conceptions and the main features of his criticism of existing society, the capitalist mode of production and its consequences. The second edition of this epoch-making work appeared in 1872; the author is engaged in the elaboration of the second volume. 

Meanwhile the labour movement in various countries of Europe had so far regained strength that Marx could entertain the idea of realizing a long-cherished wish: the foundation of a Workers’ Association embracing the most advanced countries of Europe and America, which would demonstrate bodily, so to speak, the international character of the socialist movement both to the workers themselves and to the bourgeois and the governments — for the encouragement and strengthening of the proletariat, for striking fear into the hearts of its enemies. A mass meeting in favour of Poland, which had just then again been crushed by Russia, held on September 28, 1864 in St. Martin's Hall in London, provided the occasion for bringing forward the matter, which was enthusiastically taken up. The International Working Men's Association  was founded; a Provisional General Council, with its seat in London, was elected at the meeting, and Marx was the soul of this as of all subsequent General Councils up to the Hague Congress. He drafted almost every one of the documents issued by the General Council of the International, from the Inaugural Address, 1864, to the Address on the Civil War in France, 1871. To describe Marx's activity in the International is to write the history of this Association, which in any case still lives in the memory of the European workers. 

The fall of the Paris Commune put the International in an impossible position. It was thrust into the forefront of European history at a moment when it had everywhere been deprived of all possibility of successful practical action. The events which raised it to the position of the seventh Great Power simultaneously forbade it to mobilize its fighting forces and employ them in action, on pain of inevitable defeat and the setting back of the labour movement for decades. In addition, from various sides elements were pushing themselves forward that sought to exploit the suddenly enhanced fame of the Association for the purpose of gratifying personal vanity or personal ambition, without understanding the real position of the International or without regard for it. A heroic decision had to be taken, and it was again Marx who took it and who carried it through at the Hague Congress. In a solemn resolution, the International disclaimed all responsibility for the doings of the Bakuninists, who formed the centre of those unreasonable and unsavoury elements. Then, in view of the impossibility of meeting, in the face of the general reaction, the increased demands which were being imposed upon it, and of maintaining its complete efficacy other than by a series of sacrifices which would have drained the labour movement of its life-blood — in view of this situation, the International withdrew from the stage for the time being by transferring the General Council to America. The results have proved how correct was this decision — which was at the time, and has been since, so often censured. On the one hand, it put a stop then and since to all attempts to make useless putsches in the name of the International, while, on the other hand, the continuing close intercourse between the socialist workers’ parties of the various countries proved that the consciousness of the identity of interests and of the solidarity of the proletariat of all countries evoked by the International is able to assert itself even without the bond of a formal international association, which for the moment had become a fetter. 

After the Hague Congress, Marx at last found peace and leisure again for resuming his theoretical work, and it is to be hoped he will be able before long to have the second volume of Capital ready for the press. 

Of the many important discoveries through which Marx has inscribed his name in the annals of science, we can here dwell on only two.

The first is the revolution brought about by him in the whole conception of world history. The whole previous view of history was based on the conception that the ultimate causes of all historical changes are to be looked for in the changing ideas of human beings, and that of all historical changes political changes are the most important and dominate the whole of history. But the question was not asked as to whence the ideas come into men's minds and what the driving causes of the political changes are. Only upon the newer school of French, and partly also of English, historians had the conviction forced itself that, since the Middle Ages at least, the driving force in European history was the struggle of the developing bourgeoisie with the feudal aristocracy for social and political domination. Now Marx has proved that the whole of previous history is a history of class struggles, that in all the manifold and complicated political struggles the only thing at issue has been the social and political rule of social classes, the maintenance of domination by older classes and the conquest of domination by newly arising classes. To what, however, do these classes owe their origin and their continued existence? They owe it to the particular material, physically sensible conditions in which society at a given period produces and exchanges its means of subsistence. The feudal rule of the Middle Ages rested on the self-sufficient economy of small peasant communities, which themselves produced almost all their requirements, in which there was almost no exchange and to which the arms-bearing nobility lent protection from without and national or at least political cohesion. When the towns arose and with them a separate handicraft industry and commercial intercourse, at first internal and later international, the urban bourgeoisie developed, and already during the Middle Ages achieved, in struggle with the nobility, its inclusion in the feudal order as likewise a privileged estate. But with the discovery of the extra-European world, from the middle of the fifteenth century onwards, this bourgeoisie acquired a far more extensive sphere of trade and therewith a new spur for its industry; in the most important branches handicrafts were supplanted by manufacture, now on a factory scale, and this again was supplanted by large-scale industry, which had become possible owing to the discoveries of the previous century, especially that of the steam-engine. Large-scale industry, in its turn, reacted on trade by driving out the old manual labour in backward countries, and creating the present-day new means of communication: steam-engines, railways, electric telegraphy, in the more developed ones. Thus the bourgeoisie came more and more to combine social wealth and social power in its hands, while it still for a long period remained excluded from political power, which was in the hands of the nobility and the monarchy supported by the nobility. But at a certain stage — in France since the Great Revolution — it also conquered political power, and now in turn became the ruling class over the proletariat and small peasants. From this point of view all historical phenomena are explicable in the simplest possible way — with sufficient knowledge of the particular economic condition of society, which it is true is totally lacking in our professional historians, and in the same way the conceptions and ideas of each historical period are most simply to be explained from the economic conditions of life and from the social and political relations of the period, which are in turn determined by these economic conditions. History was for the first time placed on its real basis; the palpable but previously totally overlooked fact that men must first of all eat, drink, have shelter and clothing, and therefore must work, before they can fight for domination, pursue politics, religion, philosophy and so on — this palpable fact at last came into its historical rights. 

This new conception of history, however, was of supreme significance for the socialist outlook. It showed that all previous history had moved in class antagonisms and class struggles, that there have always existed ruling and ruled, exploiting and exploited classes, and that the great majority of mankind has always been condemned to arduous labour and little enjoyment. Why is this? Simply because in all earlier stages of development of mankind production was so little developed that the historical development could proceed only in this antagonistic form, that historical progress as a whole was assigned to the activity of a small privileged minority, while the great mass remained condemned to producing by their labour their own meagre means of subsistence and also the increasingly rich means of the privileged. But the same investigation of history, which in this way provides a natural and reasonable explanation of the previous class rule, otherwise only explicable by the wickedness of man, also leads to the realization that, in consequence of the tremendously increased productive forces of the present time, even the last pretext has vanished for a division of mankind into ruIers and ruled, exploiters and exploited, at least in the most advanced countries; that the ruling big bourgeoisie has fulfilled its historic mission, that it is no longer capable of the leadership of society and has even become a hindrance to the development of production, as the trade crises, and especially the last great collapse, and the depressed condition of industry in all countries have proved; that historical leadership has passed to the proletariat, a class which, owing to its whole position in society, can only free itself by abolishing altogether all class rule, all servitude and all exploitation; and that the social productive forces, which have outgrown the control of the bourgeoisie, are only waiting for the associated proletariat to take possession of them in order to bring about a state of things in which every member of society will be enabled to participate not only in production but also in the distribution and administration of social wealth, and which so increases the social productive forces and their yield by planned operation of the whole of production that the satisfaction of all reasonable needs will be assured to everyone in an ever-increasing measure. 

The second important discovery of Marx is the final elucidation of the relation between capital and labour, in other words, the demonstration how, within present society and under the existing capitalist mode of production, the exploitation of the worker by the capitalist takes place. Ever since political economy put forward the proposition that labour is the source of all wealth and of all value, the question has become inevitable: How is this, then, to be reconciled with the fact that the wage-worker does not receive the whole sum of value created by his labour but has to surrender a part of it to the capitalist? Both the bourgeois economists and the socialists exerted themselves to give a scientifically valid answer to this question, but in vain, until at last Marx came forward with the solution. This solution is as follows: The present day capitalist mode of production presupposes the existence of two social classes — on the one hand, that of the capitalists, who are in possession of the means of production and subsistence, and, on the other hand, that of the proletarians, who, being excluded from this possession, have only a single commodity for sale, their labour power, and who therefore have to sell this labour power of theirs in order to obtain possession of means of subsistence. The value of a commodity is, however, determined by the socially necessary quantity of labour embodied in its production, and, therefore, also in its reproduction; the value of the labour power of an average human being during a day, month or year is determined, therefore, by the quantity of labour embodied in the quantity of means of subsistence necessary for the maintenance of this labour power during a day, month or year. Let us assume that the means of subsistence of a worker for one day require six hours of labour for their production, or, what is the same thing, that the labour contained in them represents a quantity of labour of six hours; then the value of labour power for one day will be expressed in a sum of money which also embodies six hours of labour. Let us assume further that the capitalist who employs our worker pays him this sum in return, pays him, therefore, the full value of his labour power. If now the worker works six hours of the day for the capitalist, he has completely replaced the latter's outlay — six hours’ labour for six hours’ labour. But then there would be nothing in it for the capitalist, and the latter therefore looks at the matter quite differently. He says: I have bought the labour power of this worker not for six hours but for a whole day, and accordingly he makes the worker work 8, 10, 12, 14 or more hours, according to circumstances, so that the product of the seventh, eighth and following hours is a product of unpaid labour and wanders, to begin with, into the pocket of the capitalist. Thus the worker in the service of the capitalist not only reproduces the value of his labour power, for which he receives pay, but over and above that he also produces a surplus value which, appropriated in the first place by the capitalist, is in its further course divided according to definite economic laws among the whole capitalist class and forms the basic stock from which arise ground rent, profit, accumulation of capital, in short, all the wealth consumed or accumulated by the non-labouring classes. This, however, proved that the acquisition of riches by the present-day capitalists consists just as much in the appropriation of the unpaid labour of others as that of the slave-owner or the feudal lord exploiting serf labour, and that all these forms of exploitation are only to be distinguished by the difference in manner and method by which the unpaid labour is appropriated. This, however, also removed the last justification for all the hypocritical phrases of the possessing classes to the effect that in the present social order right and justice, equality of rights and duties and a general harmony of interests prevail, and exposed present-day bourgeois society, no less than its predecessors, as a grandiose institution for the exploitation of the huge majority of the people by a small, ever-diminishing minority. 

Modern, scientific socialism is based on these two important facts. In the second volume of Capital these and other hardly less important scientific discoveries concerning the capitalist system of society will be further developed, and thereby those aspects of political economy not touched upon in the first volume will also undergo revolutionization. May it be vouchsafed to Marx to be able soon to have it ready for the press.
 


Biographies |
1877 Works |
Marx Engels Internet Archive



==========

## Special Introduction to the English Edition of 1892







Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (Introduction - History)




Frederick Engels

Socialism: Utopian and Scientific



1892 English Edition Introduction
[History (the role of Religion) in the English middle-class]


 


When Europe emerged from the Middle Ages, the rising
middle-class of the towns constituted its revolutionary element. It had
conquered a recognized position within mediaeval feudal organization, but
this position, also, had become too narrow for its expansive power. The
development of the middle-class, the bourgeoisie, became incompatible
with the maintenance of the feudal system; the feudal system, therefore,
had to fall.



But the great international centre of feudalism was the Roman
Catholic Church. It united the whole of feudalized Western Europe, in spite
of all internal wars, into one grand political system, opposed as much
to the schismatic Greeks as to the Mohammedan countries. It had organized
its own hierarchy on the feudal model, and, lastly, it was itself by far
the most powerful feudal lord, holding, as it did, fully 1/3rd of the soil
of the Catholic world. Before profane feudalism could be successfully attacked
in each country and in detail, this, its sacred central organization, had
to be destroyed.



Moreover, parallel with the rise of the middle-class went on the
great revival of science; astronomy, mechanics, physics, anatomy, physiology
were again cultivated. And the bourgeoisie, for the development of its
industrial production, required a science which ascertained the physical
properties of natural objects and the modes of action of the forces of
Nature. Now up to then science had but been the humble handmaid of the
Church, had not been allowed to overlap the limits set by faith, and for
that reason had been no science at all. Science rebelled against the Church;
the bourgeoisie could not do without science, and, therefore, had to join
in the rebellion.



The above, though touching but two of the points where the rising
middle-class was bound to come into collision with the established religion,
will be sufficient to show, first, that the class most directly interested
in the struggle against the pretensions of the Roman Church was the bourgeoisie;
and second, that every struggle against feudalism, at that time, had to
take on a religious disguise, had to be directed against the Church in
the first instance. But if the universities and the traders of the cities
started the cry, it was sure to find, and did find, a strong echo in the
masses of the country people, the peasants, who everywhere had to struggle
for their very existence with their feudal lords, spiritual and temporal.



The long fight of the bourgeoisie against feudalism culminated
in three great, decisive battles.



The first was what is called the Protestant Reformation in Germany.
The war cry raised against the Church, by Luther, was responded to by two
insurrections of a political nature; first, that of the lower nobility
under Franz von Sickingen (1523), then the great Peasants' War, 1525. Both
were defeated, chiefly in consequence of the indecision of the parties
most interested, the burghers of the towns – an indecision into the causes
of which we cannot here enter. From that moment, the struggle degenerated
into a fight between the local princes and the central power, and ended
by blotting out Germany, for 200 years, from the politically active nations
of Europe. The Lutheran Reformation produced a new creed indeed, a religion
adapted to absolute monarchy. No sooner were the peasant of North-east
Germany converted to Lutheranism than they were from freemen reduced to
serfs.



But where Luther failed, Calvin won the day. Calvin's creed was
one fit for the boldest of the bourgeoisie of his time. His predestination
doctrine was the religious expression of the fact that in the commercial
world of competition success or failure does not depend upon a man's activity
or cleverness, but upon circumstances uncontrollable by him. It is not
of him that willeth or of him that runneth, but of the mercy of unknown
superior economic powers; and this was especially true at a period of economic
revolution, when all old commercial routes and centres were replaced by
new ones, when India and America were opened to the world, and when even
the most sacred economic articles of faith – the value of gold and silver
– began to totter and to break down. Calvin's church constitution of God
was republicanized, could the kingdoms of this world remains subject to
monarchs, bishops, and lords? While German Lutheranism became a willing
tool in the hands of princes, Calvinism founded a republic in Holland,
and active republican parties in England, and, above all, Scotland.



In Calvinism, the second great bourgeois upheaval found its doctrine
ready cut and dried. This upheaval took place in England. The middle-class
of the towns brought it on, and the yeomanry of the country districts fought
it out. Curiously enough, in all the three great bourgeois risings, the
peasantry furnishes the army that has to do the fighting; and the peasantry
is just the class that, the victory once gained, is most surely ruined
by the economic consequences of that victory. A hundred years after Cromwell,
the yeomanry of england had almost disappeared. Anyhow, had it not been
for that yeomanry and for the plebian element in the towns, the
bourgeoisie alone would never have fought the matter out to the bitter
end, and would never have brought Charles I to the scaffold. In order to
secure even those conquests of the bourgeoisie that were ripe for gathering
at the time, the revolution had to be carried considerably further – exactly
as in 1793 in France and 1848 in Germany. This seems, in fact, to be one
of the laws of evolution of bourgeois society.



Well, upon this excess of revolutionary activity there necessarily
followed the inevitable reaction which, in its turn, went beyond the point
where it might have maintained itself. After a series of oscillations,
the new centre of gravity was at last attained and became a new starting-point.
The grand period of English history, known to respectability under the
name of "the Great Rebellion", and the struggles succeeding it, were brought
to a close by the comparatively puny events entitled by Liberal historians
"the Glorious Revolution".



The new starting-point was a compromise between the rising middle-class
and the ex-feudal landowners. The latter, though called, as now, the aristocracy,
had been long since on the way which led them to become what Louis Philippe
in France became at a much later period: "The first bourgeois of the kingdom".
Fortunately for England, the old feudal barons had killed one another during
the War of the Roses. Their successors, though mostly scions of the old
families, had been so much out of the direct line of descent that they
constituted quite a new body, with habits and tendencies far more bourgeois
than feudal. They fully understood the value of money, and at once began
to increase their rents by turning hundreds of small farmers out and replacing
them with sheep. Henry VIII, while squandering the Church lands, created
fresh bourgeois landlords by wholesale; the innumerable confiscation of
estates, regranted to absolute or relative upstarts, and continued during
the whole of the 17th century, had the same result. Consequently, ever
since Henry VII, the English "aristocracy", far from counteracting the
development of industrial production, had, on the contrary, sought to indirectly
profit thereby; and there had always been a section of the great landowners
willing, from economical or political reasons, to cooperate with the leading
men of the financial and industrial bourgeoisie. The compromise of 1689
was, therefore, easily accomplished. The political spoils of "pelf and
place" were left to the great landowning families, provided the economic
interests of the financial, manufacturing, and commercial middle-class
were sufficiently attended to. And these economic interests were at that
time powerful enough to determine the general policy of the nation. There
might be squabbles about matters of detail, but, on the whole, the aristocratic
oligarchy knew too well that its own economic prosperity was irretrievably
bound up with that of the industrial and commercial middle-class.



From that time, the bourgeoisie was a humble, but still a recognized,
component of the ruling classes of England. With the rest of them, it had
a common interest in keeping in subjection the great working mass of the
nation. The merchant or manufacturer himself stood in the position of master,
or, as it was until lately called, of "natural superior" to his clerks,
his work-people, his domestic servants. His interest was to get as much
and as good work out of them as he could; for this end, they had to be
trained to proper submission. He was himself religious; his religion had
supplied the standard under which he had fought the king and the lords;
he was not long in discovering the opportunities this same religion offered
him for working upon the minds of his natural inferiors, and making them
submissive to the behests of the masters it had pleased God to place over
them. In short, the English bourgeoisie now had to take a part in keeping
down the "lower orders", the great producing mass of the nation, and one
of the means employed for that purpose was the influence of religion.



There was another factor that contributed to strengthen the religious
leanings of the bourgeoisie. That was the rise of materialism in England.
This new doctrine not only shocked the pious feelings of the middle-class;
it announced itself as a philosophy only fit for scholars and cultivated
men of the world, in contrast to religion, which was good enough for the
uneducated masses, including the bourgeoisie. With Hobbes, it stepped on
the stage as a defender of royal prerogative and omnipotence; it called
upon absolute monarchy to keep down that puer robustus sed malitiosus
["Robust but malicious boy"] – to wit, the people. Similarly, with the
successors of Hobbes, with Bolingbroke, Shaftesbury, etc., the new deistic
form of materialism remained an aristocratic, esoteric doctrine, and, therefore,
hateful to the middle-class both for its religious heresy and for its anti-bourgeois
political connections. Accordingly, in opposition to the materialism and
deism of the aristocracy, those Protestant sects which had furnished the
flag and the fighting contingent against the Stuarts continued to furnish
the main strength of the progressive middle-class, and form even today
the backbone of "the Great Liberal Party".



In the meantime, materialism passed from England to France, where
it met and coalesced with another materialistic school of philosophers,
a branch of Cartesianism. In France, too, it remained at first an exclusively
aristocratic doctrine. But, soon, its revolutionary character asserted
itself. The French materialists did not limit their criticism to matters
of religious belief; they extended it to whatever scientific tradition
or political institution they met with; and to prove the claim of their
doctrine to universal application, they took the shortest cut, and boldly
applied it to all subjects of knowledge in the giant work after which they
were named – the Encyclopaedia. Thus, in one or the other of its two forms
– avowed materialism or deism – it became the creed of the whole cultures
youth of France; so much so that, when the Great Revolution broke out,
the doctrine hatched by English Royalists gave a theoretical flag to French
Republicans and Terrorists, and furnished the text for the Declaration
of the Rights of Man. The Great French Revolution was the third uprising
of the bourgeoisie, but the first that had entirely cast off the religious
cloak, and was fought out on undisguised political lines; it was the first,
too, that was really fought out up to the destruction of one of the combatants,
the aristocracy, and the complete triumph of the other, the bourgeoisie.
In England, the continuity of pre-revolutionary and post-revolutionary
institutions, and the compromise between landlords and capitalists, found
its expression in the continuity of judicial precedents and in the religious
preservation of the feudal forms of the law. In France, the Revolution
constituted a complete breach with the traditions of the past; it cleared
out the very last vestiges of feudalism, and created in the Code Civil
a masterly adaptation of the old Roman law – that almost perfect expression
of the juridical relations corresponding to the economic stage called by
Marx the production of commodities – to modern capitalist conditions;
so masterly that this French revolutionary code still serves as a model
for reforms of the law of property in all other countries, not excepting
England. Let us, however, not forget that if English law continues to express
the economic relations of capitalist society in that barbarous feudal language
which corresponds to the thing expressed, just as English spelling corresponds
to English pronunciation – vous ecrivez Londres et vous prononcez Constantinople,
said a Frenchman – that same English law is the only one which has preserved
through ages, and transmitted to America and the Colonies, the best part
of that old Germanic personal freedom, local self-government, and independence
from all interference (but that of the law courts), which on the Continent
has been lost during the period of absolute monarchy, and has nowhere been
as yet fully recovered.



To return to our British bourgeois. The French Revolution gave
him a splendid opportunity, with the help of the Continental monarchies,
to destroy French maritime commerce, to annex French colonies, and to crush
the last French pretensions to maritime rivalry. That was one reason why
he fought it. Another was that the ways of this revolution went very much
against his grain. Not only its "execrable" terrorism, but the very attempt
to carry bourgeois rule to extremes. What should the British bourgeois
do without his aristocracy, that taught him manners, such as they were,
and invented fashions for him – that furnished officers for the army,
which kept order at home, and the navy, which conquered colonial possessions
and new markets aboard? There was, indeed, a progressive minority of the
bourgeoisie, that minority whose interests were not so well attended to
under the compromise; this section, composed chiefly of the less wealthy
middle-class, did sympathize with the Revolution, but it was powerless
in Parliament.



Thus, if materialism became the creed of the French Revolution,
the God-fearing English bourgeois held all the faster to his religion.
Had not the reign of terror in Paris proved what was the upshot, if the
religious instincts of the masses were lost? The more materialism spread
from France to neighboring countries, and was reinforced by similar doctrinal
currents, notably by German philosophy, the more, in fact, materialism
and free thought generally became, on the Continent, the necessary qualifications
of a cultivated man, the more stubbornly the English middle-class stuck
to its manifold religious creeds. These creeds might differ from one another,
but they were, all of them, distinctly religious, Christian creeds.



While the Revolution ensured the political triumph of the bourgeoisie
in France, in England Watt, Arkwright, Cartwright, and others, initiated
an industrial revolution, which completely shifted the centre of gravity
of economic power. The wealth of the bourgeoisie increased considerably
faster than that of the landed aristocracy. Within the bourgeoisie itself,
the financial aristocracy, the bankers, etc., were more and more pushed
into the background by the manufacturers. The compromise of 1689, even
after the gradual changes it had undergone in favor of the bourgeoisie,
no longer corresponded to the relative position of the parties to it. The
character of these parties, too, had changed; the bourgeoisie of 1830 was
very different from that of the preceding century. The political power
still left to the aristocracy, and used by them to resist the pretensions
of the new industrial bourgeoisie, became incompatible with the new economic
interests. A fresh struggle with the aristocracy was necessary; it could
end only in a victory of the new economic power. First, the Reform Act
was pushed through, in spite of all resistance, under the impulse of the
French Revolution of 1830. It gave to the bourgeoisie a recognized and
powerful place in Parliament. Then the Repeal of the Corn Laws [a move
toward free-trade], which settled, once and for all, the supremacy of the
bourgeoisie, and especially of its most active portion, the manufacturers,
over the landed aristocracy. This was the greatest victory of the bourgeoisie;
it was, however, also the last it gained in its own exclusive interest.
Whatever triumphs it obtained later on, it had to share with a new social
power – first its ally, but soon its rival.



The industrial revolution had created a class of large manufacturing
capitalists, but also a class – and a far more numerous one – of manufacturing
work-people. This class gradually increased in numbers, in proportion as
the industrial revolution seized upon one branch of manufacture after another,
and in the same proportion it increased its power. This power it proved
as early as 1824, by forcing a reluctant Parliament to repeal the acts
forbidding combinations of workmen. During the Reform agitation, the workingmen
constituted the Radical wing of the Reform party; the Act of 1832 having
excluded them from the suffrage, the formulated their demands in the People's
Charter, and constituted themselves, in opposition to the great bourgeois
Anti-Corn Law party, into an independent party, the Chartists, the first
working-men's party of modern times.



Then came the Continental revolutions of February and March 1848,
in which the working people played such a prominent part, and, at least
in Paris, put forward demands which were certainly inadmissible from the
point of view of capitalist society. And then came the general reaction.
First, the defeat of the Chartists on April 10, 1848; then the crushing
of the Paris workingmen's insurrection in June of the same year; then the
disasters of 1849 in Italy, Hungary, South Germany, and at last the victory
of Louis Bonaparte over Paris, December 2, 1851. For a time, at least,
the bugbear of working-class pretensions was put down, but at what cost!
If the British bourgeois had been convinced before of the necessity of
maintaining the common people in a religious mood, how much more must he
feel that necessity after all these experiences? Regardless of the sneers
of his Continental compeers, he continued to spend thousands and tens of
thousands, year after year, upon the evangelization of the lower orders;
not content with his own native religious machinery, he appealed to Brother
Jonathan 1),
the greatest organizer in existence of religion as a trade, and imported
from America revivalism, Moody and Sankey, and the like;
and, finally, he accepted the dangerous aid of the Salvation Army, which
revives the propaganda of early Christianity, appeals to the poor as the
elect, fights capitalism in a religious way, and thus fosters an element
of early Christian class antagonism, which one day may become troublesome
to the well-to-do people who now find the ready money for it.



It seems a law of historical development that the bourgeoisie
can in no European country get hold of political power – at least for
any length of time – in the same exclusive way in which the feudal aristocracy
kept hold of it during the Middle Ages. Even in France, where feudalism
was completely extinguished, the bourgeoisie as a whole has held full possession
of the Government for very short periods only. During Louis Philippe's
reign, 1830-48, a very small portion of the bourgeoisie ruled the kingdom;
by far the larger part were excluded from the suffrage by the high qualification.
Under the Second Republic, 1848-51, the whole bourgeoisie ruled but for
three years only; their incapacity brought on the Second Empire. It is
only now, in the Third Republic, that the bourgeoisie as a whole have kept
possession of the helm for more than 20 years; and they are already showing
lively signs of decadence. A durable reign of the bourgeoisie has been
possible only in countries like America, where feudalism was unknown, and
society at the very beginning started from a bourgeois basis. And even
in France and America, the successors of the bourgeoisie, the working people,
are already knocking at the door.



In England, the bourgeoisie never held undivided sway. Even the
victory of 1832 left the landed aristocracy in almost exclusive possession
of all the leading Government offices. The meekness with which the middle-class
submitted to this remained inconceivable to me until the great Liberal
manufacturer, Mr. W. A. Forster, in a public speech, implored the young
men of Bradford to learn French, as a means to get on in the world, and
quoted from his own experience how sheepish he looked when, as a Cabinet
Minister, he had to move in society where French was, at least, as necessary
as English! The fact was, the English middle-class of that time were, as
a rule, quite uneducated upstarts, and could not help leaving to the aristocracy
those superior Government places where other qualifications were required
than mere insular narrowness and insular conceit, seasoned by business
sharpness. 2)
Even now the endless newspaper debates about middle-class education show
that the English middle-class does not yet consider itself good enough
for the best education, and looks to something more modest. Thus, even
after the repeal of the Corn Laws, it appeared a matter of course that
the men who had carried the day – the Cobdens, Brights, Forsters, etc.
– should remain excluded from a share in the official government of the
country, until 20 years afterwards a new Reform Act opened to them the
door of the Cabinet. The English bourgeoisie are, up to the present day,
so deeply penetrated by a sense of their social inferiority that they keep
up, at their own expense and that of the nation, an ornamental caste of
drones to represent the nation worthily at all State functions; and they
consider themselves highly honored whenever one of themselves is found
worthy of admission into this select and privileged body, manufactured,
after all, by themselves.



The industrial and commercial middle-class had, therefore, not
yet succeeded in driving the landed aristocracy completely from political
power when another competitor, the working-class, appeared on the stage.
The reaction after the Chartist movement and the Continental revolutions,
as well as the unparalleled extension of English trade from 1848-66 (ascribed
vulgarly to Free Trade alone, but due far more to the colossal development
of railways, ocean steamers, and means of intercourse generally), had again
driven the working-class into the dependency of the Liberal party, of which
they formed, as in pre-Chartist times, the Radical wing. Their claims to
the franchise, however, gradually became irresistible; while the Whig leaders
of the Liberals "funked", Disraeli showed his superiority by making the
Tories seize the favorable moment and introduce household suffrage in the
boroughs, along with a redistribution of seats. Then followed the ballot;
then, in 1884, the extension of household suffrage to the counties and
a fresh redistribution of seats, by which electoral districts were, to
some extent, equalized. All these measures considerably increased the electoral
power of the working-class, so much so that in at least 150 to 200 constituencies
that class now furnished the majority of the voters. But parliamentary
government is a capital school for teaching respect for tradition; if the
middle-class look with awe and veneration upon what Lord John Manners playfully
called "our old nobility", the mass of the working-people then looked up
with respect and deference to what used to be designated as "their betters",
the middle-class. Indeed, the British workman, some 15 years ago, was the
model workman, whose respectful regard for the position of his master,
and whose self-restraining modesty in claiming rights for himself, consoled
our German economists of the Katheder-Socialist school for the incurable
communistic and revolutionary tendencies of their own working-men at home.



But the English middle-class – good men of business as they are
– saw farther than the German professors. They had shared their powers
but reluctantly with the working-class. They had learnt, during the Chartist
years, what that puer robustus sed malitiosus, the people, is capable
of. And since that time, they had been compelled to incorporate the better
part of the People's Charter in the Statutes of the United Kingdom. Now,
if ever, the people must be kept in order by moral means, and the first
and foremost of all moral means of action upon the masses is and remains
– religion. Hence the parsons' majorities on the School Boards, hence
the increasing self-taxation of the bourgeoisie for the support of all
sorts of revivalism, from ritualism to the Salvation Army.



And now came the triumph of British respectability over the free
thought and religious laxity of the Continental bourgeois. The workmen
of France and Germany had become rebellious. They were thoroughly infected
with Socialism, and, for very good reasons, were not at all particular
as to the legality of the means by which to secure their own ascendancy.
The puer robustus, here, turned from day-to-day more malitiosus.
Nothing remained to the French and German bourgeoisie as a last resource
but to silently drop their free thought, as a youngster, when sea-sickness
creeps upon him, quietly drops the burning cigar he brought swaggeringly
on board; one-by-one, the scoffers turned pious in outward behavior, spoke
with respect of the Church, its dogmas and rites, and even conformed with
the latter as far as could not be helped. French bourgeois dined maigre
on Fridays, and German ones say out long Protestant sermons in their pews
on Sundays. They had come to grief with materialism. "Die Religion muss
dem Volk erhalten werden" – religion must be kept alive for the people
– that was the only and the last means to save society from utter ruin.
Unfortunately for themselves, they did not find this out until they had
done their level best to break up religion for ever. And now it was the
turn of the British bourgeoisie to sneer and to say: "Why, you fools, I
could have told you that 200 years ago!"



However, I am afraid neither the religious stolidity of the British,
nor the post festum conversion of the Continental bourgeois will
stem the rising Proletarian tide. Tradition is a great retarding force,
is the vis inertiae of history, but, being merely passive, is sure
to be broken down; and thus religion will be no lasting safeguard to capitalist
society. If our juridical, philosophical, and religious ideas are the more
or less remote offshoots of the economical relations prevailing in a given
society, such ideas cannot, in the long run, withstand the effects of a
complete change in these relations. And, unless we believe in supernatural
revelation, we must admit that no religious tenets will ever suffice to
prop up a tottering society.



In fact, in England too, the working-people have begun to move
again. They are, no doubt, shackled by traditions of various kinds. Bourgeois
traditions, such as the widespread belief that there can be but two parties,
Conservatives and Liberals, and that the working-class must work out its
salvation by and through the great Liberal Party. Working-men's traditions,
inherited from their first tentative efforts at independent action, such
as the exclusion, from ever so many old Trade Unions, of all applicants
who have not gone through a regular apprenticeship; which means the breeding,
by every such union, of its own blacklegs. But, for all that, the English
working-class is moving, as even Professor Brentano has sorrowfully had
to report to his brother Katheder-Socialists. It moves, like all things
in England, with a slow and measured step, with hesitation here, with more
or less unfruitful, tentative attempts there; it moves now and then with
an over-cautious mistrust of the name of Socialism, while it gradually
absorbs the substance; and the movement spreads and seizes one layer of
the workers after another. It has now shaken out of their torpor the unskilled
laborers of the East End of London, and we all know what a splendid impulse
these fresh forces have given it in return. And if the pace of the movement
is not up to the impatience of some people, let them not forget that it
is the working-class which keeps alive the finest qualities of the English
character, and that, if a step in advance is once gained in England, it
is, as a rule, never lost afterwards. If the sons of the old Chartists,
for reasons unexplained above, were not quite up to the mark, the grandsons
bid fair to be worthy of their forefathers.



But the triumph of the European working-class does not depend
upon England alone. It can only be secured by the cooperation of, at least,
England, France, and Germany. In both the latter countries, the working-class
movement is well ahead of England. In Germany, it is even within measurable
distance of success. The progress it has there made during the last 25
years is unparalleled. It advances with ever-increasing velocity. If the
German middle-class have shown themselves lamentably deficient in political
capacity, discipline, courage, energy, and perseverance, the German working-class
have given ample proof of all these qualities. Four hundred years ago,
Germany was the starting-point of the first upheaval of the European middle-class;
as things are now, is it outside the limits of possibility that Germany
will be the scene, too, of the first great victory of the European proletariat?




Frederick Engels
London
April 20, 1892
 


Notes


1.
"Brother Jonathan" – A sort of Anglo-Christian "Uncle Sam".



2.
And even in business matters, the conceit of 
    national Chauvinism is but a sorry adviser.  Up to quite recently, 
    the average English manufacturer considered it derogatory for an 
    Englishman to speak any language but his own, and felt rather proud 
    than otherwise of the fact that "poor devils" of foreigners settled 
    in England and took off his hands the trouble of disposing of his 
    products abroad.  He never noticed that these foreigners, mostly 
    Germans, thus got command of a very large part of British foreign 
    trade, imports and exports, and that the direct foreign trade of 
    Englishmen became limited, almost entirely, to the colonies, China, 
    the United States, and South America.  Nor did he notice that these 
    Germans traded with other Germans abroad, who gradually organized a 
    complete network of commercial colonies all over the world.  But, 
    when Germany, about 40 years ago [c.1850], seriously began 
    manufacturing for export, this network served her admirably in her 
    transformation, in so short a time, from a corn-exporting into a 
    first-rate manufacturing country.  Then, about 10 years ago, the 
    British manufacturer got frightened, and asked his ambassadors and 
    consuls how it was that he could no longer keep his customers 
    together.  The unanimous answer was: 
 


    (1) You don't learn customer's language but expect him to speak  
        your own; 



    (2) You don't even try to suit your customer's wants, habits,  
        and tastes, but expect him to conform to your English ones.  

 


Next: French Socialism
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific




==========

## Part I: [Utopian Socialism]








Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (Chpt. 1)




Frederick Engels
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific


I
[The Development of Utopian Socialism]

 
 

Modern Socialism is, in its essence, the direct product
of the recognition, on the one hand, of the class antagonisms existing
in the society of today between proprietors and non-proprietors, between
capitalists and wage-workers; on the other hand, of the anarchy existing
in production. But, in its theoretical form, modern Socialism originally
appears ostensibly as a more logical extension of the principles laid down
by the great French philosophers of the 18th century. Like every new theory,
modern Socialism had, at first, to connect itself with the intellectual
stock-in-trade ready to its hand, however deeply its roots lay in material
economic facts. 
The great men, who in France prepared men’s minds for the coming
revolution, were themselves extreme revolutionists. They recognized no
external authority of any kind whatever. Religion, natural science, society,
political institutions – everything was subjected to the most unsparing
criticism: everything must justify its existence before the judgment-seat
of reason or give up existence. Reason became the sole measure of everything.
It was the time when, as Hegel says, the world stood upon its head [1];
first in the sense that the human head, and the principles arrived at by
its thought, claimed to be the basis of all human action and association;
but by and by, also, in the wider sense that the reality which was in contradiction
to these principles had, in fact, to be turned upside down. Every form
of society and government then existing, every old traditional notion,
was flung into the lumber-room as irrational; the world had hitherto allowed
itself to be led solely by prejudices; everything in the past deserved
only pity and contempt. Now, for the first time, appeared the light of
day, the kingdom of reason; henceforth superstition, injustice, privilege,
oppression, were to be superseded by eternal truth, eternal Right, equality
based on Nature and the inalienable rights of man. 
We know today that this kingdom of reason was nothing more than
the idealized kingdom of the bourgeoisie; that this eternal Right found
its realization in bourgeois justice; that this equality reduced itself
to bourgeois equality before the law; that bourgeois property was proclaimed
as one of the essential rights of man; and that the government of reason,
the Contrat Social of Rousseau, came into being, and only could
come into being, as a democratic bourgeois republic. The great thinkers
of the 18th century could, no more than their predecessors, go beyond the
limits imposed upon them by their epoch. 
But, side by side with the antagonisms of the feudal nobility
and the burghers, who claimed to represent all the rest of society, was
the general antagonism of exploiters and exploited, of rich idlers and
poor workers. It was this very circumstance that made it possible for the
representatives of the bourgeoisie to put themselves forward as representing
not one special class, but the whole of suffering humanity. Still further.
From its origin the bourgeoisie was saddled with its antithesis: capitalists
cannot exist without wage-workers, and, in the same proportion as the mediaeval
burgher of the guild developed into the modern bourgeois, the guild journeyman
and the day-laborer, outside the guilds, developed into the proletarian.
And although, upon the whole, the bourgeoisie, in their struggle with the
nobility, could claim to represent at the same time the interests of the
different working-classes of that period, yet in every great bourgeois
movement there were independent outbursts of that class which was the forerunner,
more or less developed, of the modern proletariat. For example, at the
time of the German Reformation and the Peasants’ War, the Anabaptists and
Thomas Münzer; in the great English Revolution, the Levellers;
in the great French Revolution, Babeuf. 
These were theoretical enunciations, corresponding with these
revolutionary uprisings of a class not yet developed; in the 16th and 17th
centuries, Utopian pictures of ideal social conditions; in the 18th century, actual communistic theories (Morelly and Mably)[2]. The
demand for equality was no longer limited to political rights; it was extended
also to the social conditions of individuals. It was not simply class privileges
that were to be abolished, but class distinctions themselves. A Communism,
ascetic, denouncing all the pleasures of life, Spartan, was the first form
of the new teaching. Then came the three great Utopians: Saint-Simon, to
whom the middle-class movement, side by side with the proletarian, still
had a certain significance; Fourier; and Owen, who in the country where
capitalist production was most developed, and under the influence of the
antagonisms begotten of this, worked out his proposals for the removal
of class distinction systematically and in direct relation to French materialism. 
One thing is common to all three. Not one of them appears as a
representative of the interests of that proletariat which historical development
had, in the meantime, produced. Like the French philosophers, they do not
claim to emancipate a particular class to begin with, but all humanity
at once. Like them, they wish to bring in the kingdom of reason and eternal
justice, but this kingdom, as they see it, is as far as Heaven from Earth,
from that of the French philosophers. 
For, to our three social reformers, the bourgeois world, based
upon the principles of these philosophers, is quite as irrational and unjust,
and, therefore, finds its way to the dust-hole quite as readily as feudalism
and all the earlier stages of society. If pure reason and justice have
not, hitherto, ruled the world, this has been the case only because men
have not rightly understood them. What was wanted was the individual man
of genius, who has now arisen and who understands the truth. That he has
now arisen, that the truth has now been clearly understood, is not an inevitable
event, following of necessity in the chains of historical development,
but a mere happy accident. He might just as well have been born 500 years
earlier, and might then have spared humanity 500 years of error, strife,
and suffering.  
We saw how the French philosophers of the 18th century, the forerunners of the Revolution, appealed to reason as the sole judge of all that is. A rational government, rational society, were to be founded; everything that ran counter to eternal reason was to be remorselessly done away with. We saw also that this eternal reason was in reality nothing but the idealized understanding of the 18th century citizen, just then evolving into the bourgeois. The French Revolution had realized this rational society and government.    
But the new order of things, rational enough as compared with earlier conditions, turned out to be by no means absolutely rational. The state based upon reason completely collapsed. Rousseau’s Contrat Social had found its realization in the Reign of Terror, from which the bourgeoisie, who had lost confidence in their own political capacity, had taken refuge first in the corruption of the Directorate, and, finally, under the wing of the Napoleonic despotism. The promised eternal peace was turned into an endless war of conquest. The society based upon reason had fared no better. The antagonism between rich and poor, instead of dissolving into general prosperity, had become intensified by the removal of the guild and other privileges, which had to some extent bridged it over, and by the removal of the charitable institutions of the Church. The “freedom of property” from feudal fetters, now veritably accomplished, turned out to be, for the small capitalists and small proprietors, the freedom to sell their small property, crushed under the overmastering competition of the large capitalists and landlords, to these great lords, and thus, as far as the small capitalists and peasant proprietors were concerned, became “freedom from property”. The development of industry upon a capitalistic basis made poverty and misery of the working masses conditions of existence of society. Cash payment became more and more, in Carlyle’s phrase [See Thomas Carlyle, Past and Present, London 1843], the sole nexus between man and man. The number of crimes increased from year to year. Formerly, the feudal vices had openly stalked about in broad daylight; though not eradicated, they were now at any rate thrust into the background. In their stead, the bourgeois vices, hitherto practiced in secret, began to blossom all the more luxuriantly. Trade became to a greater and greater extent cheating. The “fraternity” of the revolutionary motto was realized in the chicanery and rivalries of the battle of competition. Oppression by force was replaced by corruption; the sword, as the first social lever, by gold. The right of the first night was transferred from the feudal lords to the bourgeois manufacturers. Prostitution increased to an extent never heard of. Marriage itself remained, as before, the legally recognized form, the official cloak of prostitution, and, moreover, was supplemented by rich crops of adultery.    
In a word, compared with the splendid promises of the philosophers, the social and political institutions born of the “triumph of reason” were bitterly disappointing caricatures. All that was wanting was the men to formulate this disappointment, and they came with the turn of the century. In 1802, Saint-Simon’s Geneva letters appeared; in 1808 appeared Fourier’s first work, although the groundwork of his theory dated from 1799; on January 1, 1800, Robert Owen undertook the direction of New Lanark.    
At this time, however, the capitalist mode of production, and with it the antagonism between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, was still very incompletely developed. Modern Industry, which had just arisen in England, was still unknown in France. But Modern Industry develops, on the one hand, the conflicts which make absolutely necessary a revolution in the mode of production, and the doing away with its capitalistic character – conflicts not only between the classes begotten of it, but also between the very productive forces and the forms of exchange created by it. And, on the other hand, it develops, in these very gigantic productive forces, the means of ending these conflicts. If, therefore, about the year 1800, the conflicts arising from the new social order were only just beginning to take shape, this holds still more fully as to the means of ending them. The “have-nothing” masses of Paris, during the Reign of Terror, were able for a moment to gain the mastery, and thus to lead the bourgeois revolution to victory in spite of the bourgeoisie themselves. But, in doing so, they only proved how impossible it was for their domination to last under the conditions then obtaining. The proletariat, which then for the first time evolved itself from these “have-nothing” masses as the nucleus of a new class, as yet quite incapable of independent political action, appeared as an oppressed, suffering order, to whom, in its incapacity to help itself, help could, at best, be brought in from without or down from above.    
This historical situation also dominated the founders of Socialism. To the crude conditions of capitalistic production and the crude class conditions correspond crude theories. The solution of the social problems, which as yet lay hidden in undeveloped economic conditions, the Utopians attempted to evolve out of the human brain. Society presented nothing but wrongs; to remove these was the task of reason. It was necessary, then, to discover a new and more perfect system of social order and to impose this upon society from without by propaganda, and, wherever it was possible, by the example of model experiments. These new social systems were foredoomed as Utopian; the more completely they were worked out in detail, the more they could not avoid drifting off into pure phantasies.    
These facts once established, we need not dwell a moment longer upon this side of the question, now wholly belonging to the past. We can leave it to the literary small fry to solemnly quibble over these phantasies, which today only make us smile, and to crow over the superiority of their own bald reasoning, as compared with such “insanity”. For ourselves, we delight in the stupendously grand thoughts and germs of thought that everywhere break out through their phantastic covering, and to which these Philistines are blind.    
 Saint-Simon was a son of the great French Revolution, at the outbreak of which he was not yet 30. The Revolution was the victory of the 3rd estate – i.e., of the great masses of the nation, working in production and in trade, over the privileged idle classes, the nobles and the priests. But the victory of the 3rd estate soon revealed itself as exclusively the victory of a smaller part of this “estate”, as the conquest of political power by the socially privileged section of it – i.e., the propertied bourgeoisie. And the bourgeoisie had certainly developed rapidly during the Revolution, partly by speculation in the lands of the nobility and of the Church, confiscated and afterwards put up for sale, and partly by frauds upon the nation by means of army contracts. It was the domination of these swindlers that, under the Directorate, brought France to the verge of ruin, and thus gave Napoleon the pretext for his coup d’état.    
Hence, to Saint-Simon the antagonism between the 3rd Estate and the privileged classes took the form of an antagonism between “workers” and “idlers”. The idlers were not merely the old privileged classes, but also all who, without taking any part in production or distribution, lived on their incomes. And the workers were not only the wage-workers, but also the manufacturers, the merchants, the bankers. That the idlers had lost the capacity for intellectual leadership and political supremacy had been proved, and was by the Revolution finally settled. That the non-possessing classes had not this capacity seemed to Saint-Simon proved by the experiences of the Reign of Terror. Then, who was to lead and command? According to Saint-Simon, science and industry, both united by a new religious bond, destined to restore that unity of religious ideas which had been lost since the time of the Reformation – a necessarily mystic and rigidly hierarchic “new Christianity”. But science, that was the scholars; and industry, that was, in the first place, the working bourgeois, manufacturers, merchants, bankers. These bourgeois were, certainly, intended by Saint-Simon to transform themselves into a kind of public officials, of social trustees; but they were still to hold, vis-à-vis of the workers, a commanding and economically privileged position. The bankers especially were to be called upon to direct the whole of social production by the regulation of credit. This conception was in exact keeping with a time in which Modern Industry in France and, with it, the chasm between bourgeoisie and proletariat was only just coming into existence. But what Saint-Simon especially lays stress upon is this: what interests him first, and above all other things, is the lot of the class that is the most numerous and the most poor (“la classe la plus nombreuse et la plus pauvre”).    
Already in his Geneva letters, Saint-Simon lays down the proposition that “all men ought to work”. In the same work he recognizes also that the Reign of Terror was the reign of the non-possessing masses.    
“See,” says he to them, “what happened in France at the time when your comrades held sway there; they brought about a famine.” [Lettres d’un habitant de Genève à ses contemporains, Saint-Simon, 1803]
 But to recognize the French Revolution as a class war, and not simply one between nobility and bourgeoisie, but between nobility, bourgeoisie, and the non-possessors, was, in the year 1802, a most pregnant discovery. In 1816, he declares that politics is the science of production, and foretells the complete absorption of politics by economics. The knowledge that economic conditions are the basis of political institutions appears here only in embryo. Yet what is here already very plainly expressed is the idea of the future conversion of political rule over men into an administration of things and a direction of processes of production – that is to say, the “abolition of the state”, about which recently there has been so much noise. 
Saint-Simon shows the same superiority over his contemporaries, when in 1814, immediately after the entry of the allies into Paris, and again in 1815, during the Hundred Days’ War, he proclaims the alliance of France and England, and then of both of these countries, with Germany, as the only guarantee for the prosperous development and peace of Europe. To preach to the French in 1815 an alliance with the victors of Waterloo required as much courage as historical foresight. 
 If in Saint-Simon we find a comprehensive breadth of view, by virtue of which almost all the ideas of later Socialists that are not strictly economic are found in him in embryo, we find in Fourier a criticism of the existing conditions of society, genuinely French and witty, but not upon that account any the less thorough. Fourier takes the bourgeoisie, their inspired prophets before the Revolution, and their interested eulogists after it, at their own word. He lays bare remorselessly the material and moral misery of the bourgeois world. He confronts it with the earlier philosophers’ dazzling promises of a society in which reason alone should reign, of a civilization in which happiness should be universal, of an illimitable human perfectibility, and with the rose-colored phraseology of the bourgeois ideologists of his time. He points out how everywhere the most pitiful reality corresponds with the most high-sounding phrases, and he overwhelms this hopeless fiasco of phrases with his mordant sarcasm. 
Fourier is not only a critic, his imperturbably serene nature makes him a satirist, and assuredly one of the greatest satirists of all time. He depicts, with equal power and charm, the swindling speculations that blossomed out upon the downfall of the Revolution, and the shopkeeping spirit prevalent in, and characteristic of, French commerce at that time. Still more masterly is his criticism of the bourgeois form of the relations between sexes, and the position of woman in bourgeois society. He was the first to declare that in any given society the degree of woman’s emancipation is the natural measure of the general emancipation. 
But Fourier is at his greatest in his conception of the history of society. He divides its whole course, thus far, into four stages of evolution – savagery, barbarism, the patriarchate, civilization. This last is identical with the so-called civil, or bourgeois, society of today – i.e., with the social order that came in with the 16th century. He proves “that the civilized stage raises every vice practiced by barbarism in a simple fashion into a form of existence, complex, ambiguous, equivocal, hypocritical” – that civilization moves “in a vicious circle”, in contradictions which it constantly reproduces without being able to solve them; hence it constantly arrives at the very opposite to that which it wants to attain, or pretends to want to attain, so that, e.g., “under civilization poverty is born of superabundance itself”. [Théorie de l’unite universelle, Fourier, 1843 and Le nouveau monde industriel et sociétaire, ou invention du procédé d'industrie attrayante et enaturelle distribuée en séries passionnées, Fourier, 1845] 
Fourier, as we see, uses the dialectic method in the same masterly way as his contemporary, Hegel. Using these same dialectics, he argues against talk about illimitable human perfectibility, that every historical phase has its period of ascent and also its period of descent, and he applies this observation to the future of the whole human race. As Kant introduced into natural science the idea of the ultimate destruction of the Earth, Fourier introduced into historical science that of the ultimate destruction of the human race. 
Whilst in France the hurricane of the Revolution swept over the land, in England a quieter, but not on that account less tremendous, revolution was going on. Steam and the new tool-making machinery were transforming manufacture into modern industry, and thus revolutionizing the whole foundation of bourgeois society. The sluggish march of development of the manufacturing period changed into a veritable storm and stress period of production. With constantly increasing swiftness the splitting-up into large capitalists and non-possessing proletarians went on. Between these, instead of the former stable middle-class, an unstable mass of artisans and small shopkeepers, the most fluctuating portion of the population, now led a precarious existence. 
The new mode of production was, as yet, only at the beginning of its period of ascent; as yet it was the normal, regular method of production – the only one possible under existing conditions. Nevertheless, even then it was producing crying social abuses – the herding together of a homeless population in the worst quarters of the large towns; the loosening of all traditional moral bonds, of patriarchal subordination, of family relations; overwork, especially of women and children, to a frightful extent; complete demoralization of the working-class, suddenly flung into altogether new conditions, from the country into the town, from agriculture into modern industry, from stable conditions of existence into insecure ones that change from day to day. 
 At this juncture, there came forward as a reformer a manufacturer 29-years-old – a man of almost sublime, childlike simplicity of character, and at the same time one of the few born leaders of men. Robert Owen had adopted the teaching of the materialistic philosophers: that man’s character is the product, on the one hand, of heredity; on the other, of the environment of the individual during his lifetime, and especially during his period of development. In the industrial revolution most of his class saw only chaos and confusion, and the opportunity of fishing in these troubled waters and making large fortunes quickly. He saw in it the opportunity of putting into practice his favorite theory, and so of bringing order out of chaos. He had already tried it with success, as superintendent of more than 500 men in a Manchester factory. From 1800 to 1829, he directed the great cotton mill at New Lanark, in Scotland, as managing partner, along the same lines, but with greater freedom of action and with a success that made him a European reputation. A population, originally consisting of the most diverse and, for the most part, very demoralized elements, a population that gradually grew to 2,500, he turned into a model colony, in which drunkenness, police, magistrates, lawsuits, poor laws, charity, were unknown. And all this simply by placing the people in conditions worthy of human beings, and especially by carefully bringing up the rising generation. He was the founder of infant schools, and introduced them first at New Lanark. At the age of two, the children came to school, where they enjoyed themselves so much that they could scarely be got home again. Whilst his competitors worked their people 13 or 14 hours a day, in New Lanark the working-day was only 10 and a half hours. When a crisis in cotton stopped work for four months, his workers received their full wages all the time. And with all this the business more than doubled in value, and to the last yielded large profits to its proprietors. 
In spite of all this, Owen was not content. The existence which he secured for his workers was, in his eyes, still far from being worthy of human beings. "The people were slaves at my mercy." The relatively favorable conditions in which he had placed them were still far from allowing a rational development of the character and of the intellect in all directions, much less of the free exercise of all their faculties. 
 “And yet, the working part of this population of 2,500 persons was daily producing as much real wealth for society as, less than half a century before, it would have required the working part of a population of 600,000 to create. I asked myself, what became of the difference between the wealth consumed by 2,500 persons and that which would have been consumed by 600,000?” [3] 
The answer was clear. It had been used to pay the proprietors of the establishment 5 per cent on the capital they had laid out, in addition to over £300,000 clear profit. And that which held for New Lanark held to a still greater extent for all the factories in England. 
“If this new wealth had not been created by machinery, imperfectly as it has been applied, the wars of Europe, in opposition to Napoleon, and to support the aristocratic principles of society, could not have been maintained. And yet this new power was the creation of the working-classes.” 
 Note, l. c., p.22. 
To them, therefore, the fruits of this new power belonged. The newly-created gigantic productive forces, hitherto used only to enrich individuals and to enslave the masses, offered to Owen the foundations for a reconstruction of society; they were destined, as the common property of all, to be worked for the common good of all. 
Owen’s communism was based upon this purely business foundation, the outcome, so to say, of commercial calculation. Throughout, it maintained this practical character. Thus, in 1823, Owen proposed the relief of the distress in Ireland by Communist colonies, and drew up complete estimates of costs of founding them, yearly expenditure, and probable revenue. And in his definite plan for the future, the technical working out of details is managed with such practical knowledge – ground plan, front and side and bird’s-eye views all included – that the Owen method of social reform once accepted, there is from the practical point of view little to be said against the actual arrangement of details. 
His advance in the direction of Communism was the turning-point in Owen’s life. As long as he was simply a philanthropist, he was rewarded with nothing but wealth, applause, honor, and glory. He was the most popular man in Europe. Not only men of his own class, but statesmen and princes listened to him approvingly. But when he came out with his Communist theories that was quite another thing. Three great obstacles seemed to him especially to block the path to social reform: private property, religion, the present form of marriage. 
He knew what confronted him if he attacked these – outlawry, excommunication from official society, the loss of his whole social position. But nothing of this prevented him from attacking them without fear of consequences, and what he had foreseen happened. Banished from official society, with a conspiracy of silence against him in the press, ruined by his unsuccessful Communist experiments in America, in which he sacrificed all his fortune, he turned directly to the working-class and continued working in their midst for 30 years. Every social movement, every real advance in England on behalf of the workers links itself on to the name of Robert Owen. He forced through in 1819, after five years’ fighting, the first law limiting the hours of labor of women and children in factories. He was president of the first Congress at which all the Trade Unions of England united in a single great trade association. He introduced as transition measures to the complete communistic organization of society, on the one hand, cooperative societies for retail trade and production. These have since that time, at least, given practical proof that the merchant and the manufacturer are socially quite unnecessary. On the other hand, he introduced labor bazaars for the exchange of the products of labor through the medium of labor-notes, whose unit was a single hour of work; institutions necessarily doomed to failure, but completely anticipating Proudhon’s bank of exchange of a much later period, and differing entirely from this in that it did not claim to be the panacea for all social ills, but only a first step towards a much more radical revolution of society. 
The Utopians’ mode of thought has for a long time governed the Socialist ideas of the 19th century, and still governs some of them. Until very recently, all French and English Socialists did homage to it. The earlier German Communism, including that of Weitling, was of the same school. To all these, Socialism is the expression of absolute truth, reason and justice, and has only to be discovered to conquer all the world by virtue of its own power. And as an absolute truth is independent of time, space, and of the historical development of man, it is a mere accident when and where it is discovered. With all this, absolute truth, reason, and justice are different with the founder of each different school. And as each one’s special kind of absolute truth, reason, and justice is again conditioned by his subjective understanding, his conditions of existence, the measure of his knowledge and his intellectual training, there is no other ending possible in this conflict of absolute truths than that they shall be mutually exclusive of one another. Hence, from this nothing could come but a kind of eclectic, average Socialism, which, as a matter of fact, has up to the present time dominated the minds of most of the socialist workers in France and England. Hence, a mish-mash allowing of the most manifold shades of opinion: a mish-mash of such critical statements, economic theories, pictures of future society by the founders of different sects, as excite a minimum of opposition; a mish-mash which is the more easily brewed the more definite sharp edges of the individual constituents are rubbed down in the stream of debate, like rounded pebbles in a brook. 
To make a science of Socialism, it had first to be placed upon a real basis. 
 

Next: Dialectics
 

Notes

1.
This is the passage on the French Revolution:

“Thought, the concept of law, all at once made itself felt, and against this the old scaffolding of wrong could make no stand.  In this conception of law, therefore, a constitution has now been established, and henceforth everything must be based upon this.  Since the Sun had been in the firmament, and the planets circled around him, the sight had never been seen of man standing upon his head – i.e., on the Idea – and building reality after this image.  Anaxagoras first said that the Nous, Reason, rules the world; but now, for the first time, had men come to recognize that the Idea must rule the mental reality.  And this was a magnificent sunrise.  All thinking Beings have participated in celebrating this holy day.  A sublime emotion swayed men at that time, an enthusiasm of reason pervaded the world, as if now had come the reconciliation of the Divine Principle with the world.”

[Hegel: “The Philosophy of history”, 1840, p.535] 

Is it not high time to set the anti-Socialist law in action against such teachings, subversive and to the common danger, by the late Professor Hegel?

2.
Engels refers here to the works of the utopian Socialists Thomas More (16th century) and Tommaso Campanella (17th century). See Code de la nature, Morelly, Paris 1841 and De la législation, ou principe des lois, Mably, Amsterdam 1776.

3.
From The Revolution in Mind and Practice, p.21, a memorial addressed to all the “red Republicans, Communists and Socialists of Europe,” and sent to the provisional government of France, 1848, and also “to Queen Victoria and her responsible advisers.” 
 


Table of Contents |
Utopian Socialism |
Fourier Archive




==========

## Part II: [Dialectics]







Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (Chpt. 2)




Frederick Engels
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific

II
[Dialectics]

 


In the meantime, along with and after the French philosophy
of the 18th century, had arisen the new German philosophy, culminating
in Hegel.

Its greatest merit was the taking up again of dialectics as the
highest form of reasoning. The old Greek philosophers were all born natural
dialecticians, and Aristotle, the most encyclopaedic of them, had already
analyzed the most essential forms of dialectic thought. The newer philosophy,
on the other hand, although in it also dialectics had brilliant exponents
(e.g. Descartes and Spinoza), had, especially through English influence,
become more and more rigidly fixed in the so-called metaphysical mode of
reasoning, by which also the French of the 18th century were almost wholly
dominated, at all events in their special philosophical work. Outside philosophy
in the restricted sense, the French nevertheless produced masterpieces
of dialectic. We need only call to mind Diderot's Le Neveu de Rameau,
and Rousseau's Discours sur l'origine et les fondements de l'inegalite
parmi les hommes. We give here, in brief, the essential character
of these two modes of thought.

When we consider and reflect upon Nature at large, or the history
of mankind, or our own intellectual activity, at first we see the picture
of an endless entanglement of relations and reactions, permutations and
combinations, in which nothing remains what, where and as it was, but everything
moves, changes, comes into being and passes away. We see, therefore, at
first the picture as a whole, with its individual parts still more or less
kept in the background; we observe the movements, transitions, connections,
rather than the things that move, combine, and are connected. This primitive,
naive but intrinsically correct conception of the world is that of ancient
Greek philosophy, and was first clearly formulated by Heraclitus: everything
is and is not, for everything is fluid, is constantly changing, constantly
coming into being and passing away.[A]

But this conception, correctly as it expresses the general character
of the picture of appearances as a whole, does not suffice to explain the
details of which this picture is made up, and so long as we do not understand
these, we have not a clear idea of the whole picture. In order to understand
these details, we must detach them from their natural, special causes,
effects, etc. This is, primarily, the task of natural science and historical
research: branches of science which the Greek of classical times, on very
good grounds, relegated to a subordinate position, because they had first
of all to collect materials for these sciences to work upon. A certain
amount of natural and historical material must be collected before there
can be any critical analysis, comparison, and arrangement in classes, orders,
and species. The foundations of the exact natural sciences were, therefore,
first worked out by the Greeks of the Alexandrian period [B],
and later on, in the Middle Ages, by the Arabs. Real natural science dates

from the second half of the 15th century, and thence onward it had advanced

with constantly increasing rapidity. The analysis of Nature into its individual

parts, the grouping of the different natural processes and objects in definite

classes, the study of the internal anatomy of organized bodies in their

manifold forms — these were the fundamental conditions of the gigantic

strides in our knowledge of Nature that have been made during the last

400 years. But this method of work has also left us as legacy the habit

of observing natural objects and processes in isolation, apart from their

connection with the vast whole; of observing them in repose, not in motion;

as constraints, not as essentially variables; in their death, not in their

life. And when this way of looking at things was transferred by Bacon and

Locke from natural science to philosophy, it begot the narrow, metaphysical

mode of thought peculiar to the last century.

To the metaphysician, things and their mental reflexes, ideas,
are isolated, are to be considered one after the other and apart from
each other, are objects of investigation fixed, rigid, given once for all.
He thinks in absolutely irreconcilable antitheses. His communication is
'yea, yea; nay, nay'; for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil."
For him, a thing either exists or does not exist; a thing cannot at the
same time be itself and something else. Positive and negative absolutely
exclude one another; cause and effect stand in a rigid antithesis, one to
the other.

At first sight, this mode of thinking seems to us very luminous,
because it is that of so-called sound commonsense. Only sound commonsense,
respectable fellow that he is, in the homely realm of his own four walls,
has very wonderful adventures directly he ventures out into the wide world
of research. And the metaphysical mode of thought, justifiable and necessary
as it is in a number of domains whose extent varies according to the nature
of the particular object of investigation, sooner or later reaches a limit,
beyond which it becomes one-sided, restricted, abstract, lost in insoluble
contradictions. In the contemplation of individual things, it forgets the
connection between them; in the contemplation of their existence, it forgets
the beginning and end of that existence; of their repose, it forgets their
motion. It cannot see the woods for the trees.

For everyday purposes, we know and can say, e.g., whether an animal
is alive or not. But, upon closer inquiry, we find that this is, in many
cases, a very complex question, as the jurists know very well. They have
cudgelled their brains in vain to discover a rational limit beyond which
the killing of the child in its mother's womb is murder. It is just as
impossible to determine absolutely the moment of death, for physiology
proves that death is not an instantaneous, momentary phenomenon, but a
very protracted process.

In like manner, every organized being is every moment the same
and not the same; every moment, it assimilates matter supplied from without,
and gets rid of other matter; every moment, some cells of its body die
and others build themselves anew; in a longer or shorter time, the matter
of its body is completely renewed, and is replaced by other molecules of
matter, so that every organized being is always itself, and yet something
other than itself.

Further, we find upon closer investigation that the two poles
of an antithesis, positive and negative, e.g., are as inseparable as they
are opposed, and that despite all their opposition, they mutually interpenetrate.
And we find, in like manner, that cause and effect are conceptions which
only hold good in their application to individual cases; but as soon as
we consider the individual cases in their general connection with the universe
as a whole, they run into each other, and they become confounded when we
contemplate that universal action and reaction in which causes and effects
are eternally changing places, so that what is effect here and now will
be cause there and then, and vice versa.

None of these processes and modes of thought enters into the framework
of metaphysical reasoning. Dialectics, on the other hand, comprehends things
and their representations, ideas, in their essential connection, concatenation,
motion, origin and ending. Such processes as those mentioned above are,
therefore, so many corroborations of its own method of procedure.

Nature is the proof of dialectics, and it must be said for modern
science that it has furnished this proof with very rich materials increasingly
daily, and thus has shown that, in the last resort, Nature works dialectically
and not metaphysically; that she does not move in the eternal oneness of
a perpetually recurring circle, but goes through a real historical evolution.
In this connection, Darwin must be named before all others. He dealt the
metaphysical conception of Nature the heaviest blow by his proof that all
organic beings, plants, animals, and man himself, are the products of a
process of evolution going on through millions of years. But, the naturalists,
who have learned to think dialectically, are few and far between, and this
conflict of the results of discovery with preconceived modes of thinking,
explains the endless confusion now reigning in theoretical natural science,
the despair of teachers as well as learners, of authors and readers alike.

An exact representation of the universe, of its evolution, of
the development of mankind, and of the reflection of this evolution in
the minds of men, can therefore only be obtained by the methods of dialectics
with its constant regard to the innumerable actions and reactions of life
and death, of progressive or retrogressive changes. And in this spirit,
the new German philosophy has worked. Kant began his career by resolving
the stable Solar system of Newton and its eternal duration, after the famous
initial impulse had once been given, into the result of a historical process,
the formation of the Sun and all the planets out of a rotating, nebulous
mass. From this, he at the same time drew the conclusion that, given this
origin of the Solar system, its future death followed of necessity. His
theory, half a century later, was established mathematically by Laplace,
and half a century after that, the spectroscope proved the existence in
space of such incandescent masses of gas in various stages of condensation.


This new German philosophy culminated in the Hegelian system. In this system
— and herein is its great merit — for the first time the whole world,
natural, historical, intellectual, is represented as a process — i.e.,
as in constant motion, change, transformation, development; and the attempt
is made to trace out the internal connection that makes a continuous whole
of all this movement and development. From this point of view, the history
of mankind no longer appeared as a wild whirl of senseless deeds of violence,
all equally condemnable at the judgment seat of mature philosophic reason
and which are best forgotten as quickly as possible, but as the process
of evolution of man himself. It was now the task of the intellect to follow
the gradual march of this process through all its devious ways, and to
trace out the inner law running through all its apparently accidental phenomena.

That the Hegelian system did not solve the problem it propounded
is here immaterial. Its epoch-making merit was that it propounded the problem.
This problem is one that no single individual will ever be able to solve.
Although Hegel was — with Saint-Simon — the most encyclopaedic mind of
his time, yet he was limited, first, by the necessary limited extent of
his own knowledge and, second, by the limited extent and depth of the knowledge
and conceptions of his age. To these limits, a third must be added; Hegel
was an idealist. To him, the thoughts within his brain were not the more
or less abstract pictures of actual things and processes, but, conversely,
things and their evolution were only the realized pictures of the "Idea",
existing somewhere from eternity before the world was. This way of thinking
turned everything upside down, and completely reversed the actual connection
of things in the world. Correctly and ingeniously as many groups of facts
were grasped by Hegel, yet, for the reasons just given, there is much that
is botched, artificial, labored, in a word, wrong in point of detail. The
Hegelian system, in itself, was a colossal miscarriage — but it was also
the last of its kind.

It was suffering, in fact, from an internal and incurable contradiction.
Upon the one hand, its essential proposition was the conception that human
history is a process of evolution, which, by its very nature, cannot find
its intellectual final term in the discovery of any so-called absolute
truth. But, on the other hand, it laid claim to being the very essence
of this absolute truth. A system of natural and historical knowledge, embracing
everything, and final for all time, is a contradiction to the fundamental
law of dialectic reasoning.

This law, indeed, by no means excludes, but, on the contrary,
includes the idea that the systematic knowledge of the external universe
can make giant strides from age to age.

The perception of the the fundamental contradiction in German
idealism led necessarily back to materialism, but — nota bene —
not to the simply metaphysical, exclusively mechanical materialism of the
18th century. Old materialism looked upon all previous history as a crude
heap of irrationality and violence; modern materialism sees in it the process
of evolution of humanity, and aims at discovering the laws thereof. With
the French of the 18th century, and even with Hegel, the conception obtained
of Nature as a whole — moving in narrow circles, and forever immutable,
with its eternal celestial bodies, as Newton, and unalterable organic species,
as Linnaeus, taught. Modern materialism embraces the more recent discoveries
of natural science, according to which Nature also has its history in time,
the celestial bodies, like the organic species that, under favorable conditions,
people them, being born and perishing. And even if Nature, as a whole,
must still be said to move in recurrent cycles, these cycles assume infinitely
larger dimensions. In both aspects, modern materialism is essentially dialectic,
and no longer requires the assistance of that sort of philosophy which,
queen-like, pretended to rule the remaining mob of sciences. As soon as
each special science is bound to make clear its position in the great totality
of things and of our knowledge of things, a special science dealing with
this totality is superfluous or unnecessary. That which still survives
of all earlier philosophy is the science of thought and its law — formal
logic and dialectics. Everything else is subsumed in the positive science
of Nature and history.

Whilst, however, the revolution in the conception of Nature could
only be made in proportion to the corresponding positive materials furnished
by research, already much earlier certain historical facts had occurred
which led to a decisive change in the conception of history. In 1831, the
first working-class rising took place in Lyons; between 1838 and 1842,
the first national working-class movement, that of the English Chartists,
reached its height. The class struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie
came to the front in the history of the most advanced countries in Europe,
in proportion to the development, upon the one hand, of modern industry,
upon the other, of the newly-acquired political supremacy of the bourgeoisie.
Facts more and more strenuously gave the lie to the teachings of bourgeois
economy as to the identity of the interests of capital and labor, as to
the universal harmony and universal prosperity that would be the consequence
of unbridled competition. All these things could no longer be ignored,
any more than the French and English Socialism, which was their theoretical,
though very imperfect, expression. But the old idealist conception of history,
which was not yet dislodged, knew nothing of class struggles based upon

economic interests, knew nothing of economic interests; production and

all economic relations appeared in it only as incidental, subordinate elements

in the "history of civilization".





The new facts made imperative a new examination of all past history.

Then it was seen that all past history, with the exception of its

primitive stages, was the history of class struggles; that these warring

classes of society are always the products of the modes of production and

of exchange — in a word, of the economic conditions of their time;

that the economic structure of society always furnishes the real basis,

starting from which we can alone work out the ultimate explanation of the

whole superstructure of juridical and political institutions as well as

of the religious, philosophical, and other ideas of a given historical

period. Hegel has freed history from metaphysics — he made it dialectic;

but his conception of history was essentially idealistic. But now idealism

was driven from its last refuge, the philosophy of history; now a materialistic

treatment of history was propounded, and a method found of explaining man's

"knowing" by his "being", instead of, as heretofore, his "being" by his

"knowing".





From that time forward, Socialism was no longer an accidental

discovery of this or that ingenious brain, but the necessary outcome of

the struggle between two historically developed classes — the proletariat

and the bourgeoisie. Its task was no longer to manufacture a system of

society as perfect as possible, but to examine the historico-economic succession

of events from which these classes and their antagonism had of necessity

sprung, and to discover in the economic conditions thus created the means

of ending the conflict. But the Socialism of earlier days was as incompatible

with this materialist conception as the conception of Nature of the French

materialists was with dialectics and modern natural science. The Socialism

of earlier days certainly criticized the existing capitalistic mode of

production and its consequences. But it could not explain them, and, therefore,

could not get the mastery of them. It could only simply reject them as

bad. The more strongly this earlier Socialism denounced the exploitations

of the working-class, inevitable under Capitalism, the less able was it

clearly to show in what this exploitation consisted and how it arose, but

for this it was necessary —





to present the capitalistic mode of production in its historical connection

and its inevitableness during a particular historical period, and therefore,

also, to present its inevitable downfall; and



to lay bare its essential character, which was still a secret. This was

done by the discovery of surplus-value.



It was shown that the appropriation of unpaid labor is the basis of the

capitalist mode of production and of the exploitation of the worker that

occurs under it; that even if the capitalist buys the labor power of his

laborer at its full value as a commodity on the market, he yet extracts

more value from it than he paid for; and that in the ultimate analysis,

this surplus-value forms those sums of value from which are heaped up constantly

increasing masses of capital in the hands of the possessing classes. The

genesis of capitalist production and the production of capital were both

explained.



These two great discoveries, the materialistic conception of history

and the revelation of the secret of capitalistic production through surplus-value,

we owe to Marx. With these discoveries, Socialism became a science. The

next thing was to work out all its details and relations.


 



Next: Historical Materialism

 



Notes



[A]

Unknown to the Western world until the 20th-century, the Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu was a predecessor of or possibly contemporary to Heraclitus. Lao Tzu wrote the renowned Tao Te Ching in which he also espouses the fundamental principles of dialectics.



[B]

The Alexandrian period of the development of science comprises the 

     period extending from the 3rd century B.C. to the 17th century 

     A.D.  It derives its name from the town of Alexandria in Egypt, 

     which was one of the most important centres of international 

     economic intercourses at that time.  In the Alexandrian period, 

     mathematics (Euclid and Archimedes), geography, astronomy, anatomy, 

     physiology, etc., attained considerable development.  

     


China also been began development in natural sciences in the third century B.C.E.

 


Table of Contents




==========

## Part III: [Historical Materialism]







Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (Chpt. 3)





Frederick Engels



Socialism: Utopian and Scientific





III

[Historical Materialism]



 



The materialist conception of history starts from

the proposition that the production of the means to support human life

and, next to production, the exchange of things produced, is the basis

of all social structure; that in every society that has appeared in history,

the manner in which wealth is distributed and society divided into classes

or orders is dependent upon what is produced, how it is produced, and how

the products are exchanged. From this point of view, the final causes of

all social changes and political revolutions are to be sought, not in men's

brains, not in men's better insights into eternal truth and justice, but

in changes in the modes of production and exchange. They are to be sought,

not in the philosophy, but in the economics of each particular

epoch. The growing perception that existing social institutions are unreasonable

and unjust, that reason has become unreason, and right wrong [1],

is only proof that in the modes of production and exchange changes have

silently taken place with which the social order, adapted to earlier economic

conditions, is no longer in keeping. From this it also follows that the

means of getting rid of the incongruities that have been brought to light

must also be present, in a more or less developed condition, within the

changed modes of production themselves. These means are not to be invented

by deduction from fundamental principles, but are to be discovered in the

stubborn facts of the existing system of production.





What is, then, the position of modern Socialism in this connection?





The present situation of society — this is now pretty generally

conceded — is the creation of the ruling class of today, of the bourgeoisie.

The mode of production peculiar to the bourgeoisie, known, since Marx,

as the capitalist mode of production, was incompatible with the feudal

system, with the privileges it conferred upon individuals, entire social

ranks and local corporations, as well as with the hereditary ties of subordination

which constituted the framework of its social organization. The bourgeoisie

broke up the feudal system and built upon its ruins the capitalist order

of society, the kingdom of free competition, of personal liberty, of the

equality, before the law, of all commodity owners, of all the rest of the

capitalist blessings. Thenceforward, the capitalist mode of production

could develop in freedom. Since steam, machinery, and the making of machines

by machinery transformed the older manufacture into modern industry, the

productive forces, evolved under the guidance of the bourgeoisie, developed

with a rapidity and in a degree unheard of before. But just as the older

manufacture, in its time, and handicraft, becoming more developed under

its influence, had come into collision with the feudal trammels of the

guilds, so now modern industry, in its complete development, comes into

collision with the bounds within which the capitalist mode of production

holds it confined. The new productive forces have already outgrown the

capitalistic mode of using them. And this conflict between productive forces

and modes of production is not a conflict engendered in the mind of man,

like that between original sin and divine justice. It exists, in fact,

objectively, outside us, independently of the will and actions even of

the men that have brought it on. Modern Socialism is nothing but the reflex,

in thought, of this conflict in fact; its ideal reflection in the minds,

first, of the class directly suffering under it, the working class.





Now, in what does this conflict consist?





Before capitalist production — i.e., in the Middle Ages — the

system of petty industry obtained generally, based upon the private property

of the laborers in their means of production; in the country, the agriculture

of the small peasant, freeman, or serf; in the towns, the handicrafts organized

in guilds. The instruments of labor — land, agricultural implements, the

workshop, the tool — were the instruments of labor of single individuals,

adapted for the use of one worker, and, therefore, of necessity, small,

dwarfish, circumscribed. But, for this very reason, they belonged as a

rule to the producer himself. To concentrate these scattered, limited means

of production, to enlarge them, to turn them into the powerful levers of

production of the present day — this was precisely the historic role of

capitalist production and of its upholder, the bourgeoisie. In the fourth

section of Capital, Marx has explained in detail how since the 15th

century this has been historically worked out through the three phases

of simple co-operation, manufacture, and modern industry. But the bourgeoisie,

as is shown there, could not transform these puny means of production into

mighty productive forces without transforming them, at the same time, from

means of production of the individual into social means of production

only workable by a collectivity of men. The spinning wheel, the handloom,

the blacksmith's hammer, were replaced by the spinning-machine, the power-loom,

the steam-hammer; the individual workshop, by the factory implying the

co-operation of hundreds and thousands of workmen. In like manner, production

itself changed from a series of individual into a series of social acts,

and the production from individual to social products. The yarn, the cloth,

the metal articles that now come out of the factory were the joint product

of many workers, through whose hands they had successively to pass before

they were ready. No one person could say of them: "I made that; this is

my product."





But where, in a given society, the fundamental form of production

is that spontaneous division of labor which creeps in gradually and not

upon any preconceived plan, there the products take on the form of commodities,

whose mutual exchange, buying and selling, enable the individual producers

to satisfy their manifold wants. And this was the case in the Middle Ages.

The peasant, e.g., sold to the artisan agricultural products and bought

from him the products of handicraft. Into this society of individual producers,

of commodity producers, the new mode of production thrust itself. In the

midst of the old division of labor, grown up spontaneously and upon no

definite plan, which had governed the whole of society, now arose division

of labor upon a definite plan, as organized in the factory; side

by side with individual production appeared social production.

The products of both were sold in the same market, and, therefore, at prices

at least approximately equal. But organization upon a definite plan was

stronger than spontaneous division of labor. The factories working with

the combined social forces of a collectivity of individuals produced their

commodities far more cheaply than the individual small producers. Individual

producers succumbed in one department after another. Socialized production

revolutionized all the old methods of production. But its revolutionary

character was, at the same time, so little recognized that it was, on the

contrary, introduced as a means of increasing and developing the production

of commodities. When it arose, it found ready-made, and made liberal use

of, certain machinery for the production and exchange of commodities: merchants'

capital, handicraft, wage-labor. Socialized production thus introducing

itself as a new form of the production of commodities, it was a matter

of course that under it the old forms of appropriation remained in full

swing, and were applied to its products as well.





In the medieval stage of evolution of the production of commodities,

the question as to the owner of the product of labor could not arise. The

individual producer, as a rule, had, from raw material belonging to himself,

and generally his own handiwork, produced it with his own tools, by the

labor of his own hands or of his family. There was no need for him to appropriate

the new product. It belonged wholly to him, as a matter of course. His

property in the product was, therefore, based upon his own labor.

Even where external help was used, this was, as a rule, of little importance,

and very generally was compensated by something other than wages. The apprentices

and journeymen of the guilds worked less for board and wages than for education,

in order that they might become master craftsmen themselves.





Then came the concentration of the means of production and of

the producers in large workshops and manufactories, their transformation

into actual socialized means of production and socialized producers. But

the socialized producers and means of production and their products were

still treated, after this change, just as they had been before — i.e.,

as the means of production and the products of individuals. Hitherto, the

owner of the instruments of labor had himself appropriated the product,

because, as a rule, it was his own product and the assistance of others

was the exception. Now, the owner of the instruments of labor always appropriated

to himself the product, although it was no longer his product but

exclusively the product of the labor of others. Thus, the products

now produced socially were not appropriated by those who had actually set

in motion the means of production and actually produced the commodities,

but by the capitalists. The means of production, and production

itself, had become in essence socialized. But they were subjected to a

form of appropriation which presupposes the private production of individuals,

under which, therefore, every one owns his own product and brings it to

market. The mode of production is subjected to this form of appropriation,

although it abolishes the conditions upon which the latter rests. [2]


This contradiction, which gives to the new mode of production

its capitalistic character, contains the germ of the whole of the social

antagonisms of today. The greater the mastery obtained by the new mode

of production over all important fields of production and in all manufacturing

countries, the more it reduced individual production to an insignificant

residuum, the more clearly was brought out the incompatibility of socialized

production with capitalistic appropriation.





The first capitalists found, as we have said, alongside of other

forms of labor, wage-labor ready-made for them on the market. But it was

exceptional, complementary, accessory, transitory wage-labor. The agricultural

laborer, though, upon occasion, he hired himself out by the day, had a

few acres of his own land on which he could at all events live at a pinch.

The guilds were so organized that the journeyman of today became the master

of tomorrow. But all this changed, as soon as the means of production became

socialized and concentrated in the hands of capitalists. The means of production,

as well as the product, of the individual producer became more and more

worthless; there was nothing left for him but to turn wage-worker under

the capitalist. Wage-labor, aforetime the exception and accessory, now

became the rule and basis of all production; aforetime complementary, it

now became the sole remaining function of the worker. The wage-worker for

a time became a wage-worker for life. The number of these permanent was

further enormously increased by the breaking-up of the feudal system that

occurred at the same time, by the disbanding of the retainers of the feudal

lords, the eviction of the peasants from their homesteads, etc. The separation

was made complete between the means of production concentrated in the hands

of the capitalists, on the one side, and the producers, possessing nothing

but their labor-power, on the other. The contradiction between socialized

production and capitalistic appropriation manifested itself as the antagonism

of proletariat and bourgeoisie.


We have seen that the capitalistic mode of production thrust its

way into a society of commodity-producers, of individual producers, whose

social bond was the exchange of their products. But every society based

upon the production of commodities has this peculiarity: that the producers

have lost control over their own social inter-relations. Each man produces

for himself with such means of production as he may happen to have, and

for such exchange as he may require to satisfy his remaining wants. No

one knows how much of his particular article is coming on the market, nor

how much of it will be wanted. No one knows whether his individual product

will meet an actual demand, whether he will be able to make good his costs

of production or even to sell his commodity at all. Anarchy reigns in socialized

production.





But the production of commodities, like every other form of production,

has it peculiar, inherent laws inseparable from it; and these laws work,

despite anarchy, in and through anarchy. They reveal themselves in the

only persistent form of social inter-relations — i.e., in exchange —

and here they affect the individual producers as compulsory laws of competition.

They are, at first, unknown to these producers themselves, and have to

be discovered by them gradually and as the result of experience. They work

themselves out, therefore, independently of the producers, and in antagonism

to them, as inexorable natural laws of their particular form of production.

The product governs the producers.





In mediaeval society, especially in the earlier centuries, production

was essentially directed toward satisfying the wants of the individual.

It satisfied, in the main, only the wants of the producer and his family.

Where relations of personal dependence existed, as in the country, it also

helped to satisfy the wants of the feudal lord. In all this there was,

therefore, no exchange; the products, consequently, did not assume the

character of commodities. The family of the peasant produced almost everything

they wanted: clothes and furniture, as well as the means of subsistence.

Only when it began to produce more than was sufficient to supply its own

wants and the payments in kind to the feudal lords, only then did it also

produce commodities. This surplus, thrown into socialized exchange and

offered for sale, became commodities.





The artisan in the towns, it is true, had from the first to produce

for exchange. But they, also, themselves supplied the greatest part of

their individual wants. They had gardens and plots of land. They turned

their cattle out into the communal forest, which, also, yielded them timber

and firing. The women spun flax, wool, and so forth. Production for the

purpose of exchange, production of commodities, was only in its infancy.

Hence, exchange was restricted, the market narrow, the methods of production

stable; there was local exclusiveness without, local unity within; the

mark in the country; in the town, the guild.





But with the extension of the production of commodities, and especially

with the introduction of the capitalist mode of production, the laws of

commodity-production, hitherto latent, came into action more openly and

with greater force. The old bonds were loosened, the old exclusive limits

broken through, the producers were more and more turned into independent,

isolated producers of commodities. It became apparent that the production

of society at large was ruled by absence of plan, by accident, by anarchy;

and this anarchy grew to greater and greater height. But the chief means

by aid of which the capitalist mode of production intensified this anarchy

of socialized production was the exact opposite of anarchy. It was the

increasing organization of production, upon a social basis, in every individual

productive establishment. By this, the old, peaceful, stable condition

of things was ended. Wherever this organization of production was introduced

into a branch of industry, it brooked no other method of production by

its side. The field of labor became a battle-ground. The great geographical

discoveries, and the colonization following them, multiplied markets and

quickened the transformation of handicraft into manufacture. The war did

not simply break out between the individual producers of particular localities.

The local struggles begat, in their turn, national conflicts, the commercial

wars of the 17th and 18th centuries.





Finally, modern industry and the opening of the world-market made

the struggle universal, and at the same time gave it an unheard-of virulence.

Advantages in natural or artificial conditions of production now decide

the existence or non-existence of individual capitalists, as well as of

whole industries and countries. He that falls is remorselessly cast aside.

It is the Darwinian struggle of the individual for existence transferred

from Nature to society with intensified violence. The conditions of existence

natural to the animal appear as the final term of human development. The

contradiction between socialized production and capitalistic appropriation

now presents itself as an antagonism between the organization of production

in the individual workshop and the anarchy of production in society generally.


The capitalistic mode of production moves in these two forms of

the antagonism immanent to it from its very origin. It is never able to

get out of that "vicious circle" which Fourier had already discovered.

What Fourier could not, indeed, see in his time is that this circle is

gradually narrowing; that the movement becomes more and more a spiral,

and must come to an end, like the movement of planets, by collision with

the centre. It is the compelling force of anarchy in the production of

society at large that more and more completely turns the great majority

of men into proletarians; and it is the masses of the proletariat again

who will finally put an end to anarchy in production. It is the compelling

force of anarchy in social production that turns the limitless perfectibility

of machinery under modern industry into a compulsory law by which every

individual industrial capitalist must perfect his machinery more and more,

under penalty of ruin.





But the perfecting of machinery is making human labor superfluous.

If the introduction and increase of machinery means the displacement of

millions of manual by a few machine-workers, improvement in machinery means

the displacement of more and more of the machine-workers themselves. It

means, in the last instance, the production of a number of available wage

workers in excess of the average needs of capital, the formation of a complete

industrial reserve army, as I called it in 1845 [3],

available at the times when industry is working at high pressure, to be

cast out upon the street when the inevitable crash comes, a constant dead

weight upon the limbs of the working-class in its struggle for existence

with capital, a regulator for keeping of wages down to the low level that

suits the interests of capital.





Thus it comes about, to quote Marx, that machinery becomes the most powerful

weapon in the war of capital against the working-class; that the instruments

of labor constantly tear the means of subsistence out of the hands of the

laborer; that they very product of the worker is turned into an instrument

for his subjugation.





Thus it comes about that the economizing of the instruments of labor becomes

at the same time, from the outset, the most reckless waste of labor-power,

and robbery based upon the normal conditions under which labor functions;

that machinery,



"the most powerful instrument for shortening labor time, becomes the

most unfailing means for placing every moment of the laborer's time and

that of his family at the disposal of the capitalist for the purpose of

expanding the value of his capital." (Capital, English edition,

p. 406)





Thus it comes about that the overwork of some becomes the preliminary

condition for the idleness of others, and that modern industry, which hunts

after new consumers over the whole world, forces the consumption of the

masses at home down to a starvation minimum, and in doing thus destroys

its own home market.



"The law that always equilibrates the relative surplus- population,

or industrial reserve army, to the extent and energy of accumulation, this

law rivets the laborer to capital more firmly than the wedges of Vulcan

did Prometheus to the rock. It establishes an accumulation of misery, corresponding

with the accumulation of capital. Accumulation of wealth at one pole is,

therefore, at the same time accumulation of misery, agony of toil, slavery,

ignorance, brutality, mental degradation, at the opposite pole, i.e., on

the side of the class that produces its own product in the form of capital

(Marx's Capital, p. 661)





And to expect any other division of the products from the capitalist mode
of production is the same as expecting the electrodes of a battery not
to decompose acidulated water, not to liberate oxygen at the positive,
hydrogen at the negative pole, so long as they are connected with the
battery.



We have seen that the ever-increasing perfectibility of modern machinery

is, by the anarchy of social production, turned into a compulsory law that

forces the individual industrial capitalist always to improve his machinery,

always to increase its productive force. The bare possibility of extending

the field of production is transformed for him into a similarly compulsory

law. The enormous expansive force of modern industry, compared with which

that of gases is mere child's play, appears to us now as a necessity

for expansion, both qualitative and quantative, that laughs at all resistance.

Such resistance is offered by consumption, by sales, by the markets for

the products of modern industry. But the capacity for extension, extensive

and intensive, of the markets is primarily governed by quite different

laws that work much less energetically. The extension of the markets cannot

keep pace with the extension of production. The collision becomes inevitable,

and as this cannot produce any real solution so long as it does not break

in pieces the capitalist mode of production, the collisions become periodic.

Capitalist production has begotten another "vicious circle".





As a matter of fact, since 1825, when the first general crisis

broke out, the whole industrial and commercial world, production and exchange

among all civilized peoples and their more or less barbaric hangers-on,

are thrown out of joint about once every 10 years. Commerce is at a stand-still,

the markets are glutted, products accumulate, as multitudinous as they

are unsaleable, hard cash disappears, credit vanishes, factories are closed,

the mass of the workers are in want of the means of subsistence, because

they have produced too much of the means of subsistence; bankruptcy follows

upon bankruptcy, execution upon execution. The stagnation lasts for years;

productive forces and products are wasted and destroyed wholesale, until

the accumulated mass of commodities finally filter off, more or less depreciated

in value, until production and exchange gradually begin to move again.

Little by little, the pace quickens. It becomes a trot. The industrial

trot breaks into a canter, the canter in turn grows into the headlong gallop

of a perfect steeplechase of industry, commercial credit, and speculation,

which finally, after breakneck leaps, ends where it began — in the ditch

of a crisis. And so over and over again. We have now, since the year 1825,

gone through this five times, and at the present moment (1877), we are

going through it for the sixth time. And the character of these crises

is so clearly defined that Fourier hit all of them off when he described

the first "crise plethorique", a crisis from plethora.





In these crises, the contradiction between socialized production

and capitalist appropriation ends in a violent explosion. The circulation

of commodities is, for the time being, stopped. Money, the means of circulation,

becomes a hindrance to circulation. All the laws of production and circulation

of commodities are turned upside down. The economic collision has reached

its apogee. The mode of production is in rebellion against the mode

of exchange.


The fact that the socialized organization of production within

the factory has developed so far that it has become incompatible with the

anarchy of production in society, which exists side by side with and dominates

it, is brought home to the capitalist themselves by the violent concentration

of capital that occurs during crises, through the ruin of many large, and

a still greater number of small, capitalists. The whole mechanism of the

capitalist mode of production breaks down under the pressure of the productive

forces, its own creations. It is no longer able to turn all this mass of

means of production into capital. They lie fallow, and for that very reason

the industrial reserve army must also lie fallow. Means of production,

means of subsistence, available laborers, all the elements of production

and of general wealth, are present in abundance. But "abundance becomes

the source of distress and want" (Fourier), because it is the very thing

that prevents the transformation of the means of production and subsistence

into capital. For in capitalistic society, the means of production can

only function when they have undergone a preliminary transformation into

capital, into the means of exploiting human labor-power. The necessity

of this transformation into capital of the means of production and subsistence

stands like a ghost between these and the workers. It alone prevents the

coming together of the material and personal levers of production; it alone

forbids the means of production to function, the workers to work and live.

On the one hand, therefore, the capitalistic mode of production stands

convicted of its own incapacity to further direct these productive forces.

On the other, these productive forces themselves, with increasing energy,

press forward to the removal of the existing contradiction, to the abolition

of their quality as capital, to the practical recognition of their character

as social production forces.


This rebellion of the productive forces, as they grow more and

more powerful, against their quality as capital, this stronger and stronger

command that their social character shall be recognized, forces the capital

class itself to treat them more and more as social productive forces, so

far as this is possible under capitalist conditions. The period of industrial

high pressure, with its unbounded inflation of credit, not less than the

crash itself, by the collapse of great capitalist establishments, tends

to bring about that form of the socialization of great masses of the means

of production which we meet with in the different kinds of joint-stock

companies. Many of these means of production and of distribution are, from

the outset, so colossal that, like the railways, they exclude all other

forms of capitalistic expansion. At a further stage of evolution, this

form also becomes insufficient. The producers on a large scale in a particular

branch of an industry in a particular country unite in a "Trust", a union

for the purpose of regulating production. They determine the total amount

to be produced, parcel it out among themselves, and thus enforce the selling

price fixed beforehand. But trusts of this kind, as soon as business becomes

bad, are generally liable to break up, and on this very account compel

a yet greater concentration of association. The whole of a particular industry

is turned into one gigantic joint-stock company; internal competition gives

place to the internal monopoly of this one company. This has happened in

1890 with the English alkali production, which is now, after the fusion

of 48 large works, in the hands of one company, conducted upon a single

plan, and with a capital of 6,000,000 pounds.





In the trusts, freedom of competition changes into its very opposite

— into monopoly; and the production without any definite plan of capitalistic

society capitulates to the production upon a definite plan of the invading

socialistic society. Certainly, this is so far still to the benefit and

advantage of the capitalists. But, in this case, the exploitation is so

palpable, that it must break down. No nation will put up with production

conducted by trusts, with so barefaced an exploitation of the community

by a small band of dividend-mongers.





In any case, with trusts or without, the official representative

of capitalist society — the state — will ultimately have to undertake

the direction of production. [4]

This necessity for conversion into State property is felt first in the

great institutions for intercourse and communication — the post office,

the telegraphs, the railways.





If the crises demonstrate the incapacity of the bourgeoisie for

managing any longer modern productive forces, the transformation of the

great establishments for production and distribution into joint-stock companies,

trusts, and State property, show how unnecessary the bourgeoisie are for

that purpose. All the social functions of the capitalist has no further

social function than that of pocketing dividends, tearing off coupons,

and gambling on the Stock Exchange, where the different capitalists despoil

one another of their capital. At first, the capitalistic mode of production

forces out the workers. Now, it forces out the capitalists, and reduces

them, just as it reduced the workers, to the ranks of the surplus-population,

although not immediately into those of the industrial reserve army.





But, the transformation — either into joint-stock companies and

trusts, or into State-ownership — does not do away with the capitalistic

nature of the productive forces. In the joint-stock companies and trusts,

this is obvious. And the modern State, again, is only the organization

that bourgeois society takes on in order to support the external conditions

of the capitalist mode of production against the encroachments as well

of the workers as of individual capitalists. The modern state, no matter

what its form, is essentially a capitalist machine — the state of the

capitalists, the ideal personification of the total national capital. The

more it proceeds to the taking over of productive forces, the more does

it actually become the national capitalist, the more citizens does it exploit.

The workers remain wage-workers — proletarians. The capitalist relation

is not done away with. It is, rather, brought to a head. But, brought to

a head, it topples over. State-ownership of the productive forces is not

the solution of the conflict, but concealed within it are the technical

conditions that form the elements of that solution.





This solution can only consist in the practical recognition of

the social nature of the modern forces of production, and therefore in

the harmonizing with the socialized character of the means of production.

And this can only come about by society openly and directly taking possession

of the productive forces which have outgrown all control, except that of

society as a whole. The social character of the means of production and

of the products today reacts against the producers, periodically disrupts

all production and exchange, acts only like a law of Nature working blindly,

forcibly, destructively. But,with the taking over by society of the productive

forces, the social character of the means of production and of the products

will be utilized by the producers with a perfect understanding of its nature,

and instead of being a source of disturbance and periodical collapse, will

become the most powerful lever of production itself.





Active social forces work exactly like natural forces: blindly,

forcibly, destructively, so long as we do not understand, and reckon with,

them. But, when once we understand them, when once we grasp their action,

their direction, their effects, it depends only upon ourselves to subject

them more and more to our own will, and, by means of them, to reach our

own ends. And this holds quite especially of the mighty productive forces

of today. As long as we obstinately refuse to understand the nature and

the character of these social means of action — and this understanding

goes against the grain of the capitalist mode of production, and its defenders

— so long these forces are at work in spite of us, in opposition to us,

so long they master us, as we have shown above in detail.





But when once their nature is understood, they can, in the hands of the
producers

working together, be transformed from master demons into willing servants.

The difference is as that between the destructive force of electricity

in the lightning in the storm, and electricity under command in the telegraph

and the voltaic arc; the difference between a conflagration, and fire working

in the service of man. With this recognition, at last, of the real nature

of the productive forces of today, the social anarchy of production gives

place to a social regulation of production upon a definite plan, according

to the needs of the community and of each individual. Then the capitalist

mode of appropriation, in which the product enslaves first the producer,

and then the appropriator, is replaced by the mode of appropriation of

the products that is based upon the nature of the modern means of production;

upon the one hand, direct social appropriation, as means to the maintenance

and extension of production — on the other, direct individual appropriation,

as means of subsistence and of enjoyment.





Whilst the capitalist mode of production more and more completely

transforms the great majority of the population into proletarians, it creates

the power which, under penalty of its own destruction, is forced to accomplish

this revolution. Whilst it forces on more and more of the transformation

of the vast means of production, already socialized, into State property,

it shows itself the way to accomplishing this revolution. The proletariat

seizes political power and turns the means of production into State property.


But, in doing this, it abolishes itself as proletariat, abolishes

all class distinction and class antagonisms, abolishes also the State as

State. Society, thus far, based upon class antagonisms, had need of the

State. That is, of an organization of the particular class which was, pro

tempore, the exploiting class, an organization for the purpose of preventing

any interference from without with the existing conditions of production,

and, therefore, especially, for the purpose of forcibly keeping the exploited

classes in the condition of oppression corresponding with the given mode

of production (slavery, serfdom, wage-labor). The State was the official

representative of society as a whole; the gathering of it together into

a visible embodiment. But, it was this only in so far as it was the State

of that class which itself represented, for the time being, society as

a whole:





in ancient times, the State of slaveowning citizens;



in the Middle Ages, the feudal lords;



in our own times, the bourgeoisie.





When, at last, it becomes the real representative of the whole of society,

it renders itself unnecessary. As soon as there is no longer any social

class to be held in subjection; as soon as class rule, and the individual

struggle for existence based upon our present anarchy in production, with

the collisions and excesses arising from these, are removed, nothing more

remains to be repressed, and a special repressive force, a State, is no

longer necessary. The first act by virtue of which the State really constitutes

itself the representative of the whole of society — the taking possession

of the means of production in the name of society — this is, at the same

time, its last independent act as a State. State interference in social

relations becomes, in one domain after another, superfluous, and then dies

out of itself; the government of persons is replaced by the administration

of things, and by the conduct of processes of production. The State is

not "abolished". It dies out. This gives the measure of the value

of the phrase: "a free State", both as to its justifiable use at times by

agitators, and as to its ultimate scientific insufficiency; and also of

the demands of the so-called anarchists for the abolition of the State

out of hand.





Since the historical appearance of the capitalist mode of production,

the appropriation by society of all the means of production has often been

dreamed of, more or less vaguely, by individuals, as well as by sects,

as the ideal of the future. But it could become possible, could become

a historical necessity, only when the actual conditions for its realization

were there. Like every other social advance, it becomes practicable, not

by men understanding that the existence of classes is in contradiction

to justice, equality, etc., not by the mere willingness to abolish these

classes, but by virtue of certain new economic conditions. The separation

of society into an exploiting and an exploited class, a ruling and an oppressed

class, was the necessary consequences of the deficient and restricted development

of production in former times. So long as the total social labor only yields

a produce which but slightly exceeds that barely necessary for the existence

of all; so long, therefore, as labor engages all or almost all the time

of the great majority of the members of society — so long, of necessity,

this society is divided into classes. Side by side with the great majority,

exclusively bond slaves to labor, arises a class freed from directly productive

labor, which looks after the general affairs of society: the direction

of labor, State business, law, science, art, etc. It is, therefore, the

law of division of labor that lies at the basis of the division into classes.

But this does not prevent this division into classes from being carried

out by means of violence and robbery, trickery and fraud. it does not prevent

the ruling class, once having the upper hand, from consolidating its power

at the expense of the working-class, from turning its social leadership

into an intensified exploitation of the masses.





But if, upon this showing, division into classes has a certain

historical justification, it has this only for a given period, only under

given social conditions. It was based upon the insufficiency of production.

It will be swept away by the complete development of modern productive

forces. And, in fact, the abolition of classes in society presupposes a

degree of historical evolution at which the existence, not simply of this

or that particular ruling class, but of any ruling class at all, and, therefore,

the existence of class distinction itself, has become a obsolete anachronism.

It presupposes, therefore, the development of production carried out to

a degree at which appropriation of the means of production and of the products,

and, with this, of political domination, of the monopoly of culture, and

of intellectual leadership by a particular class of society, has become

not only superfluous but economically, politically, intellectually, a hindrance

to development.





This point is now reached. Their political and intellectual bankruptcy

is scarcely any longer a secret to the bourgeoisie themselves. Their economic

bankruptcy recurs regularly every 10 years. In every crisis, society is

suffocated beneath the weight of its own productive forces and products,

which it cannot use, and stands helpless, face-to-face with the absurd

contradiction that the producers have nothing to consume, because consumers

are wanting. The expansive force of the means of production bursts the bonds

that the capitalist mode of production had imposed upon them. Their deliverance

from these bonds is the one precondition for an unbroken, constantly-accelerated

development of the productive forces, and therewith for a practically unlimited

increase of production itself. Nor is this all. The socialized appropriation

of the means of production does away, not only with the present artificial

restrictions upon production, but also with the positive waste and devastation

of productive forces and products that are at the present time the inevitable

concomitants of production, and that reach their height in the crises.

Further, it sets free for the community at large a mass of means of production

and of products, by doing away with the senseless extravagance of the ruling

classes of today, and their political representatives. The possibility

of securing for every member of society, by means of socialized production,

an existence not only fully sufficient materially, and becoming day-by-day

more full, but an existence guaranteeing to all the free development and

exercise of their physical and mental faculties — this possibility is

now, for the first time, here, but it is here. [5]


With the seizing of the means of production by society, production

of commodities is done away with, and, simultaneously, the mastery of the

product over the producer. Anarchy in social production is replaced by

systematic, definite organization. The struggle for individual existence

disappears. Then, for the first time, man, in a certain sense, is finally

marked off from the rest of the animal kingdom, and emerges from mere animal

conditions of existence into really human ones. The whole sphere of the

conditions of life which environ man, and which have hitherto ruled man,

now comes under the dominion and control of man, who for the first time

becomes the real, conscious lord of nature, because he has now become master

of his own social organization. The laws of his own social action, hitherto

standing face-to-face with man as laws of Nature foreign to, and dominating

him, will then be used with full understanding, and so mastered by him.

Man's own social organization, hitherto confronting him as a necessity

imposed by Nature and history, now becomes the result of his own free action.

The extraneous objective forces that have, hitherto, governed history,pass

under the control of man himself. Only from that time will man himself,

more and more consciously, make his own history — only from that time

will the social causes set in movement by him have, in the main and in

a constantly growing measure, the results intended by him. It is the ascent

of man from the kingdom of necessity to the kingdom of freedom.



Let us briefly sum up our sketch of historical evolution.




I. Mediaeval Society — Individual production on a small scale.

Means of production adapted for individual use; hence primitive, ungainly,

petty, dwarfed in action. Production for immediate consumption, either

of the producer himself or his feudal lord. Only where an excess of production

over this consumption occurs is such excess offered for sale, enters into

exchange. Production of commodities, therefore, only in its infancy. But

already it contains within itself, in embryo, anarchy in the production

of society at large.






II. Capitalist Revolution — transformation of industry, at first

be means of simple cooperation and manufacture. Concentration of the means

of production, hitherto scattered, into great workshops. As a consequence,

their transformation from individual to social means of production — a

transformation which does not, on the whole, affect the form of exchange.

The old forms of appropriation remain in force. The capitalist appears.

In his capacity as owner of the means of production, he also appropriates

the products and turns them into commodities. Production has become a social

act. Exchange and appropriation continue to be individual acts,

the acts of individuals. The social product is appropriated by the individual

capitalist. Fundamental contradiction, whence arise all the contradictions

in which our present-day society moves, and which modern industry brings

to light.




A. Severance of the producer from the means of production. Condemnation
of the worker to wage-labor for life. Antagonism between the proletariat
and the bourgeoisie.

B. Growing predominance and increasing effectiveness of the laws
governing the production of commodities. Unbridled competition. Contradiction
between socialized organization in the individual factory and social anarchy
in the production as a whole.

C. On the one hand, perfecting of machinery, made by competition
compulsory for each individual manufacturer, and complemented by a constantly
growing displacement of laborers. Industrial reserve-army. On the other
hand, unlimited extension of production, also compulsory under competition,
for every manufacturer. On both sides, unheard-of development of productive
forces, excess of supply over demand, over-production and products — excess
there, of laborers, without employment and without means of existence.
But these two levers of production and of social well-being are unable
to work together, because the capitalist form of production prevents the
productive forces from working and the products from circulating, unless
they are first turned into capital — which their very superabundance prevents.
The contradiction has grown into an absurdity. The mode of production rises
in rebellion against the form of exchange.

D. Partial recognition of the social character of the productive
forces forced upon the capitalists themselves. Taking over of the great
institutions for production and communication, first by joint-stock companies,
later in by trusts, then by the State. The bourgeoisie demonstrated to
be a superfluous class. All its social functions are now performed by salaried
employees.


III. Proletarian Revolution — Solution of the contradictions.

The proletariat seizes the public power, and by means of this transforms

the socialized means of production, slipping from the hands of the bourgeoisie,

into public property. By this act, the proletariat frees the means of production

from the character of capital they have thus far borne, and gives their

socialized character complete freedom to work itself out. Socialized production

upon a predetermined plan becomes henceforth possible. The development

of production makes the existence of different classes of society thenceforth

an anachronism. In proportion as anarchy in social production vanishes,

the political authority of the State dies out. Man, at last the master

of his own form of social organization, becomes at the same time the lord

over Nature, his own master — free.





To accomplish this act of universal emancipation is the historical

mission of the modern proletariat. To thoroughly comprehend the historical

conditions and thus the very nature of this act, to impart to the now oppressed

proletarian class a full knowledge of the conditions and of the meaning

of the momentous act it is called upon to accomplish, this is the task

of the theoretical expression of the proletarian movement, scientific Socialism.


 

Notes


1.
Mephistopheles in Goethe's Faust


2.
It is hardly necessary in this connection to point out that, even if the form of appropriation remains the same, the character of the appropriation is just as much revolutionized as production is by the changes described above.  It is, of course, a very different matter whether I appropriate to myself my own product or that of another.  Note in passing that wage-labor, which contains the whole capitalist mode of production in embryo, is very ancient; in a sporadic, scattered form, it existed for centuries alongside slave-labor.  But the embryo could duly develop into the capitalistic mode of production only when the necessary historical pre-conditions had been furnished.


3.
 "The Conditions of the Working-Class in England" — Sonnenschein & Co., p.84.


4.
I say "have to".  For only when the means of production and distribution have actually outgrown the form of management by joint-stock companies, and when, therefore, the taking them over by the State has become economically inevitable, only then — even if it is the State of today that effects this — is there an economic advance, the attainment of another step preliminary to the taking over of all productive forces by society itself.  But of late, since Bismarck went in for State-ownership of industrial establishments, a kind of spurious Socialism has arisen, degenerating, now and again, into something of flunkyism, that without more ado declares all State-ownership, even of the Bismarkian sort, to be socialistic.  Certainly, if the taking over by the State of the tobacco industry is socialistic, then Napoleon and Metternich must be numbered among the founders of Socialism.  


If the Belgian State, for quite ordinary political and financial reasons, itself constructed its chief railway lines; if Bismarck, not under any economic compulsion, took over for the State the chief Prussian lines, simply to be the better able to have them in hand in case of war, to bring up the railway employees as voting cattle for the Government, and especially to create for himself a new source of income independent of parliamentary votes — this was, in no sense, a socialistic measure, directly or indirectly, consciously or unconsciously.  Otherwise, the Royal Maritime Company, the Royal porcelain manufacture, and even the regimental tailor of the army would also be socialistic institutions, or even, as was seriously proposed by a sly dog in Frederick William III's reign, the taking over by the State of the brothels. 


5.
A few figures may serve to give an approximate idea of the enormous expansive force of the modern means of production, even under capitalist pressure.  According to Mr.  Giffen, the total wealth of Great Britain and Ireland amounted, in round  numbers in 


          1814 to £ 2,200,000,000,
          1865 to £ 6,100,000,000,
          1875 to £ 8,500,000,000. 


As an instance of the squandering of means of production and of products during a crisis, the total loss in the German iron industry alone, in the crisis of 1873-78, was given at the second German Industrial Congress (Berlin, February 21, 1878), as  22,750,000 pounds.
 


Socialism: Utopian and Scientific



==========

## Speech at the Graveside of Karl Marx






Engels' burial speech




The Death of Karl Marx

Frederick Engels’ Speech at the Grave of Karl Marx
Highgate Cemetery, London. March 17, 1883


Transcribed: by Mike Lepore, 1993.

On the 14th of March, at a quarter to three in
the afternoon, the greatest living thinker ceased to think. He had been
left alone for scarcely two minutes, and when we came back we found him
in his armchair, peacefully gone to sleep -- but for ever.
An immeasurable loss has been sustained both by the militant proletariat
of Europe and America, and by historical science, in the death of this
man. The gap that has been left by the departure of this mighty spirit
will soon enough make itself felt.
Just as Darwin discovered the law of development of organic nature,
so Marx discovered the law of development of human history: the simple
fact, hitherto concealed by an overgrowth of ideology, that mankind must
first of all eat, drink, have shelter and clothing, before it can pursue
politics, science, art, religion, etc.; that therefore the production of
the immediate material means, and consequently the degree of economic development
attained by a given people or during a given epoch, form the foundation
upon which the state institutions, the legal conceptions, art, and even
the ideas on religion, of the people concerned have been evolved, and in
the light of which they must, therefore, be explained, instead of vice
versa, as had hitherto been the case.
But that is not all. Marx also discovered the special law of motion
governing the present-day capitalist mode of production, and the bourgeois
society that this mode of production has created. The discovery of surplus
value suddenly threw light on the problem, in trying to solve which all
previous investigations, of both bourgeois economists and socialist critics,
had been groping in the dark.
Two such discoveries would be enough for one lifetime. Happy the
man to whom it is granted to make even one such discovery. But in every
single field which Marx investigated -- and he investigated very many fields,
none of them superficially -- in every field, even in that of mathematics,
he made independent discoveries.
Such was the man of science. But this was not even half the man.
Science was for Marx a historically dynamic, revolutionary force. However
great the joy with which he welcomed a new discovery in some theoretical
science whose practical application perhaps it was as yet quite impossible
to envisage, he experienced quite another kind of joy when the discovery
involved immediate revolutionary changes in industry, and in historical
development in general. For example, he followed closely the development
of the discoveries made in the field of electricity and recently those
of Marcel Deprez.
For Marx was before all else a revolutionist. His real mission
in life was to contribute, in one way or another, to the overthrow of capitalist
society and of the state institutions which it had brought into being,
to contribute to the liberation of the modern proletariat, which he was
the first to make conscious of its own position and its needs, conscious
of the conditions of its emancipation. Fighting was his element. And he
fought with a passion, a tenacity and a success such as few could rival.
His work on the first Rheinische Zeitung (1842), the Paris Vorwarts
(1844), the Deutsche Brusseler Zeitung (1847), the Neue Rheinische
Zeitung (1848-49), the New York Tribune (1852-61), and, in addition
to these, a host of militant pamphlets, work in organisations in Paris,
Brussels and London, and finally, crowning all, the formation of the great
International Working Men's
Association -- this was indeed an achievement of which its founder
might well have been proud even if he had done nothing else.
And, consequently, Marx was the best hated and most calumniated
man of his time. Governments, both absolutist and republican, deported
him from their territories. Bourgeois, whether conservative or ultra-democratic,
vied with one another in heaping slanders upon him. All this he brushed
aside as though it were a cobweb, ignoring it, answering only when extreme
necessity compelled him. And he died beloved, revered and mourned by millions
of revolutionary fellow workers -- from the mines of Siberia to California,
in all parts of Europe and America -- and I make bold to say that, though
he may have had many opponents, he had hardly one personal enemy.
His name will endure through the ages, and so also will his work.
 


Contents |
MIA Biography |
Biography Archive |
Marx Engels Archive



==========

## On the History of the Communist League




On The History of the Communist League by Frederick Engels





Frederick Engels
On The History of the Communist League


First Published: Nov 12-26, 1885 in Sozialdemokrat;
Source: Marx and Engels Selected Works, Volume 3, Progress Publishers, Moscow 1970;
Transcribed by: zodiac@io.org.

London
October 8, 1885
With the sentence of the Cologne Communists in 1852, the curtain falls on the first period of the independent German workers’ movement. Today this period is almost forgotten. Yet it lasted from 1836 to 1852 and, with the spread of German workers abroad, the movement developed in almost all civilized countries. Nor is that all. The present-day international workers’ movement is in substance a direct continuation of the German workers’ movement of that time, which was the first international workers’ movement of all time, and which brought forth many of those who took the leading role in he International Working Men’s Association. And the theoretical principles that the Communist League had inscribed on its banner in the Communist Manifesto of 1847 constitute today the strongest international bond of the entire proletarian movement of both Europe and America. 
Up to now there has been only one source for a coherent history of that movement. This is the so-called Black Book, The Communist Conspiracies of the Nineteenth Century, by Wermuth and Stieber, Erline, two parts, 1853 and 1854. This crude compilation, which bristles with deliberate falsifications, fabricated by two of the most contemptible police scoundrels of our century, today still serves as the final source for all non-communist writings about that period. 
What I am able to give here is only a sketch, and even this only in so far as the League itself is concerned; only what is absolutely necessary to understand the Revelations. I hope that some day I shall have the opportunity to work up the rich material collected by Marx and myself on the history of that glorious period of the youth of the international workers’ movement. 
* In 1836 the most extreme, chiefly proletarian elements of the secret democratic-republican Outlaws’ League, which was founded by German refugees in Paris in 1834, split off and formed the new secret League of the Just. The parent League, in which only sleepy-headed elements à la Jakobus Venedey were left, soon fell asleep altogether; when in 1840 the police scented out a few sections in Germany, it was hardly even a shadow of its former self. The new League, on the contrary, developed comparatively rapidly. Originally it was a German outlier of the French worker-Communism, reminiscent of Babouvism and taking shape in Paris at about this time; community of goods was demanded as the necessary consequence of “equality”. The aims were those of the Parisian secret societies of the time: half propaganda association, half conspiracy, Paris, however, being always regarded as the central point of revolutionary action, although the preparation of occassional putsches in Germany was by no means excluded. But as Paris remained the decisive battleground, the League was at that time actually not much more than the German branch of the French secret societies, especially the Societe des saisons led by Blanqui and Barbes, with which a close connections was maintained. The French went into action on May 12, 1839; the sections of the League marched with them and thus were involved in the common defeat. 
Among the Germans arrested were Karl Schapper and Heinrich Bauer; Louis Philippe’s government contented itself with deporting them after a fairly long imprisonment. Both went to London. Schapper came from Weilburg in Nassau and while a student of forestry at Giessen in 1832 was a member of the conspiracy organized by Georg Buchner; he took part in the storming of the Frankfort constable station on April 3, 1833, escaped abroad and in February 1834 joined Mazzini’s march on Savoy. Of gigantic stature, resolute and energetic, always ready to risk civil existence and life, he was a model of the professional revolutionist that played an important role in the thirties. In spite of a certain sluggishness of thought, he was by no means incapable of profound theoretical understanding, as is proved by his development from “demagogue” to Communist, and he held then all the more rigidly to what he had once come to recognize. Precisely on that account his revolutionary passion sometimes got the better of understanding, but he always afterwards realized his mistake and openly acknowledged it. He was fully a man and what he did for the founding of the German workers’ movement will not be forgotten. 
Heinrich Bauer, from Franconia, was a shoemaker; a lively, alert, witty little fellow, whose little body, however, also contained much shrewdness and determination. 
Arrived in London, where Schapper, who had been a compositor in Paris, now tried to earn his living as a teacher of languages, they both set to work gathering up the broken threads and made London the centre of the League. They were joined over here, if not already earlier in Paris, by Joseph Moll, a watchmaker from Cologne, a medium-sized Hercules — how often did Schapper and he victoriously defend the entrance to a hall against hundreds of onrushing opponents! — a man who was at least the equal of his two comrades in energy and determination, and intellectually superior to both of them. Not only was he a born diplomat, as the success of his numerous trips on various mission proved; he was also more capable of theoretical insight. I came to know all three of them in London in 1843. There were the first revolutionary proletarians whom I met, and however far apart our views were at that time — for I still owned, as against their narrow-minded equalitarian Communism [by equalitarian Communism I understand, as stated, only that Communism which bases itself exclusively or predominantly on the demand for equality], a goodly does of just as narrow-minded philosophical arrogance — I shall never forget the deep impression that these three real men made upon me, who was then still only wanting to become a man. 
In London, as in a lesser degree in Switzerland, they had the benefit of freedoms of association and assembly. As early as February 7, 1840, the legally functioning German Workers’ Educational Association, which still exists, was founded. This Association served the League as a recruiting ground for new members, and since, as always, the Communists were the most active and intelligent members of the Association, it was a matter of course that its leadership lay entirely in the hands of the League. The League soon had several communities, or, as they were then still called, “lodges”, in London. The same obvious tactics were followed in Switzerland and elsewhere. Where workers’ associations could be founded, they were utilized in like manner. Where this was forbidden by law, one joined choral societies, athletic clubs, and the like. Connections were to a large extent maintained by members who were continually travelling back and forth; they also, when required, served as emissaries. In both respects the League obtained lively support through the wisdom of the governments which, by resorting to deportation, converted any objectionable worker — and in nine cases our of ten he was a member of the League — into an emissary. 
The extent to which the restored League was spread was considerable. Notably in Switzerland, Weitling, August Becker (a highly gifted man who, however, like so many Germans, came to grief because of innate instability of character) and others created a strong organization more or less pledged to Weitling’s communist system. This is not the place to criticize the Communism of Weitling. But as regards its significance as the first independent theoretical stirring of the German proletariat, I still today subscribe to Marx’s words in the Paris Vorwarts of 1844:
“Where could the (German) bourgeoisie — including its philosophers and learned scribes — point to a work relating to the emancipation of the bourgeoisie — its political emancipation — comparable to Weitlings’ Guarantees of Harmony and Freedom? If one compares the drab mealy-mouthed mediocrity of German political literature with this immeasurable and brilliant debut of the German workers, if one compares these gigantic children’s shoes of the proletariat with the dwarf proportions of the worn-out political shows of the bourgeoisie, one must prophesy an athlete’s figure for this Cinderella.”
This athlete’s figure confronts us today, although still far from being fully grown. 
Numerous sections existed also in Germany; in the nature of things they were of a transient character, but those coming into existence more than made up for those passing away. Only after seven years, at the end of 1846, did the police discover traces of the League in Berlin (Mentel) and Magdeburg (Beck), without being in a position to follow them further. 
In Paris, Weitling, who was still there in 1840, likewise gathered the scattered elements together again before he left for Switzerland. 
The tailors formed the central force of the League. German tailors were everywhere: in Switzerland, in London, in Paris. In the last-named city, German was so much the prevailing tongue in this trade that I was acquainted there in 1846 with a Norwegian tailor who had travelled directly by sea from Trondhjem to France and in the space of eighteen months had learned hardly a word of French but had acquired an excellent knowledge of German. Two of the Paris communities in 1847 consisted predominantly of tailors, one of cabinetmakers. 
After the centre of gravity had shifted from Paris to London, a new feature grew conspicuous: from being German, the League gradually became international. In the workers’ society there were to be found, besides German and Swiss, also members of all those nationalities for whom German served as the chief means of communication with foreigners, notably, therefore, Scandinavians, Dutch, Hungarians, Czechs, Southern Slavs, and also Russians and Alsatians. In 1847 the regular frequenters included a British grenadier of the Guards in uniform. The society soon called itself the Communist Workers’ Educational Association, and the membership cards bore the inscription “All Men Are Brothers”, in at least twenty languages, even if not without mistakes here and there. Like the open Association, so also the secret League soon took on a more international character; at first in a restricted sense, practically through the varied nationalities of its members, theoretically through the realization that any revolution to be victorious must be a European one. One did not go any further as yet; but the foundations were there. 
Close connections were maintained with the French revolutionists through t he London refugees, comrades-in-arms of May 12, 1839. Similarly with the more radical Poles. The official Polish emigres, as also Mazzini, were, of course, opponents rather than allies. The English Chartists, on account of the specific English character of their movement, were disregarded as not revolutionary. The London leaders of the League came in touch with them only later, through me. 
In other ways, too, the character of the League had altered with events. Although Paris was still — and at that time quite rightly — looked upon as the mother city of the revolution, one had nevertheless emerged from the state of dependence on the Paris conspirators. The spread of the League raised its self-consciousness. It was felt that roots were being struck more and more in the German working class and that these German workers were historically called upon to be the standard-bearers of the workers of the North and East of Europe. In Weitling was to be found a communist theoretician who could be boldly placed at the side of his contemporary French rivals. Finally, the experience of May 12th had taught us that for the time being there was nothing to be gained by attempts at putsches. And if one still continued to explain every event as a sign of the approaching storm, if one still preserved intact the old, semi-conspiratorial rules, that was mainly the fault of the old revolutionary defiance, which had already begun to collide with the sounder views that were gaining headway. 
However, the social doctrine of the League, indefinite as it was, contained a very great defect, but one that had its roots in the conditions themselves. The members, in so far as they were workers at all, were almost exclusively artisans. Even in the big metropolises, the man who exploited them was usually only a small master. The exploitation of tailoring on a large scale, what is now called the manufacture of ready-made clothes, by the conversion of handicraft tailoring into a domestic industry working for a big capitalist, was at that time even in London only just making it appearance. On the one hand, the exploiters of these artisans was a small master; on the other hand, they all hoped ultimately to become small masters themselves. In addition, a mass of inherited guild notions still clung to the German artisan at that time. The greatest honor is due to them, in that they, who were themselves not yet full proletarians but only an appendage of the petty bourgeoisie, an appendage which was passing into the modern proletariat and which did not yet stand in direct opposition to the bourgeoisie, that is, to big capital — in that these artisans were capable of instinctively anticipating their future development and of constituting themselves, even if not yet with full consciousness, the party of the proletariat. But it was also inevitable that their old handicraft prejudices should be a stumbling block to them at every moment, whenever it was a question of criticizing existing society in detail, that is, of investigating economic facts. And I do not believe there was a single man in the whole League at that time who had ever read a book on political economy. But that mattered little; for the time being “equality”, “brotherhood” and “justice” helped them to surmount every theoretical obstacle. 
Meanwhile a second, essentially different Communism was developed alongside that of the League and of Weitling. While I was in Manchester, it was tangibly brought home to me that the economic facts, which have so far played no role or only a contemptible one in the writing of history, are, at least in the modern world, a decisive historical force; that they form the basis of the origination of the present-day class antagonisms; that these class antagonisms, in the countries where they have become fully developed, thanks to large-scale industry, hence especially in England, are in their turn the basis of the formation of political parties and of party struggles, and thus of all political history. Marx had not only arrived at the same view, but had already, in the Deutsche-Französische Jahrbücher (1844), generalized it to the effect that, speaking generally, it is not the state which conditions and regulates the civil society at all, but civil society which conditions and regulates the state, and, consequently, that policy and its history are to be explained from the economic relations and their development, and not vice versa. When I visited Marx in Paris in the summer of 1844, our complete agreement in all theoretical fields became evident and our joint work dates from that time. When, in the spring of 1845, we met again in Brussels, Marx had already fully developed his materialist theory of history in its main features form the above-mentioned basis and we now applied ourselves to the detailed elaboration of the newly-won mode of outlook in the most varied directions. 
This discovery, which revolutionized the science of history and, as we have seen, is essentially the work of Marx — a discovery in which I can claim for myself only a very insignificant share — was, however, of immediate importance for the contemporary workers’ movement. Communism among the French and Germans, Chartism among the English, now no longer appeared as something accidental which could just as well not have occurred. These movements now presented themselves as a movement of the modern oppressed class, the proletariat, as the more or less developed forms of its historically necessary struggle against the ruling class, the bourgeoisie; as forms of the class struggle, but distinguished from all earlier class struggles by this one thing, that the present-day oppressed class the proletariat, cannot achieve its emancipation without at the same time emancipating society as a whole from division into classes and, therefore, from class struggles. And Communism now no longer meant the concoction, by means of the imagination, of an ideal society as perfect as possible, but insight into the nature, the conditions and the consequent general aims of the struggle waged by the proletariat. 
Now, we were by no means of the opinion that the new scientific results should be confided in large tomes exclusively to the “learned” world. Quite the contrary. We were both of us already deeply involved in the political movement, and possessed a certain following in the educated world, especially of Western Germany, and abundant contact with the organized proletariat. It was our duty to provide a scientific foundation for our view, but it was equally important for us to win over the European and in the first place the German proletariat to our conviction. As soon as we had become clear in our own minds, we set about the task. We founded a German workers’ society in Brussels and took over the Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung, which served us as an organ up to the February Revolution. We kept in touch with the revolutionary section of the English Chartists through Julian Harney, the editor of the central organ of the movement, The Northern Star, to which I was a contributor. We entered likewise into a sort of cartel with the Brussels democrats (Marx was vice-president of the Democratic Society) and with the French social-democrats of the Réforme, which I furnished with news of the English and German movements. In short, our connections with the radical and proletarian organizations and press organs were quite what one could wish. 
Our relations with the League of the Just were as follows: The existence of the League was, of course, known to us; in 1843 Schapper had suggested that I join it, which I at that time naturally refused to do. But we not only kept up our continuous correspondence with the Londoners but remained on still closer terms with Dr Ewerbeck, then the leader of the Paris communities. Without going into the League’s internal affairs, we learnt of every important happening. On the other hand, we influenced the theoretical views of the most important members of the League by word of mouth, by letter and through the press. For this purpose we also made us of various lithographed circulars, which we dispatched to our friends and correspondents throughout the world on particular occasions, when it was a question of the internal affairs of the Communist Party in process of formation. In these, the League itself sometimes came to be dealt with. Thus, a young Westphalian student, Hermann Kriege, who went to America, came forward there as an emissary of the League and associated himself with the crazy Harro Harring for the purpose of using the League to turn South America upside down. He founded a paper in which, in the name of the League, he preached an extravagant Communism of love dreaming, based on “love” and overflowing with love. Against this we let fly with a circular that did not fail of its effect. Kriege vanished from the League scene. 
Later, Weitling came to Brussels. But he was no loner the naive young journeyman-tailor who, astonished at his own talents, was trying to clarify in his own mind just what a communist society would look like. He was now the great man, persecuted by the environs on account of his superiority, who scented rivals, secret enemies and traps everywhere — the prophet, driven from country to country, who carried a recipe for the realization of heaven on earth ready-made in his pocket, and who was was possessed with the idea that everybody intended to steal it from him. He had already fallen out with the members of the League in London; and in Brussels, where Marx and his wife welcomed him with almost superhuman forbearance, he also could not get along with anyone. So he soon afterwards went to America to try out his role of prophet there. 
All these circumstance contributed to the quiet revolution that was taking place in the League, and especially among the leaders in London. The inadequacy of the previous conception of Communism, both the simple French equalitarian Communism and that of Weitling, became more and more clear to them. The tracing of Communism back to primitive Christianity introduced by Weitling — no matter how brilliant certain passages to be found in his Gospel of Poor Sinners — had resulted in delivering the movement in Switzerland to a large extent into the hands, first of fools like Albrecht, and then of exploiting fake prophets like Kuhlmann. The “true Socialism” dealt in by a few literary writers — a translation of French socialist phraseology into corrupt Hegelian German, and sentimental love dreaming (see the section on German of “True” Socialism in the Communist Manifesto — that Kriege and the study of the corresponding literature introduced in the League was found soon to disgust the old revolutionaries of the league, if only because of its slobbering feebleness. As against the untenability of the previous theoretical views, and as against the practical aberrations resulting therefrom, it was realized more and more in London that Marx and I were right in our new theory. This understanding was undoubtedly promoted by the fact that among the London leaders there were now two men who were considerably superior to those previously mentioned in capacity for theoretical knowledge: the miniature painter Karl Pfander from Heilbronn and the tailor Georg Eccarius from Thuringia. 
[Engels footnote: Pfander died about eight years ago in London. he was a man of peculiarly fine intelligence, witty, ironical and dialectical. Eccarius, as we know, was later for many years Secretary of the General Council of the International Working Men’s Association, in the General Council of which the following old League members were to be found, among others: Eccarius, Pfander, Lessner, Lochner, Marx and myself. Eccarius subsequently devoted himself exclusively to the English trade union movement.]
It suffices to say that in the spring of 1847 Moll visited Marx in Brussels and immediately afterwards me in Paris, and invited us repeatedly, in the name of his comrades, to enter the League. He reported that they were as much convinced of the general correctness of our mode of outlook as of the necessity of freeing the League from the old conspiratorial traditions and forms. Should we enter, we would be given an opportunity of expounding our critical Communism before a congress of the League in a manifesto, which would then be published as the manifesto of the League; we would likewise be able to contribute our quota towards the replacement of the obsolete League organization by one in keeping with the new times and aims. 
We entertained no doubt that an organization within the German working class was necessary, if only for propaganda purposes, and that this organization, in so far as it would not be merely local in character, could only be a secret one, even outside Germany. Now, there already existed exactly such an organization in the shape of the League. What we previously objected to in this League was now relinquished as erroneous by the representatives of the League themselves; we were even invited to co-operate in the work of reorganization. Could we say no? Certainly not. Therefore, we entered the League; Marx founded a League community in Brussels from among our close friends, while I attended the three Paris communities. 
In the summer of 1847, the first league Congress took place in London, at which W. Wolff represented the Brussels and I the Paris communities. At this congress the reorganization of the League was carried through first of all. Whatever remained of the old mystical names dating back to the conspiratorial period was now abolished; the League now consisted of communities, circles, leading circles, a Central Committee and a Congress, and henceforth called itself the “Communist League”. 
“The aim of the League is the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the rule of the proletariat, the abolition of the old, bourgeois society based on class antagonisms and the foundation of a new society without classes and without private property”
 — thus ran the first article. The organization itself was thoroughly democratic, with elective and always removable boards. This alone barred all hankering after conspiracy, which requires dictatorship, and the League was converted — for ordinary peace times at least — into a pure propaganda society. These new Rules were submitted to the communities for discussion — so democratic was the procedure now followed — then once again debated at the Second Congress and finally adopted by the latter on December 8, 1847. They are to be found reprinted in Wermuth and Stieber, vol.I, p.239, Appendix X. 
The Second Congress took place during the end of November and beginning of December of the same year. Marx also attended this time and expounded the new theory in a fairly long debate — the congress lasted at least ten days. All contradiction and doubt were finally set at rest, the new basic principles were unanimously adopted, and Marx and I were commissioned to draw up the Manifesto. This was done immediately afterwards. A few weeks before the February Revolution it was sent to London to be printed. Since then it has travelled round the world, has been translated into almost all languages and today still serves in numerous countries as a guide for the proletarian movement. In place of the old League motto, “All Men Are Brothers”, appeared the new battle cry, “Working Men of All Countries, Unite!” which openly proclaimed the international character of the struggle. Seventeen years later this battle cry resounded throughout the world as the watchword of the International Working Men’s Association, and today the militant proletariat of all countries has inscribed it in its banner. 
The February Revolution broke out. The London Central Committee functioning hitherto immediately transferred its powers to the Brussels leading circle. But this decision came at a time when an actual state of siege already existed in Brussels, and the Germans in particular could no longer assemble anywhere. We were all of us just on the point of going to Paris, and so the new Central Committee decided likewise to dissolve, to hand over all its powers to Marx and to empower him immediately to constitute a new Central Committee in Paris. Hardly had the five persons who adopted this decision (March 3, 1848) separated, before police forced their way into Marx’s house, arrested him and compelled him to leave for France the following day, which was just where he was wanting to go. 
In Paris we all soon came together again. There the following document was drawn up and signed by all the members of the new Central Committee. It was distributed throughout Germany and many a one can still learn something from it even today:
Demands of the Communist Party in Germany
The whole of Germany shall be declared a single indivisible republic. 
Representatives of the people shall be paid so that workers also can sit in the parliament of the German people.
Universal arming of the people.
The estates of the princes and other feudal estates, all mines, pits, etc., shall be transformed into state property. On these estates, agriculture is to be conducted on a very large scale and with the most modern scientific means for the benefit of all society. 
Mortgages on peasant holdings shall be declared state property; interest on such mortgages shall be paid by the peasants to the state. 
In the districts where tenant farming is developed, land rent or farming dues shall be paid to the state as a tax.
All means of transport: railway, canals, steamships, roads, post, etc., shall be taken over by the state. They are to be converted into state property and put at the disposal of the non-possessing class free of charge. 
Limitation of the right of inheritance.
 Introduction of a steeply graded progressive taxation and abolition of taxes on consumer goods.
Establishment of national workshops. The state shall guarantee a living to all workers and provide for those unable to work.
Universal free elementary education.
It is in the interest of the German proletariat, of the petite Bourgeoisie and peasantry, to work with all possible energy to put the above measures through. For only by their education can the millions in Germany, who up to now have been exploited by a small number of people and whom it will be attempted to keep in further subjection, get their rights and the power that are their due as the producers of all wealth. 
The Committee: Karl Marx, Karl Schapper,  H. Bauer, F. Engels, J. Moll, W. Wolff
At that time the craze for revolutionary legions prevailed in Paris. Spaniards, Italians, Belgians, Dutch, Poles and Germans flocked together in crowds to liberate their respective fatherlands. The German legion was led by Herwegh, Bornsted, Bornstein. Since immediately after the revolution all foreign workers not only lost their jobs but in addition were harassed by the public, the influx into these legions was very great. the new government saw in them a means of getting rid of foreign workers and granted them l'etape du soldat, that is, quarters along their line of march and a marching allowance of 50 centimes per day up to the frontier, whereafter the eloquent Lamartine, the Foreign Minister who was so readily moved to tears, quickly found an opportunity of betraying them to their respective governments. 
We opposed this playing with revolution in the most decisive fashion. To carry an invasion, which was to import the revolution forcibly from outside, into the midst of the ferment then going on in Germany, meant to undermine the revolution in Germany itself, to strengthen the governments and to deliver the legionnaires — Lamartine guaranteed for that — defenceless into the hands of the German troops. When subsequently the revolution was victorious in Vienna and Berlin, the legion became all the more purposeless; but once begun, the game was continued. 
We founded a German communist club, in which we advised the workers to keep away from the legion and to return instead to their homes singly and work there for the movement. Our old friend Flocon, who had a seat in the Provisional Government, obtained for the workers sent by us the same travel facilities as had been granted to the legionnaires. In this way we returned three or four hundred workers to Germany, including the great majority of the League members. 
As could easily be foreseen, the League proved to be much too weak a lever as against the popular mass movement that had now broken out. Three-quarters of the League members who had previously lived abroad had changed their domicile by returning to their homeland; their previous communities were thus to a great extent dissolved and they lost all contact with the League. One part, the more ambitious among them, did not even try to resume this contact, but each one began a small separate movement on his own account in his own locality. Finally, the conditions in each separate petty state, each province and each town were so different that the League would have been incapable of giving more than the most general directives; such directives were, however, much better disseminated through the press. In short, from the moment when the causes which had made the secret League necessary ceased to exist, the secret League as such ceased to mean anything. But this could least of all surprise the persons who had just stripped this same secret League of the last vestige of its conspiratorial character. 
That, however, the League had been an excellent school for revolutionary activity was now demonstrated. On the Rhine, where the Neue Rheinische Zeitung provided a firm centre, in Nassau, in Rhenish Hesse, etc., everywhere members of the League stood at the head of the extreme democratic movement. The same was the case in Hamburg. In South Germany the predominance of petty-bourgeois democracy stood in the way. In Breslau, Wilhelm Wolff was active with great success until the summer of 1848; in addition he received a Silesian mandate as an alternate representative in the Frankfort parliament. Finally, the compositor Stephan Born, who had worked in Brussels and Paris as an active member of the League, founded a Workers’ Brotherhood in Berlin which became fairly widespread and existed until 1850. Born, a very talented young man, who, however, was a bit too much in a hurry to become a political figure, “fraternized” with the most miscellaneous ragtag and bobtail in order to get a crowd together, and was not at all the man who could bring unity into the conflicting tendencies, light into the chaos. Consequently, in the official publications of the association the views represented in the Communist Manifesto were mingled hodge-podge with guild recollections and guild aspirations, fragments of Louis Blanc and Proudhon, protectionism, etc.; in short, they wanted to please everybody [allen alles sein]. In particular, strikes, trade unions and producers’ co-operatives were set going and it was forgotten that above all it was a question of first conquering, by means of political victories, the field in which alone such things could be realized on a lasting basis. When, afterwards, the victories of the reaction made the leaders of the Brotherhood realize the necessity of taking a direct part in the revolutionary struggle, they were naturally left in the lurch by the confused mass which they had grouped around themselves. Born took part in the Dresden uprising in May, 1849 and had a lucky escape. But, in contrast to the great political movement of the proletariat, the Workers’ Brotherhood proved to be a pure Sonderbund [separate league], which to a large extent existed only on paper and played such a subordinate role that the reaction did not find it necessary to suppress it until 1850, and its surviving branches until several years later. Born, whose real name was Buttermilch, has not become a big political figure but a petty Swiss professor, who no longer translates Marx into guild language but the meek Renan into his own fulsome German. 
With June 13, 1849, the defeat of the May insurrections in Germany and the suppression of the Hungarian revolution by the Russians, a great period of the 1848 Revolution came to a close. But the victory of the reaction was as yet by no means final. A reorganziation of the scattered revolutionary forces was required, and hence also of the League. The situation again forbade, as in 1848, any open organization of the proletariat; hence one had to organize again in secret. 
In the autumn of 1849, most of the member of the previous central committees and congresses gathered again in London. The only ones still missing were Schapper, who was jailed in Wiesbaden but came after his acquittal, in the spring of 1850, and Moll, who, after he had accomplished a series of most dangerous missions and agitational journeys — in the end he recruited mounted gunners for the Palatinate artillery right in the midst of the Prussian army in the Rhine Province — joined the Besancon workers’ company of Willich’s corps and was killed by a shot in the head during the encounter at the Murg in front of the Rotenfels Bridge. On the other hand, Willich now entered upon the scene. Willich was one of those sentimental Communists so common in Western Germany since 1845, who on that account alone was instinctively, furtively antagonistic to our critical tendency. More than that, he was entirely the prophet, convinced of his personal mission as the predestined liberator of the German proletariat and as such a direct claimant as much to political as to military dictatorship. Thus, to the primitive Christian Communism previously preached by Weitling was added a kind of communist Islam. However, the propaganda of this new religion was for the first time being restricted to the refugee barracks under Willich’s command. 
Hence, the League was organized afresh; the Address of march 1850 was issued and Heinrich bauer sent as an emissary to Germany. The Address, composed by Marx and myself, is still of interest today, because petite-bourgeois democracy is even now the party which must certainly be the first to come to power in Germany as the savior of society from the communist workers on the occasion of the next European upheaval now soon due (the European revolutions, 1815, 1830, 1848-52, 1870, have occurred at intervals of 15 to 18 years in our century). Much of what is said there is, therefore, still applicable today. Heinrich Bauer’s mission was crowned with complete success. The trusty little shoemaker was a born diplomat. He brought the former members of the League, who had partly become laggards and partly were acting on their own account, back into the active organization, and particularly also the then leaders of the Workers’ Brotherhood. The League began to play the dominant role in the workers’, peasants’ and athletic associations to a far greater extent than before 1848, so that the next quarterly address to the communities, in June 1850, could already report that the student Schurz from Bonn (later on American ex-minister), who was touring Germany in the interest of petty-bourgeois democracy, “had found all fit forces already in the hands of the League”. The League was undoutbedly the only revolutionary organization that had any significance in Germany. 
But what purpose this organization should serve depended very substantially on whether the prospects of a renewed upsurge of the revolution were realized. And in the course of the year 1850 this became more and more improbable, indeed impossible. The industrial crisis of 1847, which had paved the way for the Revolution of 1848, had been overcome; a new, unprecedented period of industrial prosperity had set in; whoever had eyes to see and used them must have clearly realized that the revolutionary storm of 1848 was gradually spending itself. 
“With this general prosperity, in which the productive forces of bourgeois society develop as luxuriantly as is at all possible within bourgeois relationships, there can be no talk of a real revolution. Such a revolution is only possible in the periods when both these factors, the modern productive forces and the bourgeois productive forms, come in collision with each other. The various quarrels in which the representatives of the industrial factions of the continental party of order now indulge and mutually compromise themselves, far from providing the occassion for new revolutions are, on the contrary, possible only because the basis of the relationships is momentarily so secure and, what the reaction does not know, so bourgeois. From it all attempts of the reaction to hold up bourgeois development will rebound just as certainly as all moral indignation and all enthusiastic proclamations of the democrats”. 
Thus Marx and I wrote in the “Revue of May to October 1850” in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Politisch-okonomische Revue, Nos.V and VI, Hamburg, 1850, p.153. 
This cool estimation of the situation, however, was regarded as heresy among many persons, at a time when Ledru-Rollin, Louis Blanc, Mazzini, Kossuth and, among the lesser German lights, Ruge, Kinkel, Gogg and the rest of them crowded in London to form provisional governments of the future not only for their respective fatherlands but for the whole of Europe, and when the only still still necessary was to obtain the requisite money from America as a loan for the revolution to realize at a moment’s notice the European revolution and the various republics which went with it was a matter of course. Can anyone be surprised that a man like Willich was taken in by this, that Schapper, acting on his old revolutionary impulse, also allowed himself to be fooled, and that the majority of the London workers, to a large extent refugees themselves, followed them into the camp of the bourgeois-democratic artificers of revolution? Suffice it to say that the reserve maintained by us was not to the mind of these people; one was to enter into the game of making revolutions. We most decidedly refused to do so. A split ensued; more about this is to be read in the Revelations. Then came the arrest of Nothjung, followed by that of Haupt, in Hamburg. The latter turned traitor by divulging the names of the Cologne Central Committee and being slated as the chief witness in the trial; but his relatives had no desires to be thus disgraced and bundled him off to Rio de Janerio, where he later established himself as a businessman and in recognition of his services was appointed first Prussian and then German Consul General. He is now again in Europe. 
[Engels footnote: Schapper in London at the end of the sixties. Willich took part in the American Civil War with distinction; he became Brigadier-General and was shot in the chest during the battle of Murfreesboro (Tennessee) but recovered and died about ten years ago in America. Of the other persons mentioned above, I will only remark that Heinrich Bauer was lost track of in Australia, and that Weitling and Ewerbeck died in America.]
For a better understanding of the Revelations, I give the list of the Cologne accused:
(1) P. G. Roser, cigarmaker; (2) Heinrich Burgers, who later died a progressive deputy to the Landtag; (3) Peter Nothjung, tailor, who died a few years ago a photographer in Breslau; (4) W. J. Reiff; (5) Dr. Hermann Becker, now chief burgomaster of Cologne and member of the Upper House; (6) Dr. Roland Daniels, physician, who died a few years after the trial as a result of tuberculosis contracted in prison; (7) Karl Otto, chemist; (8) Dr. Abraham Jacoby, now physician in New York; (9) Dr. I. J. Klein, now physician and town councillor in Cologne; (10) Ferdinand Freiligrath, who, however, was at that time already in London; (11) I. L. Ehrhard, clerk; (12) Friedrich Lessner, tailor, now in London.
After a public trail before a jury lasting from October 4 to November 12, 1852, the following were sentenced for attempted high treason: Roser, Burgers and Nothjung to six, Reiff, Otto and Becker to five, and Lessner to three years’ confinement in a fortress; Daniels, Klein, Jacoby and Ehrhard were acquitted. 
With the Cologne trial the first period of the German communist workers’ movement comes to an end. Immediately after the sentence we dissolved our League; a few months later the Willich-Schapper separate league was also laid to eternal rest. 
* A whole generation lies between then and now. At that time Germany was a country of handicraft and of domestic industry based on hand labor; now it is a big industrial country still undergoing continual industrial transformation. At that time one had to seek out one by one the workers who had an understanding of their position as workers and of their historico-economic antagonism to capital, because this antagonism itself was only just beginning to develop. Today the entire German proletariat has to be placed under exceptional laws, merely in order to slow down a little the process of its development to full consciousness of its position as an oppressed class. At that time the few persons whose minds had penetrated to the realization of the historical role of the proletariat had to forgather in secret, to assemble clandestinely in small communities of 3 to 20 persons. Today the German proletariat no longer needs any official organization, either public or secret. The simple self-evident interconnection of like-minded class comrades suffices, without any rules, boards, resolutions or other tangible forms, to shake the whole German Empire to its foundations. Bismarck is the arbiter of Europe beyond the frontiers of Germany, but within them there grows daily more threatening the athletic figure of the German proletariat that Marx foresaw already in 1844, the giant for whom the cramped imperial edifice designed to fit the philistine is even now becoming inadequate and whose mighty stature and broad shoulder are growing until the moment comes when by merely rising from his seat he will shatter the whole structure of the imperial constitution into fragments. And still more. The international movement of the European and American proletariat has become so much strengthened that not merely its first narrow form — the secret League — but even its second, infinitely wider form — the open International Working Men’s Association — has become a fetter for it, and that the simple feeling of solidarity based on the understanding of the identity of class position suffices to create and to hold together one and the same great party of the proletariat among the workers of all countries and tongues. The doctrine which the League represented from 1847 to 1852, and which at that time could be treated by the wise philistines with a shrug of the shoulders as the hallucinations of utter madcaps, as the secret doctrine of a few scattered sectarians, has now innumerable adherents in all civilized countries of the world, among those condemned to the Siberian mines as much as among the gold diggers of California; and the founder of this doctrine, the most hated, most slandered man of his time, Karl Marx, was, when he died, the ever-sought-for and ever-willing counsellor of the proletariat of both the old and the new world. 
 


Communist League Index
Marx/Engels Archive





==========

## Preface to the First Edition 1884









Origins of the Family— Preface (1884)



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
Preface to the First Edition, 1884



The following chapters are, in a sense,
the execution of a bequest. No less a man than Karl Marx had made it one of his
future tasks to present the results of Morgan’s researches in the light of the
conclusions of his own — within certain limits, I may say our — materialistic
examination of history, and thus to make clear their full significance. For
Morgan in his own way had discovered afresh in America the materialistic
conception of history discovered by Marx forty years ago, and in his comparison
of barbarism and civilization it had led him, in the main points, to the same
conclusions as Marx. And just as the professional economists in Germany were
for years as busy in plagiarizing Capital as they were persistent in attempting
to kill it by silence, so Morgan's Ancient Society [1] received precisely the same treatment from the
spokesmen of “prehistoric” science in England. My work can only provide a
slight substitute for what my departed friend no longer had the time to do. But
I have the critical notes which he made to his extensive extracts from Morgan,
and as far as possible I reproduce them here. 
According to the materialistic conception, the determining factor in history
is, in the final instance, the production and reproduction of the immediate
essentials of life. This, again, is of a twofold character. On the one side,
the production of the means of existence, of articles of food and clothing,
dwellings, and of the tools necessary for that production; on the other side,
the production of human beings themselves, the propagation of the species. The
social organization under which the people of a particular historical epoch and
a particular country live is determined by both kinds of production: by the
stage of development of labor on the one hand and of the family on the other.

The lower the development of labor and the more limited the amount of its
products, and consequently, the more limited also the wealth of the society,
the more the social order is found to be dominated by kinship groups. However,
within this structure of society based on kinship groups the productivity of
labor increasingly develops, and with it private property and exchange,
differences of wealth, the possibility of utilizing the labor power of others,
and hence the basis of class antagonisms: new social elements, which in the
course of generations strive to adapt the old social order to the new
conditions, until at last their incompatibility brings about a complete
upheaval. In the collision of the newly-developed social classes, the old
society founded on kinship groups is broken up; in its place appears a new
society, with its control centered in the state, the subordinate units of which
are no longer kinship associations, but local associations; a society in which
the system of the family is completely dominated by the system of property, and
in which there now freely develop those class antagonisms and class struggles
that have hitherto formed the content of all written history. 
It is Morgan’s great merit that he has discovered and reconstructed in its
main lines this prehistoric basis of our written history, and that in the
kinship groups of the North American Indians he has found the key to the most
important and hitherto insoluble riddles of earliest Greek, Roman and German
history. His book is not the work of a day. For nearly forty years he wrestled
with his material, until he was completely master of it. But that also makes
his book one of the few epoch-making works of our time. 
In the following presentation, the reader will in general easily distinguish
what comes from Morgan and what I have added. In the historical sections on
Greece and Rome I have not confined myself to Morgan’s evidence, but have added
what was available to me. The sections on the Celts and the Germans are in the
main my work; Morgan had to rely here almost entirely on secondary sources, and
for German conditions — apart from Tacitus — on the worthless and
liberalistic falsifications of Mr. Freeman. The treatment of the economic
aspects, which in Morgan’s book was sufficient for his purpose but quite
inadequate for mine, has been done afresh by myself. And, finally, I am, of
course, responsible for all the conclusions drawn, in so far as Morgan is not
expressly cited. 



Footnotes 


[1] Ancient Society, or
Researches in the Lines of Human Progress from Savagery, through Barbarism to
Civilization, by Lewis H. Morgan, London, Macmillan & Co., 1877. The book
was printed in America and is peculiarly difficult to obtain in London. The
author died some years ago. [For the purposes of this edition, all references
to Ancient Society are from the Charles H. Kerr edition, Chicago. — Ed.] 



Preface (1891) 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## Preface to the Fourth Edition 1891









Origins of the Family. Preface (1891)



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
Preface to the Fourth Edition, 1891


The earlier large editions of this work have been out of print
now for almost half a year, and for some time the publisher has been asking me
to prepare a new edition. Until now, more urgent work kept me from doing so.
Since the appearance of the first edition seven years have elapsed, during
which our knowledge of the primitive forms of the family has made important
advances. There was, therefore, plenty to do in the way of improvements and
additions; all the more so as the proposed stereotyping of the present text
will make any further alterations impossible for some time. 
I have accordingly submitted the whole text to a careful revision and made a
number of additions which, I hope, take due account of the present state of
knowledge. I also give in the course of this preface a short review of the
development of the history of the family from Bachofen to Morgan; I do so
chiefly because the chauvinistically inclined English anthropologists are still
striving their utmost to kill by silence the revolution which Morgan’s
discoveries have effected in our conception of primitive history, while they
appropriate his results without the slightest compunction. Elsewhere also the
example of England is in some cases followed only too closely. 
My work has been translated into a number of other languages. First,
Italian: L’origine delta famiglia, delta proprieta privata e dello stato,
versions riveduta dall’autore, di Pasquale Martignetti, Benevento, 1885.
Then, Rumanian: Origina famdei, proprietatei private si a statului, traducere
de Joan Nadeide, in the Yassy periodical Contemporanul, September, 1885, to
May, 1886. Further, Danish: Familjens, Privatejendommens og Statens Oprindelse,
Dansk, af Forfattern gennemgaaet Udgave, besorget af Gerson Trier, Kobenhavn,
1888. A French translation by Henri Rave, based on the present German edition,
is on the press. 

Before the beginning of the sixties, one cannot speak of a history of
the family. In this field, the science of history was still completely under
the influence of the five books of Moses. The patriarchal form of the family,
which was there described in greater detail than anywhere else, was not only
assumed without question to be the oldest form, but it was also identified
– minus its polygamy – with the bourgeois family of today, so that
the family had really experienced no historical development at all; at most it
was admitted that in primitive times there might have been a period of sexual
promiscuity. It is true that in addition to the monogamous form of the family,
two other forms were known to exist – polygamy in the Orient and
polyandry in India and Tibet; but these three forms could not be arranged in
any historical order and merely appeared side by side without any connection.
That among some peoples of ancient history, as well as among some savages still
alive today, descent was reckoned, not from the father, but from the mother,
and that the female line was therefore regarded as alone valid; that among many
peoples of the present day in every continent marriage is forbidden within
certain large groups which at that time had not been closely studied –
these facts were indeed known and fresh instances of them were continually
being collected. But nobody knew what to do with them, and even as late as E.
B. Tylor’s Researches into the Early History of Mankind, etc. (1865) they
are listed as mere “curious customs”, side by side with the
prohibition among some savages against touching burning wood with an iron tool
and similar religious mumbo-jumbo. 
The history of the family dates from 1861, from the publication of
Bachofen’s Mutterrecht. [Mother-right, matriarchate – Ed.] In this
work the author advances the following propositions: 
(1) That originally man lived in a state of sexual
promiscuity, to describe which Bachofen uses the mistaken term
“hetaerism”; 
(2) that such promiscuity excludes any certainty of
paternity, and that descent could therefore be reckoned only in the female
line, according to mother-right, and that this was originally the case amongst
all the peoples of antiquity; 
(3) that since women, as mothers, were the only parents of
the younger generation that were known with certainty, they held a position of
such high respect and honor that it became the foundation, in Bachofen’s
conception, of a regular rule of women (gynaecocracy); 
(4) that the transition to monogamy, where the woman belonged
to one man exclusively, involved a violation of a primitive religious law (that
is, actually a violation of the traditional right of the other men to this
woman), and that in order to expiate this violation or to purchase indulgence
for it the woman had to surrender herself for a limited period. 
Bachofen finds the proofs of these assertions in innumerable passages of
ancient classical literature, which he collected with immense industry.
According to him, the development from “hetaerism” to monogamy and
from mother-right to father-right is accomplished, particularly among the
Greeks, as the consequence of an advance in religious conceptions, introducing
into the old hierarchy of the gods, representative of the old outlook, new
divinities, representative of the new outlook, who push the former more and
more into the background. Thus, according to Bachofen, it is not the
development of men’s actual conditions of life, but the religious
reflection of these conditions inside their heads, which has brought about the
historical changes in the social position of the sexes in relation to each
other. In accordance with this view, Bachofen interprets the Oresteia of
Aschylus as the dramatic representation of the conflict between declining
mother-right and the new father-right that arose and triumphed in the heroic
age. For the sake of her paramour, Ægisthus, Clytemnestra slays her husband,
Agamemnon, on his return from the Trojan War; but Orestes, the son of Agamemnon
and herself, avenges his father’s murder by slaying his mother. For this
act he is pursued by the Furies, the demonic guardians of mother-right,
according to which matricide is the gravest and most inexpiable crime. But
Apollo, who by the voice of his oracle had summoned Orestes to this deed, and
Athena, who is called upon to give judgment – the two deities who here
represent the new patriarchal order – take Orestes under their
protection; Athena hears both sides. The whole matter of the dispute is briefly
summed up in the debate which now takes place between Orestes and the Furies.
Orestes contends that Clytemnestra has committed a double crime; she has slain
her husband and thus she has also slain his father. Why should the Furies
pursue him, and not her, seeing that she is by far the more guilty? The answer
is striking: “She was not kin by blood to the man she slew.” 
The murder of a man not related by blood, even if he be the husband of the
murderess, is expiable and does not concern the Furies; their office is solely
to punish murder between blood relations, and of such murders the most grave
and the most inexpiable, according to mother-right, is matricide. Apollo now
comes forward in Orestes’ defense; Athena calls upon the Areopagites
– the Athenian jurors – to vote; the votes for Orestes’
condemnation and for his acquittal are equal; Athena, as president, gives her
vote for Orestes and acquits him. Father-right has triumphed over mother-right,
the “gods of young descent,” as the Furies themselves call them,
have triumphed over the Furies; the latter then finally allow themselves to be
persuaded to take up a new office in the service of the new order. 
This new but undoubtedly correct interpretation of the Oresteia is one of
the best and finest passages in the whole book, but it proves at the same time
that Bachofen believes at least as much as Æschylus did in the Furies, Apollo,
and Athena; for, at bottom, he believes that the overthrow of mother-right by
father-right was a miracle wrought during the Greek heroic age by these
divinities. That such a conception, which makes religion the lever of world
history, must finally end in pure mysticism, is clear. It is therefore a tough
and by no means always a grateful task to plow through Bachofen’s solid
tome. But all that does not lessen his importance as a pioneer. He was the
first to replace the vague phrases about some unknown primitive state of sexual
promiscuity by proofs of the following facts: that abundant traces survive in
old classical literature of a state prior to monogamy among the Greeks and
Asiatics when not only did a man have sexual intercourse with several women,
but a woman with several men, without offending against morality; that this
custom did not disappear without leaving its traces in the limited surrender
which was the price women had to pay for the right to monogamy; that therefore
descent could originally be reckoned only in the female line, from mother to
mother; that far into the period of monogamy, with its certain or at least
acknowledged paternity, the female line was still alone recognized; and that
the original position of the mothers, as the only certain parents of their
children, secured for them, and thus for their whole sex, a higher social
position than women have ever enjoyed since. Bachofen did not put these
statements as clearly as this, for he was hindered by his mysticism. But he
proved them; and in 1861 that was a real revolution. 
Bachofen’s massive volume was written in German, the language of the
nation which at that time interested itself less than any other in the
prehistory of the modern family. Consequently, he remained unknown. His first
successor in the same field appeared in 1865, without ever having heard of
Bachofen. 
This successor was J. F. McLennan, the exact opposite of his predecessor.
Instead of a mystic of genius, we have the dry-as-dust jurist; instead of the
exuberant imagination of a poet, the plausible arguments of a barrister
defending his brief. McLennan finds among many savage, barbarian, and even
civilized peoples of ancient and modern times a form of marriage in which the
bridegroom, alone or with his friends, must carry off the bride from her
relations by a show of force. This custom must be the survival of an earlier
custom when the men of one tribe did in fact carry off their wives by force
from other tribes. What was the origin of this “marriage by
capture”? So long as men could find enough women in their own tribe,
there was no reason whatever for it. We find, however, no less frequently that
among undeveloped peoples there are certain groups (which in 1865 were still
often identified with the tribes themselves) within which marriage is
forbidden, so that the men are obliged to take their wives, and women their
husbands, from outside the group; whereas among other peoples the custom is
that the men of one group must take their wives only from within their own
group. McLennan calls the first peoples “exogamous” and the second
“endogamous”; he then promptly proceeds to construct a rigid
opposition between exogamous and endogamous “tribes.” And although
his own investigations into exogamy force the fact under his nose that in many,
if not in most or even in all, cases, this opposition exists only in his own
imagination, he nevertheless makes it the basis of his whole theory. According
to this theory, exogamous tribes can only obtain their wives from other tribes;
and since in savagery there is a permanent state of war between tribe and
tribe, these wives could only be obtained by capture. McLennan then goes on to
ask: Whence this custom of exogamy? The conception of consanguinity and incest
could not have anything to do with it, for these things only came much later.
But there was another common custom among savages–the custom of killing
female children immediately after birth. This would cause a surplus of men in
each individual tribe, of which the inevitable and immediate consequence would
be that several men possessed a wife in common: polyandry. And this would have
the further consequence that it would be known who was the mother of a child,
but not who its father was: hence relationship only in the female line, with
exclusion of the male line – mother-right. And a second consequence of
the scarcity of women within a tribe – a scarcity which polyandry
mitigated, but did not remove – was precisely this systematic, forcible
abduction of women from other tribes. 
As exogamy and polyandry are referable to one and the same
cause – a want of balance between the sexes–we are forced to regard
all the exogamous races as having originally been polyandrous ... Therefore we
must hold it to be beyond dispute that among exogamous races the first system
of kinship was that which recognized blood-ties through mothers only. 
(McLennan, Studies in Ancient History, 1886. Primitive
Marriage, p. 124) 
It is McLennan’s merit to have directed attention to the general
occurrence and great importance of what he calls exogamy. He did not by any
means discover the existence of exogamous groups; still less did he understand
them. Besides the early, scattered notes of many observers (these were
McLennan’s sources), Latham (Descriptive Ethnology, 1859) had given a
detailed and accurate description of this institution among the Indian Magars,
and had said that it was very widespread and occurred in all parts of the world
– a passage which McLennan himself cites. Morgan, in 1847, in his letters
on the Iroquois (American Review) and in 1851 in The League of the
Iroquois, had already demonstrated the existence of exogamous groups among
this tribe and had given an accurate account of them; whereas McLennan, as we
shall see, wrought greater confusion here with his legalistic mind than
Bachofen wrought in the field of mother-right with his mystical fancies. It is
also a merit of McLennan that he recognized matrilineal descent as the earlier
system, though he was here anticipated by Bachofen, as he later acknowledged.
But McLennan is not clear on this either; he always speaks of “kinship
through females only,” and this term, which is correct for an earlier
stage, he continually applies to later stages of development when descent and
inheritance were indeed still traced exclusively through the female line, but
when kinship on the male side was also recognized and expressed. There you have
the pedantic mind of the jurist, who fixes on a rigid legal term and goes on
applying it unchanged when changed conditions have made it applicable no
longer. 
Apparently McLennan’s theory, plausible though it was, did not seem
any too well established even to its author. At any rate, he himself is struck
by the fact that “it is observable that the form of capture is now most
distinctly marked and impressive just among those races which have male
kinship” (should be “descent in the male line”). (Ibid., p.
140) And again: “It is a curious fact that nowhere now, that we are aware
of, is infanticide a system where exogamy and the earliest form of kinship
co-exist.” (Ibid., p. 146.) Both these facts flatly contradict his method
of explanation, and he can only meet them with new and still more complicated
hypotheses. 
Nevertheless, his theory found great applause and support in England.
McLennan was here generally regarded as the founder of the history of the
family and the leading authority on the subject. However many exceptions and
variations might be found in individual cases, his opposition of exogamous and
endogamous tribes continued to stand as the recognized foundation of the
accepted view, and to act as blinders, obstructing any free survey of the field
under investigation and so making any decisive advance impossible. Against
McLennan’s exaggerated reputation in England – and the English
fashion is copied elsewhere – it becomes a duty to set down the fact that
he has done more harm with his completely mistaken antithesis between exogamous
and endogamous “tribes” than he has done good by his research. 
Facts were now already coming to light in increasing number which did not
fit into his neat framework. McLennan knew only three forms of marriage:
polygyny, polyandry and monogamy. But once attention had been directed to the
question, more and more proofs were found that there existed among undeveloped
peoples forms of marriage in which a number of men possessed a number of women
in common, and Lubbock (The Origin of Civilization, 1870) recognized
this group marriage (“communal marriage”) as a historical fact. 
Immediately afterwards, in 1871, Morgan came forward with new and in many
ways decisive evidence. He had convinced himself that the peculiar system of
consanguinity in force among the Iroquois was common to all the aboriginal
inhabitants of the United States and therefore extended over a whole continent,
although it directly contradicted the degrees of relationship arising out of
the system of marriage as actually practiced by these peoples. He then induced
the Federal government to collect information about the systems of
consanguinity among the other peoples of the world and to send out for this
purpose tables and lists of questions prepared by himself. He discovered from
the replies: (1) that the system of consanguinity of the American Indians was
also in force among numerous peoples in Asia and, in a somewhat modified form,
in Africa and Australia; (2) that its complete explanation was to be found in a
form of group marriage which was just dying out in Hawaii and other
Australasian islands; and (3) that side by side with this form of marriage a
system of consanguinity was in force in the same islands which could only be
explained through a still more primitive, now extinct, form of group marriage.
He published the collected evidence, together with the conclusions he drew from
it, in his Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity, 1871, and thus carried the
debate on to an infinitely wider field. By starting from the systems of
consanguinity and reconstructing from them the corresponding forms of family,
he opened a new line of research and extended our range of vision into the
prehistory of man. If this method proved to be sound, McLennan’s pretty
theories would be completely demolished. 
McLennan defended his theory in a new edition of Primitive Marriage
(Studies in Ancient History, 1876). Whilst he himself constructs a
highly artificial history of the family out of pure hypotheses, he demands from
Lubbock and Morgan not merely proofs for every one of their statements, but
proofs as indisputably valid as if they were to be submitted in evidence in a
Scottish court of law. And this is the man who, from Tacitus’ report on
the close relationship between maternal uncle and sister’s son among the
Germans (Germania, Chap. 20), from Caesar’s report that the
Britons in groups of ten or twelve possessed their wives in common, from all
the other reports of classical authors on community of wives among barbarians,
calmly draws the conclusion that all these peoples lived in a state of
polyandry! One might be listening to a prosecuting counsel who can allow
himself every liberty in arguing his own case, but demands from defending
counsel the most formal, legally valid proof for his every word. 
He maintains that group marriage is pure imagination, and by so doing falls
far behind Bachofen. He declares that Morgan’s systems of consanguinity
are mere codes of conventional politeness, the proof being that the Indians
also address a stranger or a white man as brother or father. One might as well
say that the terms “father,” “mother,”
“brother,” “sister” are mere meaningless forms of
address because Catholic priests and abbesses are addressed as
“father” and “mother,” and because monks and nuns, and
even freemasons and members of English trade unions and associations at their
full sessions are addressed as “brother” and “sister.”
In a word, McLennan’s defense was miserably feeble. 
But on one point he had still not been assailed. The opposition of exogamous
and endogamous “tribes” on which his whole system rested not only
remained unshaken, but was even universally acknowledged as the keystone of the
whole history of the family. McLennan’s attempt to explain this
opposition might be inadequate and in contradiction with his own facts. But the
antithesis itself, the existence of two mutually exclusive types of
self-sufficient and independent tribes, of which the one type took their wives
from within the tribe, while the other type absolutely forbade it – that
was sacred gospel. Compare, for example, Giraud-Teulon’s Origines de
la Famille (1874) and even Lubbock’s Origin of Civilization
(fourth edition, 1882). 
Here Morgan takes the field with his main work, Ancient Society
(1877), the work that underlies the present study. What Morgan had only dimly
guessed in 1871 is now developed in full consciousness. There is no antithesis
between endogamy and exogamy; up to the present, the existence of exogamous
“tribes” has not been demonstrated anywhere. But at the time when
group marriage still prevailed – and in all probability it prevailed
everywhere at some time – the tribe was subdivided into a number of
groups related by blood on the mother’s side, gentes, within which it was
strictly forbidden to marry, so that the men of a gens, though they could take
their wives from within the tribe and generally did so, were compelled to take
them from outside their gens. Thus while each gens was strictly exogamous, the
tribe embracing all the gentes was no less endogamous. Which finally disposed
of the last remains of McLennan’s artificial constructions. 
But Morgan did not rest here. Through the gens of the American Indians, he
was enabled to make his second great advance in his field of research. In this
gens, organized according to mother-right, he discovered the primitive form out
of which had developed the later gens organized according to father-right, the
gens as we find it among the ancient civilized peoples. The Greek and Roman
gens, the old riddle of all historians, now found its explanation in the Indian
gens, and a new foundation was thus laid for the whole of primitive history.

This rediscovery of the primitive matriarchal gens as the earlier stage of
the patriarchal gens of civilized peoples has the same importance for
anthropology as Darwin’s theory of evolution has for biology and
Marx’s theory of surplus value for political economy. It enabled Morgan
to outline for the first time a history of the family in which for the present,
so far as the material now available permits, at least the classic stages of
development in their main outlines are now determined. That this opens a new
epoch in the treatment of primitive history must be clear to everyone. The
matriarchal gens has become the pivot on which the whole science turns; since
its discovery we know where to look and what to look for in our research, and
how to arrange the results. And, consequently, since Morgan’s book,
progress in this field has been made at a far more rapid speed. 
Anthropologists, even in England, now generally appreciate, or rather
appropriate, Morgan’s discoveries. But hardly one of them has the honesty
to admit that it is to Morgan that we owe this revolution in our ideas. In
England they try to kill his book by silence, and dispose of its author with
condescending praise for his earlier achievements; they niggle endlessly over
details and remain obstinately silent about his really great discoveries. The
original edition of Ancient Society is out of print; in America there
is no sale for such things; in England, it seems, the book was systematically
suppressed, and the only edition of this epochmaking work still circulating in
the book trade is – the German translation. 
Why this reserve? It is difficult not to see in it a conspiracy of silence;
for politeness’ sake, our recognized anthropologists generally pack their
writings with quotations and other tokens of camaraderie. Is it, perhaps,
because Morgan is an American, and for the English anthropologists it goes
sorely against the grain that, despite their highly creditable industry in
collecting material, they should be dependent for their general points of view
in the arrangement and grouping of this material, for their ideas in fact, on
two foreigners of genius, Bachofen and Morgan? They might put up with the
German – but the American? Every Englishman turns patriotic when he comes
up against an American, and of this I saw highly entertaining instances in the
United States. Moreover, McLennan was, so to speak, the officially appointed
founder and leader of the English school of anthropology. It was almost a
principle of anthropological etiquette to speak of his artificially constructed
historical series – child-murder, polygyny, marriage by capture,
matriarchal family – in tones only of profoundest respect. The slightest
doubt in the existence of exogamous and endogamous “tribes” of
absolute mutual exclusiveness was considered rank heresy. Morgan had committed
a kind of sacrilege in dissolving all these hallowed dogmas into thin air. Into
the bargain, he had done it in such a way that it only needed saying to carry
immediate conviction; so that the McLennanites, who had hitherto been
helplessly reeling to and fro between exogamy and endogamy, could only beat
their brows and exclaim: “How could we be such fools as not to think of
that for ourselves long ago?” 
As if these crimes had not already left the official school with the option
only of coldly ignoring him, Morgan filled the measure to overflowing by not
merely criticizing civilization, the society of commodity production, the basic
form of present-day society, in a manner reminiscent of Fourier, but also by
speaking of a future transformation of this society in words which Karl Marx
might have used. He had therefore amply merited McLennan’s indignant
reproach that “the historical method is antipathetical to Mr.
Morgan’s mind,” and its echo as late as 1884 from Mr. Professor
Giraud-Teulon of Geneva. In 1874 (Origines de la Famille) this same
gentleman was still groping helplessly in the maze of the McLennanite exogamy,
from which Morgan had to come and rescue him! 

Of the other advances which primitive anthropology owes to Morgan, I do not
need to speak here; they are sufficiently discussed in the course of this
study. The fourteen years which have elapsed since the publication of his chief
work have greatly enriched the material available for the study of the history
of primitive human societies. The anthropologists, travelers and primitive
historians by profession have now been joined by the comparative jurists, who
have contributed either new material or new points of view. As a result, some
of Morgan’s minor hypotheses have been shaken or even disproved. But not
one of the great leading ideas of his work has been ousted by this new
material. The order which he introduced into primitive history still holds in
its main lines today. It is, in fact, winning recognition to the same degree in
which Morgan’s responsibility for the great advance is carefully
concealed. [1] 
Frederick Engels 
London, June 16, 1891 



Footnotes 


[1] On the voyage back from
New York in September, 1888, I met a former member of Congress for the district
of Rochester, who had known Lewis Morgan. Unfortunately, he could not tell me
very much about him. He said that Morgan had lived in Rochester as a private
individual, occupied only with his studies. His brother was a colonel, and had
held a post in the War Department in Washington; it was through him that Morgan
had managed to interest the Government in his researches and to get several of
his works published at public expense. While he was a member of Congress, my
informant had also on more than one occasion used his influence on
Morgan’s behalf. 



Preface (1884) | Chapter One 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## Stages of Prehistoric Culture









Origins of the Family. Chapter 1




Frederick Engels

Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

I. Stages of Prehistoric Culture


MORGAN is the first man who, with expert knowledge, has attempted to
introduce a definite order into the history of primitive man; so long
as no important additional material makes changes necessary, his
classification will undoubtedly remain in force.


Of the three main epochs – savagery, barbarism, and civilization – he
is concerned, of course, only with the first two and the transition to
the third.  He divides both savagery and barbarism into lower, middle,
and upper stages according to the progress made in the production of
food; for, he says:


     Upon their skill in this direction, the whole question of human
     supremacy on the earth depended.  Mankind are the only beings who
     may be said to have gained an absolute control over the
     production of food ... It is accordingly probable that the great
     epochs of human progress have been identified, more or less
     directly, with the enlargement of the sources of subsistence.
     

     [Morgan, op. cit., p. 19. -Ed.]


The development of the family takes a parallel course, but here the
periods have not such striking marks of differentiation.




                             I. Savagery


(a.)  LOWER STAGE.  Childhood of the human race.  Man still lived in
his original habitat, in tropical or subtropical forests, and was
partially at least a tree-dweller, for otherwise his survival among
huge beasts of prey cannot be explained.  Fruit, nuts and roots served
him for food.  The development of articulate speech is the main result
of this period.  Of all the peoples known to history none was still at
this primitive level.  Though this period may have lasted thousands of
years, we have no direct evidence to prove its existence; but once the
evolution of man from the animal kingdom is admitted, such a
transitional stage must necessarily be assumed.[A]


(b.)  MIDDLE STAGE.  Begins with the utilization of fish for food
(including crabs, mussels, and other aquatic animals), and with the use
of fire.  The two are complementary, since fish becomes edible only by
the use of fire.  With this new source of nourishment, men now became
independent of climate and locality; even as savages, they could, by
following the rivers and coasts, spread over most of the earth.  Proof
of these migrations is the distribution over every continent of the
crudely worked, unsharpened flint tools of the earlier Stone Age, known
as “palaeoliths,” all or most of which date from this period.  New
environments, ceaseless exercise of his inventive faculty, and the
ability to produce fire by friction, led man to discover new kinds of
food: farinaceous roots and tubers, for instance, were baked in hot
ashes or in ground ovens.  With the invention of the first weapons,
club and spear, game could sometimes be added to the fare.  But the
tribes which figure in books as living entirely, that is, exclusively,
by hunting never existed in reality; the yield of the hunt was far too
precarious.  At this stage, owing to the continual uncertainty of food
supplies, cannibalism seems to have arisen, and was practiced from now
onwards for a long time.  The Australian aborigines and many of the
Polynesians are still in this middle stage of savagery today.[B]


(c.)  UPPER STAGE.  Begins with the invention of the bow and arrow,
whereby  game became a regular source of food, and hunting a normal
form of  work.  Bow, string, and arrow already constitute a very
complex instrument, whose invention implies long, accumulated
experience and sharpened intelligence, and therefore knowledge of many
other inventions as well.  We find, in fact, that the peoples
acquainted with the bow and arrow but not yet with pottery (from which
Morgan dates the transition to barbarism) are already making some
beginnings towards settlement in villages and have gained some control
over the production of means of subsistence; we find wooden vessels and
utensils, finger-weaving (without looms) with filaments of bark;
plaited baskets of bast or osier; sharpened (neolithic) stone tools. 
With the discovery of fire and the stone ax, dug-out canoes now become
common; beams and planks arc also sometimes used for building houses. 
We find all these advances, for instance, among the Indians of
northwest America, who are acquainted with the bow and arrow but not
with pottery.  The bow and arrow was for savagery what the iron sword
was for barbarism and fire-arms for civilization – the decisive
weapon.[C]




                             2. Barbarism


(a.)  LOWER STAGE.  Dates from the introduction of pottery.  In many
cases it has been proved, and in all it is probable, that the first
pots originated from the habit of covering baskets or wooden vessels
with clay to make them fireproof; in this way it was soon
discovered that the clay mold answered the purpose without any inner
vessel.


Thus far we have been able to follow a general line of development
applicable to all peoples at a given period without distinction of
place.  With the beginning of barbarism, however, we have reached a
stage when the difference in the natural endowments of the two
hemispheres of the earth comes into play.  The characteristic feature
of the period of barbarism is the domestication and breeding of animals
and the cultivation of plants.  Now, the Eastern Hemisphere, the
so-called Old World, possessed nearly all the animals adaptable to
domestication, and all the varieties of cultivable cereals except one;
the Western Hemisphere, America, had no mammals that could be
domesticated except the llama, which, moreover, was only found in one
part of South America, and of all the cultivable cereals only one,
though that was the best, namely, maize.  Owing to these differences in
natural conditions, the population of each hemisphere now goes on its
own way, and different landmarks divide the particular stages in each
of the two cases.


(b.)  MIDDLE STAGE.  Begins in the Eastern Hemisphere with
domestication of animals; in the Western, with the cultivation, by
means of irrigation, of plants for food, and with the use of adobe
(sun-dried) bricks and stone for building.


We will begin with the Western Hemisphere, as here this stage was never
superseded before the European conquest.


At the time when they were discovered, the Indians at the lower stage
of barbarism (comprising all the tribes living east of the Mississippi)
were already practicing some horticulture of maize, and possibly also
of gourds, melons, and other garden plants, from which they obtained a
very considerable part of their food.  They lived in wooden houses in
villages protected by palisades.  The tribes in the northwest,
particularly those in the region of the Columbia River, were still at
the upper stage of savagery and acquainted neither with pottery nor
with any form of horticulture.  The so-called Pueblo Indians of New
Mexico, however, and the Mexicans, Central Americans, and Peruvians at
the time of their conquest were at the middle stage of barbarism.  They
lived in houses like fortresses, made of adobe brick or of stone, and
cultivated maize and other plants, varying according to locality and
climate, in artificially irrigated plots of ground, which supplied
their main source of food; some animals even had also been domesticated
– the turkey and other birds by the Mexicans, the llama by the
Peruvians.  They could also work metals, but not iron; hence they were
still unable to dispense with stone weapons and tools.  The Spanish
conquest then cut short any further independent development.


In the Eastern Hemisphere the middle stage of barbarism began with the
domestication of animals providing milk and meat, but horticulture
seems to have remained unknown far into this period.[D]  It was,
apparently, the domestication and breeding of animals and the formation
of herds of considerable size that led to the differentiation of the
Aryans and Semites from the mass of barbarians.  The European and
Asiatic Aryans still have the same names for cattle, but those for
most of the cultivated plants are already different.


In suitable localities, the keeping of herds led to a pastoral life:
the Semites lived upon the grassy plains of the Euphrates and Tigris,
and the Aryans upon those of India and of the Oxus and Jaxartes, of the
Don and the Dnieper.  It must have been on the borders of such pasture
lands that animals were first domesticated.  To later generations,
consequently, the pastoral tribes appear to have come from regions
which, so far from being the cradle of mankind, were almost
uninhabitable for their savage ancestors and even for man at the lower
stages of barbarism.  But having once accustomed themselves to pastoral
life in the grassy plains of the rivers, these barbarians of the middle
period would never have dreamed of returning willingly to the native
forests of their ancestors.  Even when they were forced further to the
north and west, the Semites and Aryans could not move into the forest
regions of western Asia and of Europe until by cultivation of grain
they had made it possible to pasture and especially to winter their
herds on this less favorable land.  It is more than probable that among
these tribes the cultivation of grain originated from the need for
cattle fodder and only later became important as a human food supply.


The plentiful supply of milk and meat and especially the beneficial
effect of these foods on the growth of the children account perhaps for
the superior development of the Aryan and Semitic races.  It is a fact
 that the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico, who are reduced to an almost
entirely vegetarian diet, have a smaller brain than the Indians at the
lower stage of barbarism, who eat more meat and fish.[E]  In any case,
cannibalism now gradually dies out, surviving only as a religious act
or as a means of working magic, which is here almost the same thing.


(c.)  UPPER STAGE.  Begins with the smelting of iron ore, and passes
into civilization with the invention of alphabetic writing and its use
for literary records.  This stage (as we have seen, only the Eastern
Hemisphere passed through it independently) is richer in advances in
production than all the preceding stages together.  To it belong the
Greeks of the heroic age, the tribes of Italy shortly before the
foundation of Rome, the Germans of Tacitus and the Norsemen of the
Viking age.[F]


Above all, we now first meet the iron plowshare drawn by cattle, which
made large-scale agriculture, the cultivation of fields, possible, and
thus created a practically unrestricted food supply in comparison with
previous conditions.  This led to the clearance of forest land for
tillage and pasture, which in turn was impossible on a large scale
without the iron ax and the iron spade.  Population rapidly increased
in number, and in small areas became dense.  Prior to field
agriculture, conditions must have been very exceptional if they allowed
half a million people to be united under a central organization;
probably such a thing never occurred.

We find the upper stage of barbarism at its highest in the Homeric
poems, particularly in the Iliad.  Fully developed iron tools, the
bellows, the hand-mill, the potter’s wheel, the making of oil and wine,
metal work developing almost into a fine art, the wagon and the
war-chariot, ship-building with beams and planks, the beginnings of
architecture as art, walled cities with towers and battlements, the
Homeric epic and a complete mythology – these are the chief legacy
brought by the Greeks from barbarism into civilization.  When we
compare the descriptions which Caesar and even Tacitus give of the
Germans, who stood at the beginning of the cultural stage from which
the Homeric Greeks were just preparing to make the next advance, we
realize how rich was the development of production within the upper
stage of barbarism.


The sketch which I have given here, following Morgan, of the
development of mankind through savagery and barbarism to the beginnings
of civilization, is already rich enough in new features; what is more,
they cannot be disputed, since they are drawn directly from the process
of production.  Yet my sketch will seem flat and feeble compared with
the picture to be unrolled at the end of our travels; only then will
the transition from barbarism to civilization stand out in full light
and in all its striking contrasts.  For the time being, Morgan’s
division may be summarized thus: 


Savagery – the period in which man’s appropriation of products in their natural state predominates; the products of human art are
    chiefly instruments which assist this appropriation.  


Barbarism – the period during which man learns to breed domestic
    animals and to practice agriculture, and acquires methods of
    increasing the supply of natural products by human activity. 


Civilization – the period in which man learns a more advanced
    application of work to the products of nature, the period of
    industry proper and of art.




Preface | Chapter 2



Editorial Footnotes

The intent of these footnotes are both to help the modern reader critically assess this work in face of recent scientific evidence and to show how effective Engels' dialectical method was that many of his conclusions remain true to this day. The following chapters do not have editorial footnotes because they are not needed as much as they are in this chapter (and this editor is not as knowledgable on those other subjects!). It should be noted that Engels predominant focus on European cultures is due to his lack of data on other cultures. These notes were written by MIA volunteer Brian Baggins (July, 2000).


A
While written in the late nineteenth century, these characteristics are descriptive of the first hominin genus: australopithecus who came into existence ~4 million years ago on the continent of Africa, and became extinct ~2 million years ago. They primarily were dependent on fruits, roots, etc. but likely supplemented this as scavengers.

B
This stage is a reasonable facsimile of homo erectus. Collection of their own food was predominant, the use of fire is likely, they hunted animals to some extent, and most importantly these practices allowed for the migration of humanity: settling much of Europe, the Middle East, and Asia.

There are however two significant mistakes. Australian Aborigines and Polynesians were not in a "middle stage of savagery. This was a false characterization used by Europeans to justify the colonization of those people. Similarly, cannibalism is an accusation often made to justify exploitation, and its existence is extremely rare.  

C
This stage is descriptive of homo sapiens, i.e. modern human beings, who first emerged ~200,000 years ago, and who originated in Africa. At around the same time, homo erectus went extinct. 

D
Current estimates are that domestication of animals occurred in 11,000 BCE, while agriculture began around 9,500 BCE. 

E
The theory that brain size correlates to intelligence was discredited by the end of the 19th century. This theory was used to justify both gender and race inequities for over a century. Modern theories about intelligence relating to physical characteristics, including size, are highly nuanced.  


F
This is inaccurate. The Mesopotamian (3500-1000 B.C.E.), Egyptian (3000-500 B.C.E.), Harrapan (2500-1000 B.C.E.), & Chinese (2000 B.C.E.  1800 C.E.) civilizations long preceded the Europeans in this stage: the Greeks were the first in Europe at around 500 B.C.E. Further, societies throughout the western hemisphere (Mesoamerica) developed their own writing and metallurgy. Morgan and Engels failed to recognize that the majority of humans on earth reached this final stage before European colonization. 



Origins of the Family Index





==========

## The Family









Origins of the Family-- Chapter II



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
II. The Family

The Consanguine Family
The First Stage of the Family

The Punaluan Family

The Pairing Family

The Monogamous Family




MORGAN, who spent a great part of his
life among the Iroquois Indians – settled to this day in New York State
– and was adopted into one of their tribes (the Senecas), found in use
among them a system of consanguinity which was in contradiction to their actual
family relationships. There prevailed among them a form of monogamy easily
terminable on both sides, which Morgan calls the “pairing family.”
The issue of the married pair was therefore known and recognized by everybody:
there could be no doubt about whom to call father, mother, son, daughter,
brother, sister. But these names were actually used quite differently. The
Iroquois calls not only his own children his sons and daughters, but also the
children of his brothers; and they call him father. The children of his
sisters, however, he calls his nephews and nieces, and they call him their
uncle. The Iroquois woman, on the other hand, calls her sisters’
children, as well as her own, her sons and daughters, and they call her mother.
But her brothers’ children she calls her nephews and nieces, and she is
known as their aunt. Similarly, the children of brothers call one another
brother and sister, and so do the children of sisters. A woman's own children
and the children of her brother, on the other hand, call one another cousins.
And these are not mere empty names, but expressions of actual conceptions of
nearness and remoteness, of equality and difference in the degrees of
consanguinity: these conceptions serve as the foundation of a fully elaborated
system of consanguinity through which several hundred different relationships
of one individual can be expressed. What is more, this system is not only in
full force among all American Indians (no exception has been found up to the
present), but also retains its validity almost unchanged among the aborigines
of India, the Dravidian tribes in the Deccan and the Gaura tribes in Hindustan.
To this day the Tamils of southern India and the Iroquois Seneca Indians in New
York State still express more than two hundred degrees of consanguinity in the
same manner. And among these tribes of India, as among all the American
Indians, the actual relationships arising out of the existing form of the
family contradict the system of consanguinity. 
How is this to be explained? In view of the decisive part played by
consanguinity in the social structure of all savage and barbarian peoples, the
importance of a system so widespread cannot be dismissed with phrases. When a
system is general throughout America and also exists in Asia among peoples of a
quite different race, when numerous instances of it are found with greater or
less variation in every part of Africa and Australia, then that system has to
be historically explained, not talked out of existence, as McLennan, for
example, tried to do. The names of father, child, brother, sister are no mere
complimentary forms of address; they involve quite definite and very serious
mutual obligations which together make up an essential part of the social
constitution of the peoples in question. 
The explanation was found. In the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii) there still
existed in the first half of the nineteenth century a form of family in which
the fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, sons and daughters, uncles and
aunts, nephews and nieces were exactly what is required by the American and old
Indian system of consanguinity. But now comes a strange thing. Once again, the
system of consanguinity in force in Hawaii did not correspond to the actual
form of the Hawaiian family. For according to the Hawaiian system of
consanguinity all children of brothers and sisters are without exception
brothers and sisters of one another and are considered to be the common
children not only of their mother and her sisters or of their father and his
brothers, but of all the brothers and sisters of both their parents without
distinction. While, therefore, the American system of consanguinity presupposes
a more primitive form of the family which has disappeared in America, but still
actually exists in Hawaii, the Hawaiian system of consanguinity, on the other
hand, points to a still earlier form of the family which, though we can nowhere
prove it to be still in existence, nevertheless must have existed; for
otherwise the corresponding system of consanguinity could never have arisen.

The family [says Morgan] represents an active principle. It is
never stationary, but advances from a lower to a higher form as society
advances from a lower to a higher condition ... Systems of consanguinity, on
the contrary, are passive; recording the progress made by the family at long
intervals apart, and only changing radically when the family has radically
changed. 
[Morgan, op. cit., p. 444. – Ed.] 
“And,” adds Marx, “the same is true of the political,
juridical, religious, and philosophical systems in general.” While the
family undergoes living changes, the system of consanguinity ossifies; while
the system survives by force of custom, the family outgrows it. But just as
Cuvier could deduce from the marsupial bone of an animal skeleton found near
Paris that it belonged to a marsupial animal and that extinct marsupial animals
once lived there, so with the same certainty we can deduce from the historical
survival of a system of consanguinity that an extinct form of family once
existed which corresponded to it. 
The systems of consanguinity and the forms of the family we have just
mentioned differ from those of today in the fact that every child has more than
one father and mother. In the American system of consanguinity, to which the
Hawaiian family corresponds, brother and sister cannot be the father and mother
of the same child; but the Hawaiian system of consanguinity, on the contrary,
presupposes a family in which this was the rule. Here we find ourselves among
forms of family which directly contradict those hitherto generally assumed to
be alone valid. The traditional view recognizes only monogamy, with, in
addition, polygamy on the part of individual men, and at the very most
polyandry on the part of individual women; being the view of moralizing
philistines, it conceals the fact that in practice these barriers raised by
official society are quietly and calmly ignored. The study of primitive
history, however, reveals conditions where the men live in polygamy and their
wives in polyandry at the same time, and their common children are therefore
considered common to them all – and these conditions in their turn
undergo a long series of changes before they finally end in monogamy. The trend
of these changes is to narrow more and more the circle of people comprised
within the common bond of marriage, which was originally very wide, until at
last it includes only the single pair, the dominant form of marriage today. 

Reconstructing thus the past history of the family, Morgan, in agreement
with most of his colleagues, arrives at a primitive stage when unrestricted
sexual freedom prevailed within the tribe, every woman belonging equally to
every man and every man to every woman. Since the eighteenth century there had
been talk of such a primitive state, but only in general phrases. Bachofen
– and this is one of his great merits – was the first to take the
existence of such a state seriously and to search for its traces in historical
and religious survivals. Today we know that the traces he found do not lead
back to a social stage of promiscuous sexual intercourse, but to a much later
form – namely, group marriage. The primitive social stage of promiscuity,
if it ever existed, belongs to such a remote epoch that we can hardly expect to
prove its existence directly by discovering its social fossils among backward
savages. Bachofen's merit consists in having brought this question to the
forefront for examination. [1] 
Lately it has become fashionable to deny the existence of this initial stage
in human sexual life. Humanity must be spared this “shame.” It is
pointed out that all direct proof of such a stage is lacking, and particular
appeal is made to the evidence from the rest of the animal world; for, even
among animals, according to the numerous facts collected by Letourneau
(L'évolution du mariage et de la famille, 1888), complete promiscuity in
sexual intercourse marks a low stage of development. But the only conclusion I
can draw from all these facts, so far as man and his primitive conditions of
life are concerned, is that they prove nothing whatever. That vertebrates mate
together for a considerable period is sufficiently explained by physiological
causes – in the case of birds, for example, by the female’s need of
help during the brooding period; examples of faithful monogamy among birds
prove nothing about man, for the simple reason that men are not descended from
birds. And if strict monogamy is the height of all virtue, then the palm must
go to the tapeworm, which has a complete set of male and female sexual organs
in each of its 50-200 proglottides, or sections, and spends its whole life
copulating in all its sections with itself. Confining ourselves to mammals,
however, we find all forms of sexual life – promiscuity, indications of
group marriage, polygyny, monogamy. Polyandry alone is lacking – it took
human beings to achieve that. Even our nearest relations, the quadrumana,
exhibit every possible variation in the grouping of males and females; and if
we narrow it down still more and consider only the four anthropoid apes, all
that Letourneau has to say about them is that they are sometimes monogamous,
sometimes polygamous, while Saussure, quoted by Giraud-Teulon, maintains that
they are monogamous. The more recent assertions of the monogamous habits of the
anthropoid apes which are cited by Westermarck (The History of Human
Marriage, London 1891), are also very far from proving anything. In short,
our evidence is such that honest Letourneau admits: “Among mammals there
is no strict relation between the degree of intellectual development and the
form of sexual life.” And Espinas (Des sociétés animates, 1877),
says in so many words: 
The herd is the highest social group which we can observe
among animals. It is composed, so it appears, of families, but from the start
the family and the herd are in conflict with one another and develop in inverse
proportion. 
As the above shows, we know practically nothing definite about the family
and other social groupings of the anthropoid apes; the evidence is flatly
contradictory. Which is not to be wondered at. The evidence with regard to
savage human tribes is contradictory enough, requiring very critical
examination and sifting; and ape societies are far more difficult to observe
than human. For the present, therefore, we must reject any conclusion drawn
from such completely unreliable reports. 
The sentence quoted from Espinas, however, provides a better starting point.
Among the higher animals the herd and the family are not complementary to one
another, but antagonistic. Espinas shows very well how the jealousy of the
males during the mating season loosens the ties of every social herd or
temporarily breaks it up. 
When the family bond is close and exclusive, herds form only
in exceptional cases. When on the other hand free sexual intercourse or
polygamy prevails, the herd comes into being almost spontaneously ... Before a
herd can be formed, family ties must be loosened and the individual must have
become free again. This is the reason why organized flocks are so rarely found
among birds ... We find more or less organized societies among mammals,
however, precisely because here the individual is not merged in the family ...
In its first growth, therefore, the common feeling of the herd has no greater
enemy than the common feeling of the family. We state it without hesitation:
only by absorbing families which had undergone a radical change could a social
form higher than the family have developed; at the same time, these families
were thereby enabled later to constitute themselves afresh under infinitely
more favorable circumstances. 
[Espinas, op. cit., quoted by Giraud-Teulon, Origines du
mariage et de la famille,
1884, pp. 518-20]. 
Here we see that animal societies are, after all, of some value for drawing
conclusions about human societies; but the value is only negative. So far as
our evidence goes, the higher vertebrates know only two forms of family –
polygyny or separate couples; each form allows only one adult male, only one
husband. The jealousy of the male, which both consolidates and isolates the
family, sets the animal family in opposition to the herd. The jealousy of the
males prevents the herd, the higher social form, from coming into existence, or
weakens its cohesion, or breaks it up during the mating period; at best, it
attests its development. This alone is sufficient proof that animal families
and primitive human society are incompatible, and that when primitive men were
working their way up from the animal creation, they either had no family at all
or a form that does not occur among animals. In small numbers, an animal so
defenseless as evolving man might struggle along even in conditions of
isolation, with no higher social grouping than the single male and female pair,
such as Westermarck, following the reports of hunters, attributes to the
gorillas and the chimpanzees. For man's development beyond the level of the
animals, for the achievement of the greatest advance nature can show, something
more was needed: the power of defense lacking to the individual had to be made
good by the united strength and co-operation of the herd. To explain the
transition to humanity from conditions such as those in which the anthropoid
apes live today would be quite impossible; it looks much more as if these apes
had strayed off the line of evolution and were gradually dying out or at least
degenerating. That alone is sufficient ground for rejecting all attempts based
on parallels drawn between forms of family and those of primitive man. Mutual
toleration among the adult males, freedom from jealousy, was the first
condition for the formation of those larger, permanent groups in which alone
animals could become men. And what, in fact, do we find to be the oldest and
most primitive form of family whose historical existence we can indisputably
prove and which in one or two parts of the world we can still study today?
Group marriage, the form of family in which whole groups of men and whole
groups of women mutually possess one another, and which leaves little room for
jealousy. And at a later stage of development we find the exceptional form of
polyandry, which positively revolts every jealous instinct and is therefore
unknown among animals. But as all known forms of group marriage are accompanied
by such peculiarly complicated regulations that they necessarily point to
earlier and simpler forms of sexual relations, and therefore in the last resort
to a period of promiscuous intercourse corresponding to the transition from the
animal to the human, the references to animal marriages only bring us back to
the very point from which we were to be led away for good and all. 
What, then, does promiscuous sexual intercourse really mean? It means the
absence of prohibitions and restrictions which are or have been in force. We
have already seen the barrier of jealousy go down. If there is one thing
certain, it is that the feeling of jealousy develops relatively late. The same
is true of the conception of incest. Not only were brother and sister
originally man and wife; sexual intercourse between parents and children is
still permitted among many peoples today. Bancroft (The Native Races of the
Pacific States of North America, 1875, Vol. I), testifies to it among the
Kadiaks on the Behring Straits, the Kadiaks near Alaska, and the Tinneh in the
interior of British North America; Letourneau compiled reports of it among the
Chippewa Indians, the Cucus in Chile, the Caribs, the Karens in Burma; to say
nothing of the stories told by the old Greeks and Romans about the Parthians,
Persians, Scythians, Huns, and so on. Before incest was invented – for
incest is an invention, and a very valuable one, too – sexual intercourse
between parents and children did not arouse any more repulsion than sexual
intercourse between other persons of different generations, and that occurs
today even in the most philistine countries without exciting any great horror;
even “old maids” of over sixty, if they are rich enough, sometimes
marry young men in their thirties. But if we consider the most primitive known
forms of family apart from their conceptions of incest – conceptions
which are totally different from ours and frequently in direct contradiction to
them-then the form of sexual intercourse can only be described as promiscuous
– promiscuous in so far as the restrictions later established by custom
did not yet exist. But in everyday practice that by no means necessarily
implies general mixed mating. Temporary pairings of one man with one woman were
not in any way excluded, just as in the cases of group marriages today the
majority of relationships are of this character. And when Westermarck, the
latest writer to deny the existence of such a primitive state, applies the term
“marriage” to every relationship in which the two sexes remain
mated until the birth of the offspring, we must point out that this kind of
marriage can very well occur under the conditions of promiscuous intercourse
without contradicting the principle of promiscuity – the absence of any
restriction imposed by custom on sexual intercourse. Westermarck, however,
takes the standpoint that promiscuity “involves a suppression of
individual inclinations,” and that therefore “the most genuine form
of it is prostitution.” In my opinion, any understanding of primitive
society is impossible to people who only see it as a brothel. We will return to
this point when discussing group marriage. 
According to Morgan, from this primitive state of promiscuous intercourse
there developed, probably very early: 
 

1. The Consanguine Family, The First Stage of the Family 

Here the marriage groups are separated according to generations: all the
grandfathers and grandmothers within the limits of the family are all husbands
and wives of one another; so are also their children, the fathers and mothers;
the latter’s children will form a third circle of common husbands and
wives; and their children, the great-grandchildren of the first group, will
form a fourth. In this form of marriage, therefore, only ancestors and progeny,
and parents and children, are excluded from the rights and duties (as we should
say) of marriage with one another. Brothers and sisters, male and female
cousins of the first, second, and more remote degrees, are all brothers and
sisters of one another, and precisely for that reason they are all husbands and
wives of one another. At this stage the relationship of brother and sister also
includes as a matter of course the practice of sexual intercourse with one
another. [2] In its typical form, such a family would
consist of the descendants of a single pair, the descendants of these
descendants in each generation being again brothers and sisters, and therefore
husbands and wives, of one another. [3] 
The consanguine family is extinct. Even the most primitive peoples known to
history provide no demonstrable instance of it. But that it must have existed,
we are compelled to admit: for the Hawaiian system of consanguinity still
prevalent today throughout the whole of Polynesia expresses degrees of
consanguinity which could only arise in this form of family; and the whole
subsequent development of the family presupposes the existence of the
consanguine family as a necessary preparatory stage. 



Footnotes 


[1] Bachofen proves how
little he understood his own discovery, or rather his guess, by using the term
"hetaerism" to describe this primitive state. For the Greeks, when they
introduced the word, hetaerism meant intercourse of men, unmarried or living in
monogamy, with unmarried women, it always presupposes a definite form of
marriage outside which this intercourse takes place and includes at least the
possibility of prostitution. The word was never used in any other sense, and it
is in this sense that I use it with Morgan. Bachofen everywhere introduces into
his extremely important discoveries the most incredible mystifications through
his notion that in their historical development the relations between men and
women had their origin in men's contemporary religious conceptions, not in
their actual conditions of life. 

[2] In a letter written in
the spring of 1882, Marx expresses himself in the strongest terms about the
complete misrepresentation of primitive times in Wager's text to the
Nibelangen: “ Have such things been heard, that brother embraced
sister as a bride?” To Wagner and his “ lecherous
gods” who, quite in the modern manner, spice their love affairs with
a little incest, Marx replies: “ In primitive times the sister was
the wife, and that was moral.”  


[3] NOTE in Fourth edition:
A French friend of mine who is an admirer of Wagner is not in agreement with
this note. He observes that already in the Elder Edda, on which Wagner based
his story, in the Oegisdrekka, Loki makes the reproach to Freya: In the
sight of the gods thou didst embrace thine own brother." Marriage between
brother and sister, he argues, was therefore forbidden already at that time.
The Oegisdrekka is the expression of a time when belief in the old myths had
completely broken down; it is purely a satire on the gods, in the style of
Lucian. If Loki as Mephisto makes such a reproach to Freya, it tells rather
against Wagner. Loki also says some lines later to Niordhr: “ With
thy sister didst thou breed son.” (vidh systur thinni gaztu slikan
mög) Niordhr is not, indeed, an Asa, but a Vana, and says in the Ynglinga saga
that marriages between brothers and sisters are usual in Vanaland, which was
not the case among the Asas. This would seem to show that the Vanas were more
ancient gods the Asas. At any rate, Niordhr lives among the OEgisdrekka is
rather a proof that at the time when the Norse sagas of the gods arose,
marriages between brothers and sisters, at any rate among the gods, did not yet
excite any horror. If one wants to find excuses for Wagner, it would perhaps be
better to cite Goethe instead of the Edda, for in his ballad of the God and the
Bayadere Goethe commits a similar mistake in regard to the religious surrender
of women, which he makes far too similar to modern prostitution. 



Chapter One | Chapter Two (Part II) 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## The Iroquois Gens









Origins of the Family-- Chapter 3



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 

III.
The Iroquois Gens 




We now come to another discovery made by Morgan, which is at
least as important as the reconstruction of the family in its primitive form
from the systems of consanguinity. The proof that the kinship organizations
designated by animal names in a tribe of American Indians are essentially
identical with the genea of the Greeks and the gentes of the Romans; that the
American is the original form and the Greek and Roman forms are later and
derivative; that the whole social organization of the primitive Greeks and
Romans into gens, phratry, and tribe finds its faithful parallel in that of the
American Indians; that the gens is an institution common to all barbarians
until their entry into civilization and even afterwards (so far as our sources
go up to the present) – this proof has cleared up at one stroke the most
difficult questions in the most ancient periods of Greek and Roman history,
providing us at the same time with an unsuspected wealth of information about
the fundamental features of social constitution in primitive times –
before the introduction of the state. Simple as the matter seems once it is
understood, Morgan only made his discovery quite recently. In his previous
work, published in 1871, [1] he had
not yet penetrated this secret, at whose subsequent revelation the English
anthropologists, usually so self-confident, became for a time as quiet as mice.


The Latin word gens, which Morgan uses as a general term for such kinship
organizations, comes, like its Greek equivalent, genos, from the common Aryan
root gan (in German, where, following the law [2] Aryan g is regularly replaced by k, kan), which means
to beget. Gens, Genos, Sanscrit jánas, Gothic kuni (following the same law as
above), Old Norse and Anglo-Saxon kyn, English kin, Middle High German künne,
all signify lineage, descent. Gens in Latin and genos in Greek are, however,
used specifically to denote the form of kinship organization which prides
itself on its common descent (in this case from a common ancestral father) and
is bound together by social and religious institutions into a distinct
community, though to all our historians its origin and character have hitherto
remained obscure. 
We have already seen, in connection with the punaluan family, what is the composition of a
gens in its original form. It consists of all the persons who in punaluan
marriage, according to the conceptions necessarily prevailing under it, form
the recognized descendants of one particular ancestral mother, the founder of
the gens. In this form of family, as paternity is uncertain, only the female
line counts. Since brothers may not marry their sisters but only women of
different descent, the children begotten by them with these alien women cannot,
according to mother-right, belong to the father's gens. Therefore only the
offspring of the daughters in each generation remain within the kinship
organization; the offspring of the sons go into the gentes of their mothers.
What becomes of this consanguine group when it has constituted itself a
separate group, distinct from similar groups within the tribe? 
As the classic form of this original gens, Morgan takes the gens among the
Iroquois, and especially in the Seneca tribe. In this tribe there are eight
gentes, named after animals: (1) Wolf, (2) Bear, (3) Turtle, (4) Beaver, (5)
Deer, (6) Snipe, (7) Heron, (8) Hawk. In every gens the following customs are
observed: 
1. The gens elects its sachem
(head of the gens in peace) and its chief (leader in war). The sachem had to be
chosen from among the members of the gens, and his office was hereditary within
the gens, in the sense that it had to be filled immediately as often as a
vacancy occurred; the military leader could be chosen from outside the gens,
and for a time the office might even be vacant. A son was never chosen to
succeed his father as sachem, since mother-right prevailed among the Iroquois
and the son consequently belonged to a different gens; but the office might and
often did pass to a brother of the previous sachem or to his sister's son. All
voted in the elections, both men and women. The election, however, still
required the confirmation of the seven remaining gentes, and only then was the
new sachem ceremonially invested with his office by the common council of the
whole Iroquois confederacy. The significance of this will appear later. The
authority of the sachem within the gens was paternal, and purely moral in
character; he had no means of coercion. By virtue of his office he was also a
member of the tribal council of the Senecas and also of the federal council of
all the Iroquois. The war-chief could only give orders on military expeditions.

2. The gens deposes the sachem
and war-chief at will. This also is done by men and women jointly. After a
sachem or chief had been deposed, they became simple braves, private persons,
like the other members. The tribal council also had the power to depose
sachems, even against the will of the gens. 
3. No member is permitted to
marry within the gens. This is the fundamental law of the gens, the bond which
holds it together. It is the negative expression of the very positive blood
relationship, by virtue of which the individuals it comprises become a gens. By
his discovery of this simple fact Morgan has revealed for the first time the
nature of the gens. How little the gens was understood before is obvious from
the earlier reports about savages and barbarians, in which the various bodies
out of which the gentile organization is composed are ignorantly and
indiscriminately referred to as tribe, clan, thum, and so forth, and then
sometimes designated as bodies within which marriage is prohibited. Thus was
created the hopeless confusion which gave Mr. McLennan his chance to appear as
Napoleon, establishing order by his decree: All tribes are divided into those
within which marriage is prohibited (exogamous) and those within which it is
permitted (endogamous). Having now made the muddle complete, he could give
himself up to the profoundest inquiries as to which of his two absurd classes
was the older exogamy or endogamy. All this nonsense promptly stopped of itself
with the discovery of the gens and of its basis in consanguinity, involving the
exclusion of its members from intermarriage with one another. It goes without
saying that at the stage at which we find the Iroquois the prohibition of
marriage within the gens was stringently observed. 
4. The property of deceased
persons passed to the other members of the gens; it had to remain in the gens.
As an Iroquois had only things of little value to leave, the inheritance was
shared by his nearest gentile relations; in the case of a man, by his own
brothers and sisters and maternal uncle; in the case of a woman, by her
children and own sisters, but not by her brothers. For this reason man and wife
could not inherit from one another, nor children from their father. 
5. The members of the gens owed
each other help, protection, and especially assistance in avenging injury by
strangers. The individual looked for his security to the protection of the
gens, and could rely upon receiving it; to wrong him was to wrong his whole
gens. From the bonds of blood uniting the gens sprang the obligation of blood
revenge, which the Iroquois unconditionally recognized. If any person from
outside the gens killed a gentile member, the obligation of blood revenge
rested on the entire gens of the slain man. First, mediation was tried; the
gens of the slayer sat in council, and made proposals of settlement to the
council of the gens of the slain, usually offering expressions of regret and
presents of considerable value. If these were accepted, the matter was disposed
of. In the contrary case, the wronged gens appointed one or more avengers,
whose duty it was to pursue and kill the slayer. If this was accomplished, the
gens of the slayer had no ground of complaint; accounts were even and closed.

6. The gens has special names or
classes of names, which may not be used by any other gens in the whole tribe,
so that the name of the individual indicates the gens to which he belongs. A
gentile name confers of itself gentile rights. 
7. The gens can adopt strangers
and thereby admit them into the whole tribe. Thus among the Senecas the
prisoners of war who were not killed became through adoption into a gens
members of the tribe, receiving full gentile and tribal rights. The adoption
took place on the proposal of individual members of the gens; if a man adopted,
he accepted the stranger as brother or sister; if a woman, as son or daughter.
The adoption had to be confirmed by ceremonial acceptance into the tribe.
Frequently a gens which was exceptionally reduced in numbers was replenished by
mass adoption from another gens, with its consent. Among the Iroquois the
ceremony of adoption into the gens was performed at a public council of the
tribe, and therefore was actually a religious rite. 
8. Special religious ceremonies
can hardly be found among the Indian gentes; the religious rites of the Indians
are, however, more or less connected with the gens. At the six yearly religious
festivals of the Iroquois the sachems and war-chiefs of the different gentes
were included ex officio among the “Keepers of the Faith” and had
priestly functions. 
9. The gens has a common burial
place. Among the Iroquois of New York State, who are hedged in on all sides by
white people, this has disappeared, but it existed formerly. It exists still
among other Indians – for example, among the Tuscaroras, who are closely
related to the Iroquois; although they are Christians, each gens has a separate
row in the cemetery; the mother is therefore buried in the same row as her
children, but not the father. And among the Iroquois also the whole gens of the
deceased attends the burial, prepares the grave, the funeral addresses, etc.

10. The gens has a council: the
democratic assembly of all male and female adult gentiles, all with equal
votes. This council elected sachems, war-chiefs and also the other "Keepers of
the Faith," and deposed them; it took decisions regarding blood revenge or
payment of atonement for murdered gentiles; it adopted strangers into the gens.
In short, it was the sovereign power in the gens. Such were the rights and
privileges of a typical Indian gens. 

All the members of an Iroquois gens were personally free, and
they were bound to defend each other's freedom; they were equal in privileges
and in personal rights, the sachem and chiefs claiming no superiority; and they
were a brotherhood bound together by the ties of kin. Liberty, equality, and
fraternity, though never formulated, were cardinal principles of the gens.
These facts are material, because the gens was the unit of a social and
governmental system, the foundation upon which Indian society was organized ...
It serves to explain that sense of independence and personal dignity
universally an attribute of Indian character. [3] 
The Indians of the whole of North America at the time of its discovery were
organized in gentes under mother-right. The gentes had disappeared only in some
tribes, as among the Dakotas; in others, as among the Ojibwas and the Omahas,
they were organized according to father-right. 
Among very many Indian tribes with more than five or six gentes, we find
every three, four, or more gentes united in a special group, which Morgan,
rendering the Indian name faithfully by its Greek equivalent, calls a "phratry"
(brotherhood). Thus the Senecas have two phratries: the first comprises gentes
1 to 4, the second gentes 5 to 8. Closer investigation shows that these
phratries generally represent the original gentes into which the tribe first
split up; for since marriage was prohibited within the gens, there had to be at
least two gentes in any tribe to enable it to exist independently. 
In the measure in which the tribe increased, each gens divided again into
two or more gentes, each of which now appears as a separate gens, while the
original gens, which includes all the daughter gentes, continues as the
phratry. Among the Senecas and most other Indians, the gentes within one
phratry are brother gentes to one another, while those in the other phratry are
their cousin gentes-terms which in the American system of consanguinity have,
as we have seen, a very real and expressive meaning. Originally no Seneca was
allowed to marry within his phratry, but this restriction has long since become
obsolete and is now confined to the gens. According to Senecan tradition, the
Bear and the Deer were the two original gentes, from which the others branched
off. After this new institution had once taken firm root, it was modified as
required; if the gentes in one phratry died out, entire gentes were sometimes
transferred into it from other phratries to make the numbers even. Hence we
find gentes of the same name grouped in different phratries in different
tribes. 
Among the Iroquois, the functions of the phratry are partly social, partly
religious. 
(1) In the ball game one phratry
plays against another. Each phratry puts forward its best players, while the
other members, grouped according to phratries, look on and bet against one
another on the victory of their players. 
(2) In the tribal council the
sachems and the war-chiefs of each phratry sit together, the two groups facing
one another; each speaker addresses the representatives of each phratry as a
separate body. 
(3) If a murder had been
committed in the tribe, and the slayer and the slain belonged to different
phratries, the injured gens often appealed to its brother gentes; these held a
council of the phratry and appealed in a body to the other phratry that it also
should assemble its council to effect a settlement. Here the phratry reappears
as the original gens, and with greater prospect of success than the weaker
single gens, its offspring. 
(4) At the death of prominent
persons the opposite phratry saw to the interment and the burial ceremonies,
while the phratry of the dead person attended as mourners. If a sachem died,
the opposite phratry reported to the federal council of the Iroquois that the
office was vacant. 
(5) The council of the phratry
also played a part in the election of a sachem. That the election would be
confirmed by the brother gentes was more or less taken for granted, but the
gentes of the opposite phratry might raise an objection. In this case the
council of the opposite phratry was assembled; if it maintained the objection,
the election was void. 
(6) The Iroquois formerly had
special religious mysteries, called medicine lodges by the white men. Among the
Senecas, these mysteries were celebrated by two religious brotherhoods, into
which new members were admitted by formal initiation; there was one such
brotherhood in each of the two phratries. 
(7) If, as is almost certain, the
four lineages occupying the four quarters of Tlascala at the time of the
conquest were four phratries, we here have proof that the phratries were also
military units, like the phratries among the Greeks and similar kinship
organizations among the Germans; these four lineages went into battle as
separate groups, each with its own uniform and flag, and under its own leader.

As several gentes make up a phratry, so in the classic form
several phratries make up a tribe; in some cases, when tribes have been much
weakened, the intermediate form, the phratry, is absent. What distinguishes an
Indian tribe in America? 
1. Its own territory and name. In
addition to its actual place of settlement, every tribe further possessed
considerable territory for hunting and lashing. Beyond that lay a broad strip
of neutral land reaching to the territory of the neighboring tribe; it was
smaller between tribes related in language, larger between tribes not so
related. It is the same as the boundary forest of the Germans, the waste made
by Caesar's Suevi around their territory, the isarnholt (in Danish, jarnved,
limes Danicus) between Danes and Germans, the Sachsenwald (Saxon wood) and
branibor (Slav, "protecting wood") between Germans and Slavs, from which
Brandenburg takes its name. The territory delimited by these uncertain
boundaries was the common land of the tribe, recognized as such by neighboring
tribes and defended by the tribe itself against attacks. In most cases the
uncertainty of the boundaries only became a practical disadvantage when there
had been a great increase in population. The names of the tribes seem generally
to have arisen by chance rather than to have been deliberately chosen; in the
course of time it often happened that a tribe was called by another name among
the neighboring tribes than that which it used itself, just as the Germans were
first called Germans by the Celts. 
2. A distinct dialect peculiar to the tribe
alone. Tribe and dialect are substantially coextensive; the formation
through segmentation of new tribes and dialects was still proceeding in America
until quite recently, and most probably has not entirely stopped even today.
When two weakened tribes have merged into one, the exceptional case occurs of
two closely related dialects being spoken in the same tribe. The average
strength of American tribes is under 2,000 members; the Cherokees, however,
number about 26,000, the greatest number of Indians in the United States
speaking the same dialect. 
3. The right to install into office the
Sachems and war-chiefs elected by the Gentes and the right to depose
them, even against the will of their gens. As these sachems and
war-chiefs are members of the council of the tribe, these rights of the tribe
in regard to them explain themselves. Where a confederacy of tribes had been
formed, with all the tribes represented in a federal council, these rights were
transferred to the latter. 

4. The possession of common religious
conceptions (mythology) and ceremonies. “After the fashion of
barbarians the American Indians were a religious people.” [4] Their mythology has not yet been
studied at all critically. They already embodied their religious ideas-spirits
of every kind-in human form; but the lower stage of barbarism, which they had
reached, still knows no plastic representations, so-called idols. Their
religion is a cult of nature and of elemental forces, in process of development
to polytheism. The various tribes had their regular festivals, with definite
rites, especially dances and games. Dancing particularly was an essential part
of all religious ceremonies; each tribe held its own celebration separately.

5. A tribal council for the common affairs of
the tribe. It was composed of all the sachems and war-chiefs of the
different gentes, who were genuinely representative because they could be
deposed at any time. It held its deliberations in public, surrounded by the
other members of the tribe, who had the right to join freely in the discussion
and to make their views heard. The decision rested with the council. As a rule,
everyone was given a hearing who asked for it; the women could also have their
views expressed by a speaker of their own choice. Among the Iroquois the final
decision had to be unanimous, as was also the case in regard to many decisions
of the German mark communities. The tribal council was responsible especially
for the handling of relations with other tribes; it received and sent
embassies, declared war and made peace. If war broke out, it was generally
carried on by volunteers. In principle, every tribe was considered to be in a
state of war with every other tribe with which it had not expressly concluded a
treaty of peace. Military expeditions against such enemies were generally
organized by prominent individual warriors; they held a war-dance, and whoever
joined in the dance announced thereby his participation in the expedition. The
column was at once formed, and started off. The defense of the tribal territory
when attacked was also generally carried out by volunteers. The departure and
return of such columns were always an occasion of public festivities. The
consent of the tribal council was not required for such expeditions, and was
neither asked nor given. They find their exact counterpart in the private war
expeditions of the German retinues described by Tacitus, only with the
difference that among the Germans the retinues have already acquired a more
permanent character, forming a firm core already organized in peacetime to
which the other volunteers are attached in event of war. These war parties are
seldom large; the most important expeditions of the Indians, even to great
distances, were undertaken with insignificant forces. If several such parties
united for operations on a large scale, each was under the orders only of its
own leader. Unity in the plan of campaign was secured well or ill by a council
of these leaders. It is the same manner of warfare as we find described by
Ammianus Marcellinus among the Alemanni on the Upper Rhine in the fourth
century. 
6. Among some tribes we find a head chief,
whose powers, however, are very slight. He is one of the sachems, and in
situations demanding swift action he has to take provisional measures, until
the council can assemble and make a definite decision. His function represents
the first feeble attempt at the creation of an official with executive power,
though generally nothing more came of it; as we shall see, the executive
official developed in most cases, if not in all, out of the chief military
commander. 
The great majority of the American Indians did not advance to any higher
form of association than the tribe. Living in small tribes, separated from one
another by wide tracts between their frontiers, weakened by incessant wars,
they occupied an immense territory with few people. Here and there alliances
between related tribes came into being in the emergency of the moment and broke
up when the emergency had passed. But in certain districts tribes which were
originally related and had then been dispersed, joined together again in
permanent federations, thus taking the first step towards the formation of
nations. In the United States we find the most developed form of such a
federation among the Iroquois. Emigrating from their homes west of the
Mississippi, where they probably formed a branch of the great Dakota family,
they settled after long wanderings in what is now the State of New York. They
were divided into five tribes: Senecas, Cayugas, Onondagas, Oneidas and
Mohawks. They subsisted on fish, game, and the products of a crude
horticulture, and lived in villages, which were generally protected by a
stockade. Never more than twenty thousand strong, they had a number of gentes
common to all the five tribes, spoke closely related dialects of the same
language, and occupied a continuous stretch of territory which was divided up
among the five tribes. As they had newly conquered this territory, these tribes
were naturally accustomed to stand together against the Inhabitants they had
driven out. From this developed, at the beginning of the fifteenth century at
latest, a regular “everlasting league,” a sworn confederacy, which
in the consciousness of its new strength immediately assumed an aggressive
character, and at the height of its power, about 1675, conquered wide stretches
of the surrounding country, either expelling the inhabitants or making them pay
tribute. The Iroquois confederacy represents the most advanced social
organization achieved by any Indians still at the lower stage of barbarism
(excluding, therefore, the Mexicans, New Mexicans and Peruvians). 
The main provisions of the confederacy were as follows: 
1. Perpetual federation of the
five consanguineous tribes on the basis of complete equality and independence
in all internal matters of the tribe. This bond of kin represented the real
basis of the confederacy. Of the five tribes, three were known as father tribes
and were brother tribes to one another; the other two were known as son tribes,
and were likewise brother tribes to one another. Three gentes, the oldest,
still had their living representatives in all five tribes, and another three in
three tribes; the members of each of these gentes were all brothers of one
another throughout all the five tribes. Their common language, in which there
were only variations of dialect, was the expression and the proof of their
common descent. 
2. The organ of the confederacy
was federal council of fifty sachems, all equal in rank and authority; the
decisions of this council were final in all matters relating to the
confederacy. 
3. The fifty sachems were
distributed among the tribes and gentes at the foundation of the confederacy to
hold the new offices specially created for federal purposes. They were elected
by the respective gentes whenever a vacancy occurred and could be deposed by
the gentes at any time; but the right of investing them with their office
belonged to the federal council. 
4. These federal sachems were
also sachems in their respective tribes, and had a seat and a vote in the
tribal council. 
5. All decisions of the federal
council had to be unanimous. 
6. Voting was by tribes, so that
for a decision to be valid every tribe and all members of the council in every
tribe had to signify their agreement. 
7. Each of the five tribal
councils could convene the federal council, but it could not convene itself.

8. The meetings of the council
were held in the presence of the assembled people; every Iroquois could speak;
the council alone decided. 
9. The confederacy had no
official head or chief executive officer. 
10. On the other hand, the
council had two principal war-chiefs, with equal powers and equal authority
(the two "kings" of the Spartans, the two consuls in Rome). 


That was the whole public constitution under which the Iroquois
lived for over four hundred years and are still living today. I have described
it fully, following Morgan, because here we have the opportunity of studying
the organization of a society which still has no state. The state presupposes a
special public power separated from the body of the people, and Maurer, who
with a true instinct recognizes that the constitution of the German mark is a
purely social institution, differing essentially from the state, though later
providing a great part of its basis, consequently investigates in all his
writings the gradual growth of the public power out of, and side by side with,
the primitive constitutions of marks, villages, homesteads, and towns. Among
the North American Indians we see how an originally homogeneous tribe gradually
spreads over a huge continent; how through division tribes become nations,
entire groups of tribes; how the languages change until they not only become
unintelligible to other tribes, but also lose almost every trace of their
original identity; how at the same time within the tribes each gens splits up
into several gentes, how the old mother gentes are preserved as phratries,
while the names of these oldest gentes nevertheless remain the same in widely
distant tribes that have long been separated-the Wolf and the Bear are still
gentile names among a majority of all Indian tribes. And the constitution
described above applies in the main to them all, except that many of them never
advanced as far as the confederacy of related tribes. 
But once the gens is given as the social unit, we also see how the whole
constitution of gentes, phratries, and tribes is almost necessarily bound to
develop from this unit, because the development is natural. Gens, phratry, and
tribe are all groups of different degrees of consanguinity, each self-contained
and ordering its own affairs, but each supplementing the other. And the affairs
which fall within their sphere comprise all the public affairs of barbarians of
the lower stage. When we find a people with the gens as their social unit, we
may therefore also look for an organization of the tribe similar to that here
described; and when there are adequate sources, as in the case of the Greeks
and the Romans, we shall not only find it, but we shall also be able to
convince ourselves that where the sources fail us, comparison with the American
social constitution helps us over the most difficult doubts and riddles. 
And a wonderful constitution it is, this gentile constitution, in all its
childlike simplicity! No soldiers, no gendarmes or police, no nobles, kings,
regents, prefects, or judges, no prisons, no lawsuits – and everything takes
its orderly course. All quarrels and disputes are settled by the whole of the
community affected, by the gens or the tribe, or by the gentes among
themselves; only as an extreme and exceptional measure is blood revenge
threatened-and our capital punishment is nothing but blood revenge in a
civilized form, with all the advantages and drawbacks of civilization. Although
there were many more matters to be settled in common than today – the household
is maintained by a number of families in common, and is communistic, the land
belongs to the tribe, only the small gardens are allotted provisionally to the
households – yet there is no need for even a trace of our complicated
administrative apparatus with all its ramifications. The decisions are taken by
those concerned, and in most cases everything has been already settled by the
custom of centuries. There cannot be any poor or needy – the communal household
and the gens know their responsibilities towards the old, the sick, and those
disabled in war. All are equal and free – the women included. There is no place
yet for slaves, nor, as a rule, for the subjugation of other tribes. When,
about the year 1651, the Iroquois had conquered the Eries and the
“Neutral Nation,” they offered to accept them into the confederacy
on equal terms; it was only after the defeated tribes had refused that they
were driven from their territory. And what men and women such a society breeds
is proved by the admiration inspired in all white people who have come into
contact with unspoiled Indians, by the personal dignity, uprightness, strength
of character, and courage of these barbarians. 
We have seen examples of this courage quite recently in Africa. The Zulus a
few years ago and the Nubians a few months ago – both of them tribes in
which gentile institutions have not yet died out – did what no European
army can do. Armed only with lances and spears, without firearms, under a hail
of bullets from the breech-loaders of the English infantry – acknowledged the
best in the world at fighting in close order – they advanced right up to
the bayonets and more than once threw the lines into disorder and even broke
them, in spite of the enormous inequality of weapons and in spite of the fact
that they have no military service and know nothing of drill. Their powers of
endurance and performance are shown by the complaint of the English that a
Kaffir travels farther and faster in twenty-four hours than a horse. His
smallest muscle stands out hard and firm like whipcord, says an English
painter. 
That is what men and society were before the division into classes. And when
we compare their position with that of the overwhelming majority of civilized
men today, an enormous gulf separates the present-day proletarian and small
peasant from the free member of the old gentile society. 

That is the one side. But we must not forget that this organization was
doomed. It did not go beyond the tribe. The confederacy of tribes already marks
the beginning of its collapse, as will soon be apparent, and was already
apparent in the attempts at subjugation by the Iroquois. Outside the tribe was
outside the law. Wherever there was not an explicit treaty of peace, tribe was
at war with tribe, and wars were waged with the cruelty which distinguishes man
from other animals, and which was only mitigated later by self-interest. The
gentile constitution in its best days, as we saw it in America, presupposed an
extremely undeveloped state of production and therefore an extremely sparse
population over a wide area. Man’s attitude to nature was therefore one
of almost complete subjection to a strange incomprehensible power, as is
reflected in his childish religious conceptions. Man was bounded by his tribe,
both in relation to strangers from outside the tribe and to himself; the tribe,
the gens, and their institutions were sacred and inviolable, a higher power
established by nature, to which the individual subjected himself
unconditionally in feeling, thought, and action. However impressive the people
of this epoch appear to us, they are completely undifferentiated from one
another; as Marx says, they are still attached to the navel string of the
primitive community. [5] The power
of this primitive community had to be broken, and it was broken. But it was
broken by influences which from the very start appear as a degradation, a fall
from the simple moral greatness of the old gentile society. The lowest
interests – base greed, brutal appetites, sordid avarice, selfish robbery
of the common wealth – inaugurate the new, civilized, class society. It
is by the vilest means – theft, violence, fraud, treason – that the
old classless gentile society is undermined and overthrown. And the new society
itself, during all the two and a half thousand years of its existence, has
never been anything else but the development of the small minority at the
expense of the great exploited and oppressed majority; today it is so more than
ever before. 



Footnotes 


[1] Systems of Consanguinity
and Affinity of the Human Family, Smithsonian Publications, 1871.-Ed. 


[2] Engels refers here to
Grimm's law of the shifting of consonants in the Indo-European languages.-Ed.



[3] Morgan, Ancient
Society, pp. 85-86.-Ed. 


[4] Ibid., p. 117 -Ed. 


[5] “Those ancient
social organisms of production are, as compared with bourgeois society,
extremely simple and transparent. But they are founded either on the immature
development of man individually, who has not yet severed the umbilical cord
that unified him with his fellow men in a primitive tribal community, or upon
direct relations of domination and subjection.” – (Karl Marx, Capital Vol. I, p. 51, New York.) Ed. 



Chapter Two (IV) | Chapter Four 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## The Greek Gens [The Rise of Private Property]









Origins of the Family-- Chapter IV



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
IV. The Greek Gens


From prehistoric times Greeks and Pelasgians alike, and other
peoples of kindred stock, had been organized in the same organic series as the
Americans: gens, phratry, tribe, confederacy of tribes. The phratry might be
absent, as among the Dorians, and the confederacy of tribes was not necessarily
fully developed everywhere as yet; but in every case the gens was the unit. At
the time of their entry into history, the Greeks are on the threshold of
civilization; between them and the American tribes, of whom we spoke above, lie
almost two entire great periods of development, by which the Greeks of the
heroic age are ahead of the Iroquois. The gens of the Greeks is therefore no
longer the archaic gens of the Iroquois; the impress of group marriage is
beginning to be a good deal blurred. Mother-right has given way to
father-right; increasing private wealth has thus made its first breach in the
gentile constitution. A second breach followed naturally from the first. After
the introduction of father-right the property of a rich heiress would have
passed to her husband and thus into another gens on her marriage, but the
foundation of all gentile law was now violated and in such a case the girl was
not only permitted but ordered to marry within the gens, in order that her
property should be retained for the gens. 
According to Grote's History of Greece, the Athenian gens, in particular,
was held together by the following institutions and customs: 
1. Common religious rites, and
the exclusive privilege of priesthood in honor of a particular god, the
supposed ancestral father of the gens, who in this attribute was designated by
a special surname. 
2. A common burial place (cf.
Demosthenes' Eubulides). 
3. Mutual right of inheritance.

4. Mutual obligations of help,
protection, and assistance in case of violence. 
5. Mutual right and obligation to
marry within the gens in certain cases, especially for orphan girls and
heiresses. 
6. Possession, at least in some
cases, of common property, with a special archon (head man or president) and
treasurer. 
Next, several gentes were united in the phratry, but less
closely; though here also we find mutual rights and obligations of a similar
kind, particularly the common celebration of certain religious ceremonies and
the right to avenge the death of a phrator. Similarly, all the phratries of a
tribe held regularly recurring religious festivals in common, at which a leader
of the tribe (phylobasileus), elected from the nobility (Eupatridai),
officiated. 
Thus far Grote. And Marx adds:
“In the Greek gens, the savage (e.g. Iroquois) shows
through unmistakably.” He becomes still more unmistakable when we
investigate further. 
For the Greek gens has also the following characteristics: 
7. Descent in the male line. 
8. Prohibition of marriage within
the gens except in the case of heiresses. This exception, and its formulation
as an ordinance, prove the old rule to be valid. This is further substantiated
by the universally accepted principle that at her marriage the woman renounced
the religious rites of her gens and went over to those of her husband, being
also inscribed in his phratry. This custom and a famous passage in Diccarchus
both show that marriage outside the gens was the rule, and Becker in Charicles
directly assumes that nobody might marry within his own gens. 
9. The right of adoption into the
gens. This was exercised through adoption into the family, but required public
formalities and was exceptional. 
10. The right to elect chieftains
and to depose them. We know that every gens had its archon; but it is nowhere
stated that the office was hereditary in certain families. Until the end of
barbarism the probability is always against strict heredity, which is quite
incompatible with conditions in which rich and poor had completely equal rights
within the gens. 
Not only Grote, but also Niebuhr, Mommsen and all the other historians of
classical antiquity, have come to grief over the gens. Though they correctly
noted many of its characteristics, they always took it to be a group of
families, thus making it impossible for themselves to understand the nature and
origin of the gens. Under the gentile constitution, the family was never an
organizational unit, and could not be so, for man and wife necessarily belonged
to two different gentes. The whole gens was incorporated within the phratry,
and the whole phratry within the tribe; but the family belonged half to the
gens of the man and half to the gens of the woman. In public law the state also
does not recognize the family; up to this day, the family only exists for
private law. And yet all our histories have hitherto started from the absurd
assumption, which, since the eighteenth century in particular, has become
inviolable, that the monogamous single family, which is hardly older than
civilization, is the core around which society and state have gradually
crystallized. 
Mr. Grote will also please note [Marx throws in] that though
the Greeks derive their gentes from mythology, the gentes are older than the
mythology which they themselves created with all its gods and
demigods. 
Morgan prefers to quote Grote because he is not only an impressive but also
a trustworthy witness. Grote goes on to say that every Athenian gens had a name
derived from its supposed ancestor; that it was the general custom before
Solon, and even after Solon, in the absence of a will, for the property of a
deceased person to pass to the members of his gens (gennetai), and that in the
case of a murder it was the light and the duty, first of the relatives of the
murdered man, then of the members of his gens, and lastly of his phratry, to
prosecute the criminal before the tribunals: “All that we hear of the
most ancient Athenian laws is based upon the gentile and phratric
divisions.” (Grote.) 
The descent of the gentes from common ancestors has caused the
“pedantic philistines,” as Marx calls them, a lot of brain-racking.
As they of course declare the common ancestors to be pure myths, they are at an
utter loss to explain how the gens originated out of a number of separate and
originally quite unrelated families; yet they have to perform this feat in
order to explain how the gentes exist at all. So they argue in circles, with
floods of words, never getting any further than the statement: the ancestral
tree is a fairy tale, but the gens is a reality. And finally Grote declares
(interpolations by Marx): 
We hear of this genealogy but rarely, because it is only
brought before the public in certain cases pre-eminent and venerable. But the
humbler gentes had their common rites [this is strange, Mr. Grote!], and common
superhuman ancestor and genealogy, as well as the more celebrated [this is most
strange, Mr. Grote, among humbler gentes!]: the scheme and ideal basis
[my good sir, not ideal, but carnal, germanice fleishlich!]
was the same in all. [Quoted by Morgan, op. cit., p. 239. – Ed.] 
Marx summarizes Morgan's reply to this as follows: 
“The system of consanguinity corresponding to the
original form of the gens – and the Greeks, like other mortals, once possessed
such a gens – preserved the knowledge of the mutual relations between all
members of a gens to each other. They learned this, for them decisively
important, fact by practice from early childhood. This fell into desuetude with
the rise of the monogamian family. The gentile name created a pedigree beside
which that of the individual family was insignificant. This name was now to
preserve the fact of the common descent of those who bore it; but the lineage
of the gens went so far that its members could no longer prove the actual
relationship existing between them, except in a limited number of cases through
recent common ancestors. The name itself was the evidence of a common descent,
and conclusive proof, except in cases of adoption. The actual denial of all
kinship between gentiles à la Grote and Neibuhr, which transforms the gens into
a purely fictitious, fanciful creation of the brain, is, on the other hand,
worthy of ‘ideal’ scientists, that is, of cloistered bookworms.
Because concatention of the generations, especially with the incipience of
monogamy, is removed into the distance, and the reality of the past seems
reflected in mythological fantasy, the good old Philistines concluded, and
still conclude, that the fancied genealogy created real gentes!”
As among the Americans, the phratry was a mother gens, split up
into several daughter gentes, and uniting them, often tracing them all to a
common ancestor. Thus, according to Grote,
“all the contemporary members of the phratry of
Hekataeus had a common god for their ancestor at the sixteenth
degree.”
Hence, all the gentes of this phratry were literally brother gentes. The
phratry still occurs in Homer as a military unit in that famous passage where
Nestos advises Agamemnon: Draw up people by tribes and by phratries so that
phratry may support phratry, and tribe tribe. The phratry has further the right
and the duty of prosecuting for blood-guilt incurred against a phrator; hence
in earlier times it also had the obligation of blood revenge. Further, it had
common shrines and festivals; in fact the elaboration of the whole Greek
mythology out of the traditional old Aryan nature-cult was essentially
conditioned by the phratries and gentes, and took place within them. The
phratry also had a chief (the phratriarchos) and, according to de Coulanges,
assemblies. It could pass binding resolutions, and act as a judicial and
administrative body. Even the later state, while it ignored the gens, left
certain public offices in the hands of the phratry. 
Several related phratries form a tribe. In Attica there were four tribes,
each consisting of three phratries, each phratry numbering thirty gentes. Such
a rounded symmetry of groups presupposes conscious, purposeful interference
with the naturally developed order. As to how, when, and why this occurred,.
Greek history is silent; the historical memory of the Greeks only went back to
the heroic age. 
As the Greeks were crowded together in a relatively small territory,
differences of dialect were less developed than in the wide American forests;
yet in Greece also it was only tribes of the same main dialect that united in a
larger organization, and even Attica, small as it was, had a dialect of its
own, which later, through its general use as the language of prose, became the
dominant dialect. 
In the Homeric poems we find most of the Greek tribes already united into
small nations, within which, however, gentes, phratries, and tribes retained
their full independence. They already lived in towns fortified with walls; the
population increased with the increase of the herds, the extension of
agriculture and the beginnings of handicraft. The differences in wealth thus
became more pronounced, and with them the aristocratic element within the old
primitive democracy. The various small nations waged incessant wars for the
possession of the best land and doubtless also for booty; the use of prisoners
of war as slaves was already a recognized institution. 
The constitution of these tribes and small nations was as follows: 
(1) The permanent authority was the council (boulè), probably
composed originally of all the chiefs of the gentes; later, when their number
became too large, of a selection, whose choice provided an opportunity of
extending and strengthening the aristocratic element. Dionysius actually speaks
of the council in the heroic age as composed of nobles (kratistoi). The
ultimate decision in important matters rested with the council. Thus in
Æschylus the council of Thebes makes what is in the circumstances the vital
decision to give Eteocles an honorable burial, but to throw out the corpse of
Polynices to be devoured by dogs. When the state was established, this council
was merged into the senate. 
(2) The assembly of the people (agora). We saw among the
Iroquois how the people, men and women, stood round the council when it was
holding its meetings, intervening in an orderly manner in its deliberations and
thus influencing its decisions. Among the Homeric Greeks, this Umstand
(standing round), to use an old German legal expression, had already developed
into a regular assembly of the people, as was also the case among the Germans
in primitive times. It was convened by the council to decide important
questions; every man bad the right to speak. The decision was given by a show
of hands (AEschylus, The Suppliants) or by acclamation. The decision of the
assembly was supreme and final, for, says Schomann, in Griechische
Altertumer,
“if the matter was one requiring the co-operation of
the people for its execution, Homer does not indicate any means by which the
people could be forced to co-operate against their will.” 
For at this time, when every adult male member of the tribe was
a warrior, there was as yet no public power separate from the people which
could have been used against the people. Primitive democracy was still in its
full strength, and it is in relation to that fact that the power and the
position both of the council and of the basileus must first be judged. 
(3) The leader of the army (basileus). Marx makes the following
comment:
European scholars, born lackeys most of them, make the
basileus into a monarch in the modern sense. Morgan, the Yankee
republican, protests. Very ironically, but truly, he says of the oily-tongued
Gladstone and his Juventus Mundi:
“Mr. Gladstone, who presents to his readers the Grecian
chiefs of the heroic age as kings and princes, with the superadded qualities of
gentlemen, is forced to admit that ‘on the whole we seem to have the
custom or law of primogeniture sufficiently, but not oversharply
defined.’”
[Morgan, op. cit., p. 255 – Ed.]
Mr. Gladstone will probably agree that such an ambiguous law
of primogeniture may be “sufficiently, but not oversharply defined”
as being just as good as none at all. 
In what sense the offices of sachem and chieftain were
hereditary among the Iroquois and other Indians, we have already seen. All
offices were elective, generally within a gens, and to that extent hereditary
to the gens. In the course of time, preference when filling vacancies was given
to the nearest gentile relation-brother or sister's son – unless there were
reasons for passing him over. The fact that among the Greeks, under
father-right, the office of basileus generally passed to the son, or one of the
sons, only proves that the probabilities were in favor of the sons succeeding
to the office by popular election; it is no proof at all of legal hereditary
succession without popular election. All that we have here is the first
beginnings among the Iroquois and Greeks of distinct noble families within the
gentes and, in the case of the Greeks, the first beginnings also of a future
hereditary leadership or monarchy. The probability is, therefore, that among
the Greeks the basileus had either to be elected by the people or at least
confirmed in his office by the recognized organs of the people, the council or
agora, as was the case with the Roman “king” (rex). 
 
In the Iliad, Agamemnon, the ruler of men, does not appear
as the supreme king of the Greeks, but as supreme commander of a federal army
before a besieged town. It is to this supremacy of command that Odysseus, after
disputes had broken out among the Greeks, refers in a famous passage:
“Evil is the rule of many; let one be commander,” etc. (The
favorite line about the scepter is a later addition.) 
Odysseus is here not giving a lecture on a form of
government, but demanding obedience to the supreme commander in war. Since they
are appearing before Troy only as an army, the proceedings in the agora secure
to the Greeks all necessary democracy. When Achilles speaks of presents –
that is, the division of the booty – he always leaves the division, not
to Agamemnon or any other basileus, but to the “sons of the
Achacans,” that is, the people. Such epithets as “descended from
Zeus,” “nourished by Zeus,” prove nothing, for every gens is
descended from a god, that of the leader of the tribe being already descended
from a “superior” god, in this case Zeus. Even those without
personal freedom, such as the swineherd Eumaecus and others, are
“divine” (dioi and theioi), and that too in the Odyssey, which is
much later than the Iliad; and again in the Odyssey the name Heros is given to
the herald Mulius as well as to the blind bard Demodocus. Since, in short,
council and assembly of the people function together with the basileus, the
word basileia, which Greek writers employ to denote the so-called Homeric
kingship (chief command in the army being the principal characteristic of the
office), only means – military democracy. (Marx.) 

In addition to his military functions, the basileus also held those of
priest and judge, the latter not clearly defined, the former exercised in his
capacity as supreme representative of the tribe or confederacy of tribes. There
is never any mention of civil administrative powers; he seems, however, to be a
member of the council ex officio. It is there fore quite correct etymologically
to translate basileus as king, since king (kuning) is derived from kuni, kunne,
and means head of a gens. But the old Greek basileus does not correspond in any
way to the present meaning of the word “king.” Thucydides expressly
refers to the old basileia as patrike, i.e. derived from gentes, and says it
had strictly defined, and therefore limited, functions. And Aristotle says that
the basileia of the heroic age was a leadership over free men and that the
basileus was military leader, judge and high priest; he thus had no
governmental power in the later sense. [1] 
Thus in the Greek constitution of the heroic age we see the old gentile
order as still a living force. But we also see the beginnings of its
disintegration: father-right, with transmission of the property to the
children, by which accumulation of wealth within the family was favored and the
family itself became a power as against the gens; reaction of the inequality of
wealth on the constitution by the formation of the first rudiments of
hereditary nobility and monarchy; slavery, at first only of prisoners of war,
but already preparing the way for the enslavement of fellow-members of the
tribe and even of the gens; the old wars between tribe and tribe already
degenerating into systematic pillage by land and sea for the acquisition of
cattle, slaves and treasure, and becoming a regular source of wealth; in short,
riches praised and respected as the highest good and the old gentile order
misused to justify the violent seizure of riches. Only one thing was wanting:
an institution which not only secured the newly acquired riches of individuals
against the communistic traditions of the gentile order, which not only
sanctified the private property formerly so little valued, and declared this
sanctification to be the highest purpose of all human society; but an
institution which set the seal of general social recognition on each new method
of acquiring property and thus amassing wealth at continually increasing speed;
an institution which perpetuated, not only this growing cleavage of society
into classes, but also the right of the possessing class to exploit the
non-possessing, and the rule of the former over the latter. 
And this institution came. The state was invented. 



Footnotes 


[1] Like the Greek basileus,
so also the Aztec military chief has been made out to be a modern prince. The
reports of the Spaniards, which were at first misinterpretations and
exaggerations, and later actual lies, were submitted for the first time to
historical criticism by Morgan. He proves that the Mexicans were at the middle
stage of barbarism, though more advanced than the New Mexican Pueblo Indians,
and that their constitution, so far as it can be recognized in the distorted
reports, corresponded to this stage: a confederacy of three tribes, which had
subjugated a number of other tribes and exacted tribute from them, and which
was governed by a federal council and a federal military leader, out of whom
the Spaniards made an “emperor.” 



Chapter Three | Chapter Five 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## The Rise of the Athenian State 









Origins of the Family-- Chapter V



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
V. The Rise of the Athenian State


How the state developed, how the organs of the gentile
constitution were partly transformed in this development, partly pushed aside
by the introduction of new organs, and at last superseded entirely by real
state authorities, while the true “people in arms,” organized for
its self-defense in its gentes, phratries, and tribes, was replaced by an armed
“public force” in the service of these state authorities and
therefore at their command for use also against the people – this
process, at least in its first stages, can be followed nowhere better than in
ancient Athens. The changes in form have been outlined by Morgan, but their
economic content and cause must largely be added by myself. 
In the Heroic age the four tribes of the Athenians were still settled in
Attica in separate territories; even the twelve phratries composing them seem
still to have had distinct seats in the twelve towns of Cecrops. The
constitution was that of the heroic age: assembly of the people, council of the
people, basileus. As far as written history takes us back, we find the land
already divided up and privately owned, which is in accordance with the
relatively advanced commodity production and the corresponding trade in
commodities developed towards the end of the upper stage of barbarism. In
addition to grain, wine and oil were produced; to a continually increasing
extent, the sea trade in the Aegean was captured from the Phoenicians, and most
of it passed into Athenian hands. Through the sale and purchase of land, and
the progressive division of labor between agriculture and handicraft, trade,
and shipping, it was inevitable that the members of the different gentes,
phratries, and tribes very soon became intermixed, and that into the districts
of the phratry and tribe moved inhabitants, who, although fellow countrymen,
did not belong to these bodies and were therefore strangers in their own place
of domicile. For when times were quiet, each tribe and each phratry
administered its own affairs without sending to Athens to consult the council
of the people or the basileus. But anyone not a member of the phratry or tribe
was, of course, excluded from taking any part in this administration, even
though living in the district. 
The smooth functioning of the organs of the gentile constitution was thus
thrown so much out of gear that even in the heroic age remedies had to be
found. The constitution ascribed to Theseus was introduced. The principal
change which it made was to set up a central authority in Athens – that
is, part of the affairs hitherto administered by the tribes independently were
declared common affairs and entrusted to the common council sitting in Athens.
In taking this step, the Athenians went further than any native people of
America had ever done: instead of neighboring tribes forming a simple
confederacy, they fused together into one single nation. Hence arose a common
Athenian civil law, which stood above the legal customs of the tribes and
gentes. 
The Athenian citizen, as such, acquired definite rights and new protection
in law even on territory which was not that of his tribe. The first step had
been taken towards undermining the gentile constitution; for this was the first
step to the later admission of citizens who did not belong to any tribe in all
Attica, but were, and remained, completely outside the Athenian gentile
constitution. By a second measure ascribed to Theseus, the entire people,
regardless of gens, phratry or tribe, was divided into three classes:
eupatridai, or nobles, geomoroi, or farmers, and demiourgoi, or artisans, and
the right to hold office was vested exclusively in the nobility. Apart from the
tenure of offices by the nobility, this division remained inoperative, as it
did not create any other legal distinctions between the classes. It is,
however, important because it reveals the new social elements which had been
developing unobserved. It shows that the customary appointment of members of
certain families to the offices of the gens had already grown into an almost
uncontested right of these families to office; it shows that these families,
already powerful through their wealth, were beginning to form groupings outside
their gentes as a separate, privileged class, and that the state now taking
form sanctioned this presumption. It shows further that the division of labor
between peasants and artisans was now firmly enough established in its social
importance to challenge the old grouping of gentes and tribes. And, finally, it
proclaims the irreconcilable opposition between gentile society and the state;
the first attempt at forming a state consists in breaking up the gentes by
dividing their members into those with privileges and those with none, and by
further separating the latter into two productive classes and thus setting them
one against the other. 
The further political history of Athens up to the time of Solon is only
imperfectly known. The office of basileus fell into disuse; the positions at
the head of the state were occupied by archons elected from the nobility. The
power of the nobility continuously increased, until about the year 600 B.C. it
became insupportable. And the principal means for suppressing the common
liberty were – money and usury. The nobility had their chief seat in and
around Athens, whose maritime trade, with occasional piracy still thrown in,
enriched them and concentrated in their hands the wealth existing in the form
of money. From here the growing money economy penetrated like corrosive acid
into the old traditional life of the rural communities founded on natural
economy. The gentile constitution is absolutely irreconcilable with money
economy; the ruin of the Attic small farmers coincided with the loosening of
the old gentile bonds which embraced and protected them. The debtorA’s
bond and the lien on property (for already the Athenians had invented the
mortgage also) respected neither gens nor phratry, while the old gentile
constitution, for its part, knew neither money nor advances of money nor debts
in money. Hence the money rule of the aristocracy now in full flood of
expansion also created a new customary law to secure the creditor against the
debtor and to sanction the exploitation of the small peasant by the possessor
of money. All the fields of Attica were thick with mortgage columns bearing
inscriptions stating that the land on which they stood was mortgaged to such
and such for so and so much. The fields not so marked had for the most part
already been sold on account of unpaid mortgages or interest, and had passed
into the ownership of the noble usurer; the peasant could count himself lucky
if he was allowed to remain on the land as a tenant and live on one-sixth of
the produce of his labor, while he paid five-sixths to his new master as rent.
And that was not all. If the sale of the land did not cover the debt, or if the
debt had been contracted without any security, the debtor, in order to meet his
creditor's claims, had to sell his children into slavery abroad. Children sold
by their father – such was the first fruit of father-right and monogamy!
And if the blood-sucker was still not satisfied, he could sell the debtor
himself as a slave. Thus the pleasant dawn of civilization began for the
Athenian people. 
Formerly, when the conditions of the people still corresponded to the
gentile constitution, such an upheaval was impossible; now it had happened
– nobody knew how. Let us go back for a moment to our Iroquois, amongst
whom the situation now confronting the Athenians, without their own doing, so
to speak, and certainly against their will, was inconceivable. Their mode of
producing the necessities of life, unvarying from year to year, could never
generate such conflicts as were apparently forced on the Athenians from
without; it could never create an opposition of rich and poor, of exploiters
and exploited. The Iroquois were still very far from controlling nature, but
within the limits imposed on them by natural forces they did control their own
production. Apart from bad harvests in their small gardens, the exhaustion of
the stocks of fish in their lakes and rivers or of the game in their woods,
they knew what results they could expect, making their living as they did. The
certain result was a livelihood, plentiful or scanty; but one result there
could never be – social upheavals that no one had ever intended,
sundering of the gentile bonds, division of gens and tribe into two opposing
and warring classes. Production was limited in the extreme, but – the
producers controlled their product. That was the immense advantage of barbarian
production, which was lost with the coming of civilization; to reconquer it,
but on the basis of the gigantic control of nature now achieved by man and of
the free association now made possible, will be the task of the next
generations. 
Not so among the Greeks. The rise of private property in herds and articles
of luxury led to exchange between individuals, to the transformation of
products into commodities. And here lie the seeds of the whole subsequent
upheaval. When the producers no longer directly consumed their product
themselves, but let it pass out of their hands in the act of exchange, they
lost control of it. They no longer knew what became of it; the possibility was
there that one day it would be used against the producer to exploit and oppress
him. For this reason no society can permanently retain the mastery of its own
production and the control over the social effects of its process of production
unless it abolishes exchange between individuals. 
But the Athenians were soon to learn how rapidly the product asserts its
mastery over the producer when once exchange between individuals has begun and
products have been transformed into commodities. With the coming of commodity
production, individuals began to cultivate the soil on their own account, which
soon led to individual ownership of land. Money followed, the general commodity
with which all others 101 were exchangeable. But when men invented money, they
did not think that they were again creating a new social power, the one general
power before which the whole of society must bow. And it was this new power,
suddenly sprung to life without knowledge or will of its creators, which now,
in all the brutality of its youth, gave the Athenians the first taste of its
might. 
What was to be done? The old gentile constitution had not only shown itself
powerless before the triumphal march of money; it was absolutely incapable of
finding any place within its framework for such things as money, creditors,
debtors, and forcible collection of debts. But the new social power was there;
pious wishes, and yearning for the return of the good old days would not drive
money and usury out of the world. Further, a number of minor breaches had also
been made in the gentile constitution. All over Attica, and especially in
Athens itself, the members of the different gentes and phratries became still
more indiscriminately mixed with every generation, although even now an
Athenian was only allowed to sell land outside his gens, not the house in which
he lived. The division of labor between the different branches of production
– agriculture, handicrafts (in which there were again innumerable
subdivisions), trade, shipping, and so forth – had been carried further
with every advance of industry and commerce; the population was now divided
according to occupation into fairly permanent groups, each with its new common
interests; and since the gens and the phratry made no provision for dealing
with them, new offices had to be created. The number of slaves had increased
considerably, and even at that time must have far exceeded the number of free
Athenians; the gentile constitution originally knew nothing of slavery and
therefore had no means of keeping these masses of bondsmen in order. Finally,
trade had brought to Athens a number of foreigners who settled there on account
of the greater facilities of making money; they also could claim no rights or
protection under the old constitution; and, though they were received with
traditional tolerance, they remained a disturbing and alien body among the
people. 
In short, the end of the gentile constitution was approaching. Society was
outgrowing it more every day; even the worst evils that had grown up under its
eyes were beyond its power to check or remove. But in the meantime the state
had quietly been developing. The new groups formed by the division of labor,
first between town and country, then between the different branches of town
labor, had created new organs to look after their interests; official posts of
all kinds had been set up. And above everything else the young state needed a
power of its own, which in the case of the seafaring Athenians could at first
only be a naval power, for the purpose of carrying on small wars and protecting
its merchant ships. At some unknown date before Solon, the naukrariai were set
up, small territorial districts, twelve to each tribe; each naukraria had to
provide, equip and man a warship and also contribute two horsemen. This
institution was a twofold attack on the gentile constitution. In the first
place, it created a public force which was now no longer simply identical with
the whole body of the armed people; secondly, for the first time it divided the
people for public purposes, not by groups of kinship, but by common place of
residence. We shall see the significance of this. 
The gentile constitution being incapable of bringing help to the exploited
people, there remained only the growing state. And the state brought them its
help in the form of the constitution of Solon, thereby strengthening itself
again at the expense of the old constitution. Solon – the manner in which
his reform, which belongs to the year 594 B.C., was carried through does not
concern us here – opened the series of so-called political revolutions;
and he did so with an attack on property. All revolutions hitherto have been
revolutions to protect one kind of property against another kind of property.
They cannot protect the one without violating the other. In the great French
Revolution feudal property was sacrificed to save bourgeois property; in that
of Solon, the property of the creditors had to suffer for the benefit of the
property of the debtors. The debts were simply declared void. We do not know
the exact details, but in his poems Solon boasts of having removed the mortgage
columns from the fields and brought back all the people who had fled or been
sold abroad on account of debt. This was only possible by open violation of
property. And, in fact, from the first to the last, all so-called political
revolutions have been made to protect property – of one kind; and they
have been carried out by confiscating, also called stealing, property –
of another kind. The plain truth is that for two and a half thousand years it
has been possible to preserve private property only by violating property. 
But now the need was to protect the free Athenians against the return of
such slavery. The first step was the introduction of general measures –
for example, the prohibition of debt contracts pledging the person of the
debtor. Further, in order to place at least some check on the nobles’
ravening hunger for the land of the peasants, a maximum limit was fixed for the
amount of land that could be owned by one individual. Then changes were made in
the constitution, of which the most important for us are the following: 
The council was raised to four hundred members, one hundred for each tribe;
here, therefore, the tribe was still taken as basis. But that was the one and
only feature of the new state incorporating anything from the old constitution.
For all other purposes Solon divided the citizens into four classes according
to their property in land and the amount of its yield: five hundred, three
hundred and one hundred fifty medimni of grain (one medimnus equals about 1.16
bushels) were the minimum yields for the first three classes; those who owned
less land or none at all were placed in the fourth class. All offices could be
filled only from the three upper classes, and the highest offices only from the
first. The fourth class only had the right to speak and vote in the assembly of
the people; but it was in this assembly that all officers were elected, here
they had to render their account, here all laws were made; and here the fourth
class formed the majority. The privileges of the aristocracy were partially
renewed in the form of privileges of wealth, but the people retained the
decisive power. Further, the four classes formed the basis of a new military
organization. The first two classes provided the cavalry; the third had to
serve as heavy infantry; the fourth served either as light infantry without
armor or in the fleet, for which they probably received wages. 
A completely new element is thus introduced into the constitution: private
ownership. According to the size of their property in land, the rights and
duties of the citizens of the state are now assessed, and in the same degree to
which the classes based on property gain influence, the old groups of blood
relationship lose it; the gentile constitution had suffered a new defeat. 
However, the assessment of political rights on a property basis was not an
institution indispensable to the existence of the state. In spite of the great
part it has played in the constitutional history of states, very many states,
and precisely those most highly developed, have not required it. In Athens also
its role was only temporary; from the time of Aristides all offices were open
to every citizen. 
During the next eighty years Athenian society gradually shaped the course
along which it developed in the following centuries. Usury on the security of
mortgaged land, which had been rampant in the period before Solon, had been
curbed, as had also the inordinate concentration of property in land. Commerce
and handicrafts, including artistic handicrafts, which were being increasingly
developed on a large scale by the use of slave labor, became the main
occupations. Athenians were growing more enlightened. Instead of exploiting
their fellow citizens in the old brutal way, they exploited chiefly the slaves
and the non-Athenian customers. Movable property, wealth in the form of money,
of slaves and ships, continually increased, but it was no longer a mere means
to the acquisition of landed property, as in the old slow days: it had become
an end in itself. On the one hand the old power of the aristocracy now had to
contend with successful competition from the new class of rich industrialists
and merchants; but, on the other hand, the ground was also cut away from
beneath the last remains of the old gentile constitution. The gentes,
phratries, and tribes, whose members were now scattered over all Attica and
thoroughly intermixed, had thus become useless as political bodies; numbers of
Athenian citizens did not belong to any gens at all; they were immigrants, who
had indeed acquired rights of citizenship, but had not been adopted into any of
the old kinship organizations; in addition, there was the steadily increasing
number of foreign immigrants who only had rights of protection. 
Meanwhile, the fights went on between parties; the nobility tried to win
back their former privileges and for a moment regained the upper hand, until
the revolution of Cleisthenes (509 B.C.) overthrew them finally, but with them
also the last remnants of the gentile constitution. 
In his new constitution, Cleisthenes ignored the four old tribes founded on
gentes and phratries. In their place appeared a completely new organization on
the basis of division of the citizens merely according to their place of
residence, such as had been already attempted in the naukrariai. Only domicile
was now decisive, not membership of a kinship group. Not the people, but the
territory was now divided: the inhabitants became a mere political appendage of
the territory. 
The whole of Attica was divided into one hundred communal districts, called
“demes,” each of which was self-governing. The citizens resident in
each deme (demotes) elected their president (demarch) and treasurer, as well as
thirty judges with jurisdiction in minor disputes. They were also given their
own temple and patron divinity or hero, whose priests they elected. Supreme
power in the deme was vested in the assembly of the demotes. As Morgan rightly
observes, here is the prototype of the self-governing American township. The
modern state, in its highest development, ends in the same unit with which the
rising state in Athens began. 
Ten of these units (demes) formed a tribe, which, however, is now known as a
local tribe to distinguish it from the old tribe of kinship. The local tribe
was not only a self-governing political body, but also a military body; it
elected its phylarch, or tribal chief, who commanded the cavalry, the taxiarch
commanding the infantry, and the strategos, who was in command over all the
forces raised in the tribal area. It further provided five warships with their
crews and commanders, and received as patron deity an Attic hero, after whom it
was named. Lastly, it elected fifty councilors to the Athenian council. 
At the summit was the Athenian state, governed by the council composed of
the five hundred councilors elected by the ten tribes, and in the last instance
by the assembly of the people, at which every Athenian citizen had the right to
attend and to vote; archons and other officials managed the various departments
of administration and justice. In Athens there was no supreme official with
executive power. 
Through this new constitution and the admission to civil rights of a very
large number of protected persons, partly immigrants, partly freed slaves, the
organs of the gentile constitution were forced out of public affairs; they sank
to the level of private associations and religious bodies. But the moral
influence of the old gentile period and its traditional ways of thought were
still handed down for a long time to come, and only died out gradually. We find
evidence of this in another state institution. 
We saw that an essential characteristic of the state is the existence of a
public force differentiated from the mass of the people. At this time, Athens
still had only a people’s army and a fleet provided directly by the
people; army and fleet gave protection against external enemies and kept in
check the slaves, who already formed the great majority of the population. In
relation to the citizens, the public power at first existed only in the form of
the police force, which is as old as the state itself; for which reason the
naive French of the eighteenth century did not speak of civilized peoples, but
of policed peoples (nations policées). The Athenians then instituted a police
force simultaneously with their state, a veritable gendarmerie of bowmen, foot
and mounted Landjäger [the country's hunters] as
they call them in South Germany and Switzerland. But this gendarmerie consisted
of slaves. The free Athenian considered police duty so degrading that he would
rather be arrested by an armed slave than himself have any hand in such
despicable work. That was still the old gentile spirit. The state could not
exist without police, but the state was still young and could not yet inspire
enough moral respect to make honorable an occupation which, to the older
members of the gens, necessarily appeared infamous. 
Now complete in its main features, the state was perfectly adapted to the
new social conditions of the Athenians, as is shown by the rapid growth of
wealth, commerce, and industry. The class opposition on which the social and
political institutions rested was no longer that of nobility and common people,
but of slaves and free men, of protected persons and citizens. At the time of
their greatest prosperity, the entire free-citizen population of Athens, women
and children included, numbered about ninety thousand; besides them there were
three hundred and sixty-five thousand slaves of both sexes and forty-five
thousand protected persons – aliens and freedmen. There were therefore at least
eighteen slaves and more than two protected persons to every adult male
citizen. The reason for the large number of slaves was that many of them worked
together in manufactories, in large rooms, under overseers. But with the
development of commerce and industry wealth was accumulated and concentrated in
a few hands, and the mass of the free citizens were impoverished. Their only
alternatives were to compete against slave labor with their own labor as
handicraftsman, which was considered base and vulgar and also offered very
little prospect of success, or to become social scrap. Necessarily, in the
circumstances, they did the latter, and, as they formed the majority, they
thereby brought about the downfall of the whole Athenian state. The downfall of
Athens was not caused by democracy, as the European lickspittle historians
assert to flatter their princes, but by slavery, which banned the labor of free
citizens. 
The rise of the state among the Athenians is a particularly typical example
of the formation of a state; first, the process takes place in a pure form,
without any interference through use of violent force, either from without or
from within (the usurpation by Pisistratus left no trace of its short
duration); second, it shows a very highly developed form of state, the
democratic republic, arising directly out of gentile society; and lastly we are
sufficiently acquainted with all the essential details. 



Chapter Four | Chapter Six 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## The Gens and the State in Rome









Origins of the Family - Chapter VI



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
VI. The Gens and the State in Rome



According to the legendary account of the foundation of Rome,
the first settlement was established by a number of Latin gentes [1] (one hundred, says the legend), who
were united in a tribe; these were soon joined by a Sabellian tribe, also said
to have numbered a hundred gentes, and lastly by a third tribe of mixed
elements, again said to have been composed of a hundred gentes. The whole
account reveals at the first glance that very little was still primitive here
except the gens, and that even it was in some cases only an offshoot from a
mother gens still existing in its original home. The tribes clearly bear the
mark of their artificial composition, even though they are generally composed
out of related elements and after the pattern of the old tribe, which was not
made but grew; it is, however, not an impossibility that the core of each of
the three tribes was a genuine old tribe. The intermediate group, the phratry,
consisted of ten gentes and was called a curia; there were therefore thirty
curiae. 
The Roman gens is recognized to be the same institution as the Greek gens;
and since the Greek gens is a further development of the social unit whose
original form is found among the American Indians, this, of course, holds true
of the Roman gens also. Here therefore we can be more brief. 
The Roman gens, at least in the earliest times of Rome, had the following
constitution: 
1. Mutual right of inheritance
among gentile members; the property remained within the gens. Since
father-right already prevailed in the Roman gens as in the Greek, descendants
in the female line were excluded. According to the Law of the Twelve Tables,
the oldest written Roman law known to us, the children, as natural heirs, had
the first title to the estate; in default of children, then the agnates
(descendants in the male line); in default of agnates, the gentiles. In all
cases the property remained within the gens. Here we see gentile custom
gradually being penetrated by the new legal provisions springing from increased
wealth and monogamy: the original equal right of inheritance of all members of
the gens is first restricted in practice to the agnates – probably very early, as
already mentioned – finally, to the children and their issue in the male line;
in the Twelve Tables this appears, of course, in the reverse order. 
2. Possession of a common burial
place. On their immigration to Rome from Regilli, the patrician gens of the
Claudii received a piece of land for their own use and also a common burial
place in the town. Even in the time of Augustus, the head of Varus, who had
fallen in the battle of the Teutoburg Forest, was brought to Rome and interred
in the gentilitius tumulus (mound of the gens); the gens (Quinctilia) therefore still had its own
burial mound. 
3. Common religious rites. These,
the sacra gentilitia, are well known. 
4. Obligation not to marry within
the gens. This seems never to have become written law in Rome, but the custom
persisted. Of all the countless Roman married couples whose names have been
preserved, there is not one where husband and wife have the same gentile name.
The law of inheritance also proves the observance of this rule. The woman loses
her agnatic rights on marriage and leaves her gens; neither she nor her
children can inherit from her father or his brothers, because otherwise the
inheritance would be lost to the father’s gens. There is no sense in this
rule unless a woman may not marry a member of her own gens. 
5. Common land. In primitive
times the gens had always owned common land, ever since the tribal land began
to be divided up. Among the Latin tribes, we find the land partly in the
possession of the tribe, partly of the gens, and partly of the households,
which at that time can hardly have been single families. Romulus is said to
have made the first allotments of land to individuals, about two and one-half
acres (two jugera) to a person. But later we still find land owned by the
gentes, to say nothing of the state land, round which the whole internal
history of the republic centers. 
6. Obligation of mutual
protection and help among members of the gens. Only vestiges remain in written
history; from the very start the Roman state made its superior power so
manifest that the right of protection against injury passed into its hands.
When Appius Claudius was arrested, the whole of his gens, even those who were
his personal enemies, put on mourning. At the time of the second Punic war the
gentes joined together to ransom their members who had been taken prisoner; the
senate prohibited them from doing so. 
7. Right to bear the gentile
name. Persisted till the time of the emperors; freedmen were allowed to use the
gentile name of their former master, but without gentile rights. 
8. Right to adopt strangers into
the gens. This was done through adoption into a family (as among the Indians),
which carried with it acceptance into the gens. 
9. The right to elect the chief
and to depose him is nowhere mentioned. But since in the earliest days of Rome
all offices were filled by election or nomination, from the elected king
downwards, and since the priests of the curiae were also elected by the curiae
themselves, we may assume the same procedure for the presidents (principes) of
the gentes – however firmly established the election from one and the same family
within the gens may have already become. 
Such were the rights of a Roman gens. Apart from the already completed
transition to father-right, they are the perfect counterpart of the rights and
duties in an Iroquois gens; here again “the Iroquois shows through
unmistakably” (p. 90). 
The confusion that still exists today, even among our leading historians, on
the subject of the Roman gens, may be illustrated by one example. In his paper
on Roman family names in the period of the Republic and of Augustus
(Romische Forschungen, Berlin, 1864, Vol. I, pp. 8-11) Mommsen writes:

The gentile name belongs to all the male members of the gens,
excluding, of course, the slaves, but including adopted and protected persons;
it belongs also to the women ... The tribe [as Mommsen here translates gens]
is... a communal entity, derived from common lineage (real, supposed or even
pretended) and united by communal festivities, burial rites and laws of
inheritance; to it all personally free individuals, and therefore all women
also, may and must belong. But it is difficult to determine what gentile name
was borne by married women. So long as the woman may only marry a member of her
own gens, this problem does not arise; and there is evidence that for a long
period it was more difficult for women to marry outside than inside the gens;
for instance, so late as the sixth century [B.C.] the right of gentis enuptio
(marriage outside the gens) was a personal privilege, conceded as a reward ...
But when such marriages outside the tribe took place, the wife, in earliest
times, must thereby have gone over to her husband's tribe. Nothing is more
certain than that the woman, in the old religious marriage, enters completely
into the legal and sacramental bonds of her husband's community and leaves her
own. Everyone knows that the married woman forfeits the right of inheritance
and bequest in relation to members of her own gens but shares rights of
inheritance with her husband and children and the members of their gens. And if
she is adopted by her husband and taken into his family, how can she remain
apart from his gens? 
Mommsen therefore maintains that the Roman women who belonged to a gens had
originally been permitted to marry only within the gens, that the gens had
therefore been endogamous, not exogamous. This view, which is in contradiction
to all the evidence from other peoples, rests chiefly, if not exclusively, on
one much disputed passage from Livy (Book XXXIX, Ch. 19), according to which
the senate in the year 568 after the foundation of the city, or 186 B.C.,
decreed: “Uti Feceniae Hispallae datio, deminutio, gentis enuptio, tutoris optio item esset quasi ei vir testamento dedisset; utique ei ingenuo nubere liceret, neu quid ei qui eam duxisset ob id fraudi ignominiaeve esset”
– that Fecenia Hispala shall have the right to dispose of her property,
to decrease it, to marry outside the gens, and to choose for herself a
guardian, exactly as if her (deceased) husband had conferred this right on her
by testament; that she may marry a freeman, and that the man who takes her to
wife shall not be considered to have committed a wrongful or shameful act
thereby. 
Without a doubt, Fecenia, a freedwoman, is here granted the right to marry
outside the gens. And equally without a doubt the husband possessed the right,
according to this passage, to bequeath to his wife by will the right to marry
outside the gens after his death. But outside which gens? 
If the woman had to marry within her gens, as Mommsen assumes, she remained
within this gens also after her marriage. But in the first place the endogamous
character of the gens which is here asserted is precisely what has to be
proved. And, secondly, if the wife had to marry within the gens, then, of
course, so had the man, for otherwise he could not get a wife. So we reach the
position that the man could bequeath to his wife by will a right which he
himself, and for himself, did not possess; we arrive at a legal absurdity.
Mommsen also feels this, and hence makes the assumption: “For a lawful
marriage outside the gens, it was probably necessary to have the consent, not
only of the chief, but of all members of the gens.” That is a very bold
assumption in the first place, and, secondly, it contradicts the clear wording
of the passage. The senate grants her this right in the place of her husband;
it grants her expressly neither more nor less than her husband could have
granted her, but what it grants her is an absolute right, conditional upon no
other restriction. Thus it is provided that if she makes use of this right, her
new husband also shall not suffer any disability. The senate even directs the
present and future consuls and praetors to see to it that no injurious
consequences to her follow. Mommsen’s assumption therefore seems to be
completely inadmissible. 
Or assume that the woman married a man from another gens, but herself
remained in the gens into which she had been born. Then, according to the above
passage, the man would have had the right to allow his wife to marry outside
her own gens. That is, he would have had the right to make dispositions in the
affairs of a gens to which he did not even belong. The thing is so patently
absurd that we need waste no more words on it. 
Hence there only remains the assumption that in her first marriage the woman
married a man from another gens, and thereby immediately entered the gens of
her husband, which Mommsen himself actually admits to have been the practice
when the woman married outside her gens. Then everything at once becomes clear.
Severed from her old gens by her marriage and accepted into the gentile group
of her husband, the woman occupies a peculiar position in her new gens. She is,
indeed, a member of the gens, but not related by blood. By the mere manner of
her acceptance as a gentile member, she is entirely excluded from the
prohibition against marrying within the gens, for she has just married into it;
further, she is accepted as one of the married members of the gens, and on her
husband’s death inherits from his property, the property of a gentile
member. What is more natural than that this property should remain within the
gens and that she should therefore be obliged to marry a member of her
husband’s gens and nobody else? And if an exception is to be made, who is
so competent to give her the necessary authorization as the man who has
bequeathed her this property, her first husband? At the moment when he
bequeaths to her a part of his property and at the same time allows her to
transfer it into another gens through marriage or in consequence of marriage,
this property still belongs to him and he is therefore literally disposing of
his own property. As regards the woman herself and her relation to her
husband's gens, it was he who brought her into the gens by a free act of will -
the marriage; hence it also seems natural that he should be the proper person
to authorize her to leave this gens by a second marriage. In a word, the matter
appears simple and natural as soon as we abandon the extraordinary conception
of the endogamous Roman gens and regard it, with Morgan, as originally
exogamous. 
There still remains one last assumption which has also found adherents, and
probably the most numerous. On this view, the passage only means that
“freed servants (libertae) could not without special permission e gente
enubere (marry out of the gens) or perform any of the acts, which, involving
loss of rights (capitis deminutio minima), would have resulted in the liberta
leaving the gens.” (Lange, Römische Altertumer, Berlin 1856, I,
195, where Huschke is cited in connection with our passage from Livy.) If this
supposition is correct, the passage then proves nothing at all about the
position of free Roman women, and there can be even less question of any
obligation resting on them to marry within the gens. 
The expression enuptio gentis only occurs in this one passage and
nowhere else in the whole of Latin literature; the word enubere, to marry
outside, only occurs three times, also in Livy, and then not in reference to
the gens. The fantastic notion that Roman women were only allowed to marry
within their gens owes its existence solely to this one passage. But it cannot
possibly be maintained. For either the passage refers to special restrictions
for freedwomen, in which case it proves nothing about free women (ingenuae), or
it applies also to free women; and then it proves, on the contrary, that the
woman married as a rule outside her gens, but on her marriage entered into the
gens of her husband; which contradicts Mommsen and supports Morgan. 
Almost three centuries after the foundation of Rome, the gentile groups were
still so strong that a patrician gens, that of the Fabii, was able to undertake
an independent campaign, with the permission of the senate, against the
neighboring town of Veii; three hundred and six Fabii are said to have set out
and to have been killed to a man, in an ambush; according to the story, only
one boy who had remained behind survived to propagate the gens. 
As we have said, ten gentes formed a phratry, which among the Romans was
called a curia and had more important public functions than the Greek phratry.
Every curia had its own religious rites, shrines and priests; the latter, as a
body, formed one of the Roman priestly colleges. Ten curiae formed a tribe,
which probably, like the rest of the Latin tribes, originally had an elected
president-military leader and high priest. The three tribes together formed the
Roman people, the Populus Romanus. 

Thus no one could belong to the Roman people unless he was a member of a
gens and through it of a curia and a tribe. The first constitution of the Roman
people was as follows: Public affairs were managed in the first instance by the
senate, which, as Niebuhr first rightly saw, was composed of the presidents of
the three hundred gentes; it was because they were the elders of the gens that
they were called fathers, patres, and their body, the senate (council of the
elders, from senex, old). Here again the custom of electing always from the
same family in the gens brought into being the first hereditary nobility; these
families called themselves “patricians,” and claimed for themselves
exclusive right of entry into the senate and tenure of all other offices. The
acquiescence of the people in this claim, in course of time, and its
transformation into an actual right, appear in legend as the story that Romulus
conferred the patriciate and its privileges on the first senators and their
descendants. The senate, like the Athenian boulè, made final decisions in many
matters and held preparatory discussions on those of greater importance,
particularly new laws. With regard to these, the decision rested with the
assembly of the people, called the comitia curiata (assembly of the curiae).
The people assembled together, grouped in curiae, each curia probably grouped
in gentes; each of the thirty curiae had one vote in the final decision. The
assembly of the curiae accepted or rejected all laws, elected all higher
officials, including the rex (so-called king), declared war (the senate,
however, concluded peace), and, as supreme court, decided, on the appeal of the
parties concerned, all cases involving death sentence on a Roman citizen.
Lastly, besides the senate and the assembly of the people, there was the rex,
who corresponded exactly to the Greek basileus and was not at all the almost
absolute king which Mommsen made him out to be. [2] He also was military leader,
high priest, and president of certain courts. He had no civil authority
whatever, nor any power over the life, liberty, or property of citizens, except
such as derived from his disciplinary powers as military leader or his
executive powers as president of a court. The office of rex was not hereditary;
on the contrary, he was first elected by the assembly of the curiae, probably
on the nomination of his predecessor, and then at a second meeting solemnly
installed in office. That he could also be deposed is shown by the fate of
Tarquinius Superbus. 
Like the Greeks of the heroic age, the Romans in the age of the so-called
kings lived in a military democracy founded on gentes, phratries, and tribes
and developed out of them. Even if the curiae and tribes were to a certain
extent artificial groups, they were formed after the genuine, primitive models
of the society out of which they had arisen and by which they were still
surrounded on all sides. Even if the primitive patrician nobility had already
gained ground, even if the reges were endeavoring gradually to extend their
power, it does not change the original, fundamental character of the
constitution, and that alone matters. 
Meanwhile, Rome and the Roman territory, which had been enlarged by
conquest, increased in population, partly through immigration, partly through
the addition of inhabitants of the subjugated, chiefly Latin, districts. All
these new citizens of the state (we leave aside the question of the clients)
stood outside the old gentes, curiae, and tribes, and therefore formed no part
of the populus Romanus, the real Roman people. They were personally free, could
own property in land, and had to pay taxes and do military service. But they
could not hold any office, nor take part in the assembly of the curiae, nor
share in the allotment of conquered state lands. They formed the class that was
excluded from all public rights, the plebs. Owing to their continually
increasing numbers, their military training and their possession of arms, they
became a powerful threat to the old populus, which now rigidly barred any
addition to its own ranks from outside. Further, landed property seems to have
been fairly equally divided between populus and plebs, while the commercial and
industrial wealth, though not as yet much developed, was probably for the most
part in the hands of the plebs. 
The great obscurity which envelops the completely legendary primitive
history of Rome – an obscurity considerably deepened by the rationalistically
pragmatical interpretations and accounts given of the subject by later authors
with legalistic minds – makes it impossible to say anything definite about the
time, course, or occasion of the revolution which made an end of the old
gentile constitution. All that is certain is that its cause lay in the
struggles between plebs and populus. 
The new constitution, which was attributed to the rex Servius Tullius and
followed the Greek model, particularly that of Solon, created a new assembly of
the people, in which populus and plebeians without distinction were included or
excluded according to whether they performed military service or not. The whole
male population liable to bear arms was divided on a property basis into six
classes. The lower limit in each of the five classes was: (1) 100,000 asses;
(2) 75,000 asses; (3) 50,000 asses; (4) 25,000 asses; (5) 11,000 asses;
according to Dureau de la Malle, the equivalent to about 14,000; 10,500; 7,000;
3,600; and 1,570 marks respectively. The sixth class, the proletarians,
consisted of those with less property than the lower class and those exempt
from military service and taxes. In the new popular assembly of the centuries
(comitia centuriata) the citizens appeared in military formation, arranged by
companies in their centuries of a hundred men, each century having one vote.
Now the first class put eighty centuries in the field, the second twenty-two,
the third twenty, the fourth twenty-two, the fifth thirty, and the sixth also
on century for the sake of appearances. In addition, there was the cavalry,
drawn from the wealthiest men, with eighteen centuries; total, 193;
ninety-seven votes were thus required for a clear majority. But the cavalry and
the first class alone had together ninety-eight votes, an therefore the
majority; if they were agreed, they did not ask the others; they made their
decision, and it stood. 
This new assembly of the centuries now took over all political rights of the
former assembly of the curiae, with the exception of a few nominal privileges.
The curiae and the gentes of which they were composed were thus degraded, as in
Athens, to mere private and religious associations and continued to vegetate as
such for a long period while the assembly of the curiae soon became completely
dormant. In order that the three old tribes of kinship should also be excluded
from the state, four local tribes were instituted, each of which inhabited one
quarter of the city and possessed a number of political rights. 
Thus in Rome also, even before the abolition of the so-called monarchy, the
old order of society based on personal ties of blood was destroyed and in its
place was set up a new and complete state constitution based on territorial
division and difference of wealth. Here the public power consisted of the body
of citizens liable to military service, in opposition not only to the slaves,
but also to those excluded from service in the army and from possession of
arms, the so-called proletarians. 
The banishment of the last rex, Tarquinius Superbus, who usurped real
monarchic power, and the replacement of the office of rex by two military
leaders (consuls) with equal powers (as among the Iroquois) was simply a
further development of this new constitution. Within this new constitution, the
whole history of the Roman Republic runs its course, with all the struggles
between patricians and plebeians for admission to office and share in the state
lands, and the final merging of the patrician nobility in the new class of the
great land and money owners, who, gradually swallowing up all the land of the
peasants ruined by military service, employed slave labor to cultivate the
enormous estates thus formed, depopulated Italy and so threw open the door, not
only to the emperors, but also to their successors, the German barbarians. 



Footnotes 


[1] As gentes is here the
Latin word used by the Romans, it is printed in italics to distinguish it from
the general term "gens" used throughout the book – Ed. 


[2] The Latin rex is the
same as the Celtic-Irish righ (tribal chief) and the Gothic reiks; that reiks
signified head of the gens or tribe, as did also originally the German word
Furst (meaning "first" – cf. English first and Danish forste), is shown
by the fact that already in the fourth century the Goths had a special word for
the later "king," the military leader of the whole people: thiudans. In
Ulfilas’ translation of the Bible, Artaxerxes and Herod are never called
reiks, but thiudans, and the empire of the Emperor Tiberius is not called
reiki, but thiudinassus. In the name of the Gothic thiodans or, as we
inaccurately translate, "king," Thiudareik (Theodorich, i.e. Dietrich), both
titles coalesce. 



Chapter Five | Chapter Seven 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## The Gens Among Celts and Germans









Origins of the Family-- Chapter VII



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
VII. The Gens among Celts and Germans


Space does not allow us to consider the gentile institutions
still existing in greater or lesser degree of purity among the most various
savage and barbarian peoples, nor the traces of these institutions in the
ancient history of the civilized peoples of Asia. The institutions or their
traces are found everywhere. A few examples will be enough. Before the gens had
been recognized, the man who took the greatest pains to misunderstand it,
McLennan himself, proved its existence, and in the main accurately described
it, among the Kalmucks, Circassians, Samoyeds and three Indian peoples: the
Warali, Magars and Munniporees. Recently it has been discovered and described
by M. Kovalevsky among the Pshavs, Shevsurs, Svanets and other Caucasian
tribes. Here we will only give some short notes on the occurrence of the gens
among Celts and Germans. 
The oldest Celtic laws which have been preserved show the gens still fully
alive: in Ireland, after being forcibly broken up by the English, it still
lives today in the consciousness of the people, as an instinct at any rate; in
Scotland it was still in full strength in the middle of the eighteenth century,
and here again it succumbed only to the weapons, laws, and courts of the
English. 
The old Welsh laws, which were recorded in writing several centuries before
the English conquest, at the latest in the eleventh century, still show common
tillage of the soil by whole villages, even if only as an exceptional relic of
a once general custom; each family had five acres for its own cultivation; a
piece of land was cultivated collectively as well and the yield shared. In view
of the analogy of Ireland and Scotland, it cannot be doubted that these village
communities represent gentes or subdivisions of gentes, even though further
examination of the Welsh laws, which I cannot undertake for lack of time (my
notes date from 1869), should not provide direct proof. But what is directly
proved by the Welsh sources and by the Irish is that among the Celts in the
eleventh century pairing marriage had not by any means been displaced by
monogamy. 
In Wales a marriage only became indissoluble, or rather it only ceased to be
terminable by notification, after seven years had elapsed. If the time was
short of seven years by only three nights, husband and wife could separate.
They then shared out their property between them; the woman divided and the man
chose. The furniture was divided according to fixed and very humorous rules. If
it was the man who dissolved the marriage, he had to give the woman back her
dowry and some other things; if it was the woman, she received less. Of the
children the man took two and the woman one, the middle child. If after the
separation the woman took another husband and the first husband came to fetch
her back again, she had to follow him even if she had already one foot in her
new marriage bed. If, on the other hand, the man and woman had been together
for seven years, they were husband and wife, even without any previous formal
marriage. Chastity of girls before marriage was not at all strictly observed,
nor was it demanded; the provisions in this respect are of an extremely
frivolous character and not at all in keeping with bourgeois morality. If a
woman committed adultery, the husband had the right to beat her (this was one
of the three occasions when he was allowed to do so; otherwise he was
punished), but not then to demand any other satisfaction, since “for the
one offense there shall be either atonement or vengeance, but not both.”
The grounds on which the wife could demand divorce without losing any of her
claims in the subsequent settlement were very comprehensive; if the husband had
bad breath, it was enough. The money which had to be paid to the chief of the
tribe or king to buy off his right of the first night (gobr merch, whence the
medieval name, marcheta; French marquette), plays a large part in the code of
laws. The women had the right to vote in the assemblies of the people. When we
add that the evidence shows similar conditions in Ireland; that there, also,
temporary marriages were quite usual and that at the separation very favorable
and exactly defined conditions were assured to the woman, including even
compensation for her domestic services; that in Ireland there was a
“first wife” as well as other wives, and that in the division of an
inheritance no distinction was made between children born in wedlock or outside
it – we then have a picture of pairing marriage in comparison with which the
form of marriage observed in North America appears strict. This is not
surprising in the eleventh century among a people who even so late as
Caesar’s time were still living in group marriage. 

The existence of the Irish gens (sept; the tribe was called clainne, clan) is
confirmed and described not only by the old legal codes, but also by the
English jurists of the seventeenth century who were sent over to transform the
clan lands into domains of the English crown. Until then, the land had been the
common property of the clan or gens, in so far as the chieftains had not
already converted it into their private domains. When a member of the gens died
and a household consequently came to an end, the gentile chief (the English
jurists called him caput cognationis) made a new division of the whole
territory among the remaining households. This must have been done, broadly
speaking, according to the rules in force in Germany. Forty or fifty years ago
village fields were very numerous, and even today a few of these rundales, as
they are called, may still be found. The peasants of a rundale, now individual
tenants on the soil that had been the common property of the gens till it was
seized by the English conquerors, pay rent for their respective piece of land,
but put all their shares in arable and meadowland together, which they then
divide according to position and quality into Gewanne, as they are called on
the Moselle, each receiving a share in each Gewann; moorland and pasture-land
are used in common. Only fifty years ago new divisions were still made from
time to time, sometimes annually. The field-map of such a village looks exactly
like that of a German Gehöferschaft [peasant community] on the Moselle or in
the Mittelwald. The gens also lives on in the “factions.” The Irish
peasants often divide themselves into parties based apparently on perfectly
absurd or meaningless distinctions; to the English they are quite
incomprehensible and seem to have no other purpose than the favorite ceremony
of two factions hammering one another. They are artificial revivals, modern
substitutes for the dispersed gentes, manifesting in their own peculiar manner
the persistence of the inherited gentile instinct. In some districts the
members of the gens still live pretty much together on the old territory; in
the ’thirties the great majority of the inhabitants of County Monaghan
still had only four family names, that is, they were descended from four gentes
or clans. [1] 
In Scotland the decay of the gentile organization dates from the suppression
of the rising of 1745. The precise function of the Scottish clan in this
organization still awaits investigation; but that the clan is a gentile body is
beyond doubt. In Walter Scott's novels the Highland clan lives before our eyes.
It is, says Morgan: 
... an excellent type of the gens in organization and in
spirit, and an extraordinary illustration of the power of the gentile life over
its members ... We find in their feuds and blood revenge, in their localization
by gentes, in their use of lands in common, in the fidelity of the clansman to
his chief and of the members of the clan to each other, the usual and
persistent features of gentile society ... Descent was in the male line, the
children of the males remaining members of the clan, while the children of its
female members belonged to the clans of their respective fathers." 
[Morgan, op. cit., pp. 368-369. – Ed.] 
But that formerly mother-right prevailed in Scotland is proved by the fact
that, according to Bede, in the royal family of the Picts succession was in the
female line. Among the Scots, as among the Welsh, a relic even of the punaluan
family persisted into the Middle Ages in the form of the right of the first
night, which the head of the clan or the king, as last representative of the
former community of husbands, had the right to exercise with every bride,
unless it was compounded for money. 

That the Germans were organized in gentes until the time of the migrations
is beyond all doubt. They can have occupied the territory between the Danube,
Rhine, Vistula, and the northern seas only a few centuries before our era; the
Cimbri and Teutons were then still in full migration, and the Suevi did not
find any permanent habitation until Caesar's time. Caesar expressly states of
them that they had settled in gentes and kindreds (gentibus cognationtbusque),
and in the mouth of a Roman of the Julian gens the word gentibus has a
definite meaning which cannot be argued away. The same was true of all the
Germans; they seem still to have settled by gentes even in the provinces they
conquered from the Romans. The code of laws of the Alemanni confirms that the
people settled by kindreds (genealogiae) in the conquered territory
south of the Danube; genealogia is used in exactly the same sense as
Markgenossenschaft or Dorfgenossenschaft [Mark or village
community – Ed.] later. Kovalevsky has recently put forward the
view that these genealogia are the large household communities among which the
land was divided, and from which the village community only developed later.
This would then probably also apply to the fara, with which expression the
Burgundians and the Lombards – that is, a Gothic and a Herminonian or
High German tribe – designated nearly, if not exactly, the same thing as
the genealogiae in the Alemannian code of laws. Whether it is really a gens or
a household community must be settled by further research. 
The records of language leave us in doubt whether all the Germans had a
common expression for gens, and what that expression was. Etymologically, the
Gothic kuni, Middle High German kunne, corresponds to the Greek genos and the
Latin gens, and is used in the same sense. The fact that the term for woman
comes from the same root – Greek gyne, Slav zena, Gothic qvino, Old Norse
kona, kuna – points back to the time of mother-right. Among the Lombards
and Burgundians we find, as already mentioned, the term fara, which Grimm
derives from an imaginary root fisan, to beget. I should prefer to go back to
the more obvious derivation from faran (fahren), to travel or wander; fara
would then denote a section of the migrating people which remained permanently
together and almost as a matter of course would be composed of relatives. In
the several centuries of migration, first to the east and then to the west, the
expression came to be transferred to the kinship group itself. There are,
further, the Gothic sibia, Anglo-Saxon sib, Old High German sippia, sima,
kindred. Old Norse only has the plural sifiar, relatives; the singular only
occurs as the name of a goddess, Sif. Lastly, still another expression occurs
in the Hildebrandslied, where Hildebrand asks Hadubrand: “Who is thy
father among the men of the people ... or of what kin art thou?“ (eddo huêlîhes cnuosles du sîs). In as far as there was a common German name for the
gens, it was probably the Gothic kuni that was used; this is rendered probable,
not only by its identity with the corresponding expression in the related
languages, but also by the fact that from it is derived the word kuning, König
(king), which originally denotes the head of a gens or of a tribe. Sibia,
kindred, does not seem to call for consideration; at any rate, sifiar in Old
Norse denotes not only blood relations, but also relations by marriage; thus it
includes the members of at least two gentes, and hence sif itself cannot have
been the term for the gens. 
As among the Mexicans and Greeks, so also among the Germans, the order of
battle, both the cavalry squadrons and the wedge formations of the infantry,
was drawn up by gentes. Tacitus’ use of the vague expression “by
families and kindreds” is to be explained through the fact that in his
time the gens in Rome had long ceased to be a living body. 

A further passage in Tacitus is decisive. It states that the maternal uncle
looks upon his nephew as his own son, and that some even regard the bond of
blood between the maternal uncle and the nephew as more sacred and close than
that between father and son, so that when hostages are demanded the sister's
son is considered a better security than the natural son of the man whom it is
desired to bind. Here we have living evidence, described as particularly
characteristic of the Germans, of the matriarchal, and therefore primitive,
gens. [2]
If a member of such a gens gave his own son as a pledge of his oath and the son
then paid the penalty of death for his father's breach of faith, the father had
to answer for that to himself. But if it was a sister's son who was sacrificed,
then the most sacred law of the gens was violated. The member of the gens who
was nearest of kin to the boy or youth, and more than all others was bound to
protect him, was guilty of his death; either he should not have pledged him or
he should have kept the agreement. Even if we had no other trace of gentile
organization among the Germans, this one passage would suffice. 
Still more decisive, because it comes about eight hundred years later, is a
passage from the Old Norse poem of the twilight of the gods and the end of the
world, the Völuspà. In this "vision of the seeress," into which Christian
elements are also interwoven, as Bang and Bugge have now proved, the
description of the period of universal degeneration and corruption leading up
to the great catastrophe contains the following passage: 
Broedhr munu berjask ok at bonum verdask,
munu systrungar sifjum spilla. 
“Brothers will make war upon one another and become one
another’s murderers, the children of sisters will break kinship.”
Systrungar means the son of the mother’s sister, and that these
sisters’ sons should betray the blood-bond between them is regarded by
the poet as an even greater crime than that of fratricide. The force of the
climax is in the word systrungar, which emphasizes the kinship on the
mother“s side; if the word had been syskina-börn, brothers' or sisters'
children, or syskinasynir, brothers' or sisters' sons, the second line would
not have been a climax to the first, but would merely have weakened the effect.
Hence even in the time of the Vikings, when the Völuspà was composed, the
memory of mother-right had not yet been obliterated in Scandinavia. 
In the time of Tacitus, however, mother-right had already given way to
father-right, at least among the Germans with whose customs he was more
familiar. The children inherited from the father; if there were no children,
the brothers, and the uncles on the father's and the mother's side. The fact
that the mother’s brother was allowed to inherit is connected with the
survivals of mother-right already mentioned, and again proves how new
father-right still was among the Germans at that time. Traces of mother-right
are also found until late in the Middle Ages. Apparently even at that time
people still did not have any great trust in fatherhood, especially in the case
of serfs. When, therefore, a feudal lord demanded from a town the return of a
fugitive serf, it was required – for example, in Augsburg, Basle and
Kaiserslautern – that the accused person's status as serf should be sworn
to by six of his nearest blood relations, and that they should all be relations
on the mother’s side. (Maurer, Städteverfassung, I, p. 381.) 
Another relic of mother-right, which was still only in process of dying out,
was the respect of the Germans for the female sex, which to the Romans was
almost incomprehensible. Young girls of noble family were considered the most
binding hostages in treaties with the Germans. The thought that their wives and
daughters might be taken captive and carried into slavery was terrible to them
and more than anything else fired their courage in battle; they saw in a woman
something holy and prophetic, and listened to her advice even in the most
important matters. Veleda, the priestess of the Bructerians on the River Lippe,
was the very soul of the whole Batavian rising in which Civilis, at the head of
the Germans and Belgae, shook the foundations of Roman rule in Gaul. In the
home, the woman seems to have held undisputed sway, though, together with the
old people and the children, she also had to do all the work, while the man
hunted, drank, or idled about. That, at least, is what Tacitus says; but as he
does not say who tilled the fields, and definitely declares that the serfs only
paid tribute, but did not have to render labor dues, the bulk of the adult men
must have had to do what little work the cultivation of the land required. The
form of marriage, as already said, was a pairing marriage which was gradually
approaching monogamy. It was not yet strict monogamy, as polygamy was permitted
for the leading members of the tribe. In general, strict chastity was required
of the girls (in contrast to the Celts), and Tacitus also speaks with special
warmth of the sacredness of the marriage tie among the Germans. Adultery by the
woman is the only ground for divorce mentioned by him. But there are many gaps
here in his report, and it is also only too apparent that he is holding up a
mirror of virtue before the dissipated Romans. One thing is certain: if the
Germans were such paragons of virtue in their forests, it only required slight
contact with the outside world to bring them down to the level of the average
man in the rest of Europe. Amidst the Roman world, the last trace of moral
austerity disappeared far more rapidly even than the German language. For
proof, it is enough to read Gregory of Tours. That in the German primeval
forests there could be no such voluptuous abandonment to all the refinements of
sensuality as in Rome is obvious; the superiority of the Germans to the Roman
world in this respect also is sufficiently great, and there is no need to endow
them with an ideal continence in things of the flesh, such as has never yet
been practiced by an entire nation. 
Also derived from the gentile organization is the obligation to inherit the
enmities as well as the friendships of the father or the relatives; likewise
the Wergeld, the fine for idling or injuring, in place of blood
revenge. The Wergeld, which only a generation ago was regarded as a
specifically German institution, has now been shown to be general among
hundreds of peoples as a milder form of the blood revenge originating out of
the gentile organization. We find it, for example, among the American Indians,
who also regard hospitality as an obligation. Tacitus’ description of
hospitality as practiced among the Germans (Germania, Ch. XXI) is identical
almost to the details with that given by Morgan of his Indians. 
The endless, burning controversy as to whether the Germans of Tacitus’
time had already definitely divided the land or not, and how the relevant
passages are to be interpreted, now belongs to the past. No more words need be
wasted in this dispute, since it has been established that among almost all
peoples the cultivated land was tilled collectively by the gens, and later by
communistic household communities such as were still found by Caesar among the
Suevi, and that after this stage the land was allotted to individual families
with periodical repartitions, which are shown to have survived as a local
custom in Germany down to our day. If in the one hundred and fifty years
between Caesar and Tacitus the Germans had changed from the collective
cultivation of the land expressly attributed by Caesar to the Suevi (they had
no divided or private fields whatever, he says) to individual cultivation with
annual repartition of the land, that is surely progress enough. The transition
from that stage to complete private property in land during such a short period
and without any outside interference is a sheer impossibility. What I read in
Tacitus is simply what he says in his own dry words: they change (or divide
afresh) the cultivated land every year, and there is enough common land left
over. It is the stage of agriculture and property relations in regard to the
land which exactly corresponds to the gentile constitution of the Germans at
that time. 
I leave the preceding paragraph unchanged as it stood in the former
editions. Meanwhile the question has taken another turn. Since Kovalevsky has
shown (cf. pages 51-52) that the patriarchal household community was a very
common, if not universal, intermediate form between the matriarchal communistic
family and the modern isolated family, it is no longer a question of whether
property in land is communal or private, which was the point at issue between
Maurer and Waitz, but a question of the form of the communal property. There is
no doubt at all that the Suevi in Caesar's time not only owned the land in
common, but also cultivated it in common for the common benefit. Whether the
economic unit was the gens or the household community or a communistic kinship
group intermediate between the two; or whether all three groups occurred
according to the conditions of the soil – these questions will be in
dispute for a long time to come. Kovalevsky maintains, however, that the
conditions described by Tacitus presuppose the existence, not of the mark or
village community, but of the household community and that the village
community only develops out of the latter much later, as a result of the
increase in population. 
According to this view, the settlements of the Germans in the territory of
which they were already in possession at the time of the Romans, and also in
the territory which they later took from the Romans, were not composed of
villages but of large household communities, which included several
generations, cultivated an amount of land proportionate to the number of their
members, and had common use with their neighbors of the surrounding waste. The
passage in Tacitus about changing the cultivated land would then have to be
taken in an agronomic sense: the community cultivated a different piece of land
every year, and allowed the land cultivated the previous year to lie fallow or
run completely to waste; the population being scanty, there was always enough
waste left over to make any disputes about land unnecessary. Only in the course
of centuries, when the number of members in the household communities had
increased so much that a common economy was no longer possible under the
existing conditions of production did the communities dissolve. The arable and
meadow lands which had hitherto been common were divided in the manner familiar
to us, first temporarily and then permanently, among the single households
which were now coming into being, while forest, pasture land, and water
remained common. 
In the case of Russia this development seems to be a proved historical fact.
With regard to Germany, and, secondarily, the other Germanic countries, it
cannot be denied that in many ways this view provides a better explanation of
the sources and an easier solution to difficulties than that held hitherto,
which takes the village community back to the time of Tacitus. On the whole,
the oldest documents, such as the Codex Laureshamensis, can be explained much
better in terms of the household community than of the village community. On
the other hand, this view raises new difficulties and new questions, which have
still to be solved. They can only be settled by new investigations; but I
cannot deny that in the case also of Germany, Scandinavia and England there is
very great probability in favor of the intermediate form of the household
community. 
While in Caesar’s time the Germans had only just taken up or were
still looking for settled abodes, in Tacitus’ time they already had a
full century of settled life behind them; correspondingly, the progress in the
production of the necessities of life is unmistakable. They live in log-houses;
their clothing is still very much that of primitive people of the forests:
coarse woolen mantles, skins; for women and notable people underclothing of
linen. Their food is milk, meat, wild fruits, and, as Pliny adds, oatmeal
porridge (still the Celtic national food in Ireland and Scotland). Their wealth
consists in cattle and horses, but of inferior breed; the cows are small, poor
in build and without horns; the horses are ponies, with very little speed.
Money was used rarely and in small amounts; it was exclusively Roman. They did
not work gold or silver, nor did they value it. Iron was rare, and, at least,
among the tribes on the Rhine and the Danube, seems to have been almost
entirely imported, not mined. Runic writing (imitated from the Greek or Latin
letters) was a purely secret form of writing, used only for religious magic.
Human sacrifices were still offered. In short, we here see a people which had
just raised itself from the middle to the upper stage of barbarism. But whereas
the tribes living immediately on the Roman frontiers were hindered in the
development of an independent metal and textile industry by the facility with
which Roman products could be imported, such industry undoubtedly did develop
in the northeast, on the Baltic. The fragments of weapons found in the
Schleswig marshes – long iron sword, coat of mail, silver helmet, and so
forth, together with Roman coins of the end of the second century – and
the German metal objects distributed by the migrations, show quite a pronounced
character of their own, even when they derive from an originally Roman model.
Emigration into the civilized Roman world put an end to this native industry
everywhere except in England. With what uniformity this industry arose and
developed, can be seen, for example, in the bronze brooches; those found in
Burgundy, Rumania and on the Sea of Azov might have come out of the same
workshop as those found in England and Sweden, and are just as certainly of
Germanic origin. 
The constitution also corresponds to the upper stage of barbarism. According
to Tacitus, there was generally a council of chiefs (principes), which
decided minor matters, but prepared more important questions for decision by
the assembly of the people; at the lower stage of barbarism, so far as we have
knowledge of it, as among the Americans, this assembly of the people still
comprises only the members of the gens, not yet of the tribe or of the
confederacy of tribes. The chiefs (principes) are still sharply
distinguished from the military leaders (duces) just as they are among
the Iroquois; they already subsist partially on gifts of cattle, corn, etc.,
from the members of the tribe; as in America, they are generally elected from
the same family. The transition to father-right favored, as in Greece and Rome,
the gradual transformation of election into hereditary succession, and hence
the rise of a noble family in each gens. This old so-called tribal nobility
disappeared for the most part during the migrations or soon afterwards. The
military leaders were chosen without regard to their descent, solely according
to their ability. They had little power and had to rely on the force of
example. Tacitus expressly states that the actual disciplinary authority in the
army lay with the priests. The real power was in the hands of the assembly of
the people. The king or the chief of the tribe presides; the people decide:
“No” by murmurs; “Yes” by acclamation and clash of
weapons. The assembly of the people is at the same time an assembly of justice;
here complaints are brought forward and decided and sentences of death passed,
the only capital crimes being cowardice, treason against the people, and
unnatural lust. Also in the gentes and other subdivisions of the tribe all the
members sit in judgment under the presidency of the chief, who, as in all the
early German courts, can only have guided the proceedings and put questions;
the actual verdict was always given among Germans everywhere by the whole
community. 
Confederacies of tribes had grown up since the time of Caesar; some of them
already had kings; the supreme military commander was already aiming at the
position of tyrant, as among the Greeks and Romans, and sometimes secured it.
But these fortunate usurpers were not by any means absolute rulers; they were,
however, already beginning to break the fetters of the gentile constitution.
Whereas freed slaves usually occupied a subordinate position, since they could
not belong to any gens, as favorites of the new kings they often won rank,
riches and honors. The same thing happened after the conquest of the Roman
Empire by these military leaders, who now became kings of great countries.
Among the Franks, slaves and freedmen of the king played a leading part first
at the court and then in the state; the new nobility was to a great extent
descended from them. 
One institution particularly favored the rise of kingship: the retinues. We
have already seen among the American Indians how, side by side with the gentile
constitution, private associations were formed to carry on wars independently.
Among the Germans, these private associations had already become permanent. A
military leader who had made himself a name gathered around him a band of young
men eager for booty, whom he pledged to personal loyalty, giving the same
pledge to them. The leader provided their keep, gave them gifts, and organized
them on a hierarchic basis; a bodyguard and a standing troop for smaller
expeditions and a regular corps of officers for operations on a larger scale.
Weak as these retinues must have been, and as we in fact find them to be later
– for example, under Odoacer in Italy – they were nevertheless the
beginnings of the decay of the old freedom of the people and showed themselves
to be such during and after the migrations. For in the first place they favored
the rise of monarchic power. In the second place, as Tacitus already notes,
they could only be kept together by continual wars and plundering expeditions.
Plunder became an end in itself. If the leader of the retinue found nothing to
do in the neighborhood, he set out with his men to other peoples where there
was war and the prospect of booty. The German mercenaries who fought in great
numbers under the Roman standard even against Germans were partly mobilized
through these retinues. They already represent the first form of the system of
Landsknechte, the shame and curse of the Germans. When the Roman Empire had
been conquered, these retinues of the kings formed the second main stock, after
the unfree and the Roman courtiers, from which the later nobility was drawn.

In general, then, the constitution of those German tribes which had combined
into peoples was the same as had developed among the Greeks of the Heroic Age
and the Romans of the so-called time of the kings: assembly of the people,
council of the chiefs of the gentes, military leader, who is already striving
for real monarchic power. It was the highest form of constitution which the
gentile order could achieve; it was the model constitution of the upper stage
of barbarism. If society passed beyond the limits within which this
constitution was adequate, that meant the end of the gentile order; it was
broken up and the state took its place. 

Footnotes


[1] During a few days spent
in Ireland, I realized afresh to what an extent the country people still live
in the conceptions of the gentile period. The landed proprietor, whose tenant
the farmer is, is still regarded by the latter as a kind of chief of the clan,
whose duty it is to manage the land in the interests of all, while the farmer
pays tribute in the form of rent, but has a claim upon him for assistance in
times of necessity. Similarly, everyone who is well off is considered under an
obligation to assist his poorer neighbors when they fall on hard times. Such
help is not charity; it is what the poorer member of the clan is entitled to
receive from the wealthier member or the chief. One can understand the
complaints of the political economists and jurists about the impossibility of
making the Irish peasant grasp the idea of modern bourgeois property; the
Irishman simply cannot get it into his head that there can be property with
rights but no duties. But one can also understand that when Irishmen with these
naive gentile conceptions suddenly find themselves in one of the big English or
American towns among a population with completely different ideas of morality
and justice, they easily become completely confused about both morality and
justice and lose all their bearings, with the result that masses of them become
demoralized. (Note to the Fourth Edition.) 


[2] The peculiar closeness
of the bond between maternal uncle and nephew, which derives from the time of
mother-right and is found among many peoples, is only recognized by the Greeks
in their mythology of the heroic age. According to Diodorus, IV, 34, Meleager
slays the sons of Thestius, the brothers of his mother Althma. She regards this
deed as such an inexpiable crime that she curses the murderer, her own son, and
prays for his death. “The gods heard her wishes,” the story says, “and put an
end to Meleager’s life.” Also according to Diodorus (IV, 44), the Argonauts
land in Thrace under Heracles and there find that Phincus, at the instigation
of his new wife, is shamefully ill-treating the two sons born to him by his
former wife, the Boread Cleopatra, whom he has put away. But among the
Argonauts there are also Boreads, brothers of Cleopatra, therefore maternal
uncles of the maltreated boys. They at once take up their nephews’ cause, free
them, and kill their guards. 



Chapter Six | Chapter
Eight 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## The Formation of the State Among the Germans









Origins of the Family-- Chapter VIII



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
VIII. The Formation of the State among Germans



According to Tacitus, the Germans were a very numerous people.
Caesar gives us an approximate idea of the strength of the separate German
peoples; he places the number of the Usipetans and the Tencterans who appeared
on the left bank of the Rhine at 180,000, women and children included. That is
about 100,000 to one people, [1] already considerably more than, for
instance, the total number of the Iroquois in their prime, when, no more than
20,000 strong, they were the terror of the whole country from the Great Lakes
to the Ohio and the Potomac. On the map, if we try to group the better known
peoples settled near the Rhine according to the evidence of the reports, a
single people occupies the space of a Prussian government district that is,
about 10,000 square kilometers or 182 geographical square miles. [About 4,000 square miles – Ed.] Now, the Germania
Magna of the Romans, which reached as far as the Vistula, had an area of
500,000 square kilometers in round figures. Reckoning the average number of
each people at 100,000, the total population of Germania Magna would work out
at 5,000,000 – a considerable figure for a barbarian group of peoples, but,
compared with our conditions ten persons to the square kilometer, or about 550
to the geographical square mile – extremely low. But that by no means exhausts
the number of the Germans then living. We know that all along the Carpathians
and down to the south of the Danube there were German peoples descended from
Gothic tribes, such as the Bastarnians, Peucinians and others, who were so
numerous that Pliny classes them together as the fifth main tribe of the
Germans. As early as 180 B.C. they make their appearance as mercenaries in the
service of the Macedonian King Perseus, and in the first years of Augustus,
still advancing, they almost reached Adrianople. If we estimate these at only
1,000,000, the probable total number of the Germans at the beginning of our era
must have been at least 6,000,000. 
After permanent settlements had been founded in Germany, the population must
have grown with increasing rapidity; the advances in industry we mentioned are
in themselves proof of this. The objects found in the Schleswig marshes date
from the third century, according to the Roman coins discovered with them. At
this time, therefore, there was already a developed metal and textile industry
on the Baltic, brisk traffic with the Roman Empire and a certain degree of
luxury among the more wealthy – all signs of denser population. But also
at this time begins the general attack by the Germans along the whole line of
the Rhine, the Roman wall and the Danube, from the North Sea to the Black Sea
– direct proof of the continual growth and outward thrust of the
population. For three centuries the fight went on, during which the whole main
body of the Gothic peoples (with the exception of the Scandinavian Goths and
the Burgundians) thrust south-east, forming the left wing on the long front of
attack, while in the center the High Germans (Hermionians) pushed forward down
the upper Danube, and on the right wing the Ischovonians, now called Franks,
advanced along the Rhine; the Ingoevonians carried out the conquest of Britain.
By the end of the fifth century an exhausted and bleeding Roman Empire lay
helpless before the invading Germans. 
In earlier chapters we were standing at the cradle of ancient Greek and
Roman civilization. Now we stand at its grave. Rome had driven the leveling
plane of its world rule over all the countries of the Mediterranean basin, and
that for centuries. Except when Greek offered resistance, all natural languages
had been forced to yield to a debased Latin; there were no more national
differences, no more Gauls, Iberians, Ligurians, Noricans; all had become
Romans. Roman administration and Roman law had everywhere broken up the old
kinship groups, and with them the last vestige of local and national
independence. The half-baked culture of Rome provided no substitute; it
expressed no nationality, only the lack of nationality. The elements of new
nations were present everywhere; the Latin dialects of the various provinces
were becoming increasingly differentiated; the natural boundaries which once
had made Italy, Gaul, Spain, Africa independent territories, were still there
and still made themselves felt. But the strength was not there to fuse these
elements into new nations; there was no longer a sign anywhere of capacity for
development, or power of resistance, to say nothing of creative energy. The
enormous mass of humanity in the whole enormous territory was held together by
one bond only: the Roman state; and the Roman state had become in the course of
time their worst enemy and oppressor. The provinces had annihilated Rome; Rome
itself had become a provincial town like the rest – privileged, but no
longer the ruler, no longer the hub of the world empire, not even the seat of
the emperors or sub-emperors, who now lived in Constantinople, Treves, Milan.
The Roman state had become a huge, complicated machine, exclusively for
bleeding its subjects, Taxes, state imposts and tributes of every kind pressed
the mass of the people always deeper into poverty; the pressure was intensified
until the exactions of governors, tax-collectors, and armies made it
unbearable. That was what the Roman state had achieved with its world rule. It
gave as the justification of its existence that it maintained order within the
empire and protected it against the barbarians without. But its order was worse
than the worst disorder, and the citizens whom it claimed to protect against
the barbarians longed for the barbarians to deliver them. 
Social conditions were no less desperate. Already in the last years of the
republic the policy of Roman rule had been ruthlessly to exploit the provinces;
the empire, far from abolishing this exploitation, had organized it. The more
the empire declined, the higher rose the taxes and levies, the more shamelessly
the officials robbed and extorted. The Romans had always been too occupied in
ruling other nations to become proficient in trade and industry; it was only as
usurers that they beat all who came before or after. What commerce had already
existed and still survived was now ruined by official extortion; it struggled
on only in the eastern, Greek part of the empire, which lies outside the
present study. General impoverishment; decline of commerce, handicrafts and
art; fall in the population; decay of the towns; relapse of agriculture to a
lower level-such was the final result of Roman world rule. 
Agriculture, always the decisive branch of production throughout the ancient
world, was now more so than ever. In Italy, the enormous estates (latifundia)
which, since the end of the republic, occupied almost the whole country, had
been exploited in two different ways. They had been used either as pastures,
the population being displaced by sheep and cattle, which could be tended by a
few slaves, or as country estates (villae), where large-scale horticulture was
carried on with masses of slaves, partly as a luxury for the owner, partly for
sale in the town markets. The great grazing farms had kept going and had
probably even extended; the country estates and their gardens had been ruined
through the impoverishment of their owners and the decay of the towns. The
system of latifundia run by slave labor no longer paid; but at that time no
other form of large-scale agriculture was possible. Small production had again
become the only profitable form. One country estate after another was cut up
into small lots, which were handed over either to tenants, who paid a fixed sum
and had hereditary rights, or to partiarii, stewards rather than tenants, who
received a sixth or even only a ninth of the year's product in return for their
labor. For the most part, however, these small lots of land were given out to
coloni, who paid for them a definite yearly amount, were tied to the soil and
could be sold together with their lot. True, they were not slaves, but neither
were they free; they could not marry free persons, and their marriages with one
another were not regarded as full marriages, but, like those of slaves, as mere
concubinage (contubernium). They were the forerunners of the medieval serfs.


The slavery of classical times had outlived itself. Whether employed on the
land in large-scale agriculture or in manufacture in the towns, it no longer
yielded any satisfactory return – the market for its products was no
longer there. But the small-scale agriculture and the small handicraft
production to which the enormous production of the empire in its prosperous
days was now shrunk had no room for numbers of slaves. Only for the domestic
and luxury slaves of the wealthy was there still a place in society. But though
it was dying out, slavery was still common enough to make all productive labor
appear to be work for slaves, unworthy of free Romans – and everybody was
a free Roman now. Hence, on the one side, increasing manumissions of the
superfluous slaves who were now a burden; on the other hand, a growth in some
parts in the numbers of the coloni, and in other parts of the declassed freemen
(like the “poor whites” in the ex-slave states of America).
Christianity is completely innocent of the gradual dying out of ancient
slavery; it was itself actively involved in the system for centuries under the
Roman Empire, and never interfered later with slave-trading by Christians: not
with the Germans in the north, or with the Venetians in the Mediterranean, or
with the later trade in Negroes. [2] Slavery no longer paid; it was for that
reason it died out. But in dying it left behind its poisoned sting – the
stigma attaching to the productive labor of freemen. This was the blind alley
from which the Roman world had no way out: slavery was economically impossible,
the labor of freemen was morally ostracized. The one could be the basic form of
social production no longer; the other, not yet. Nothing could help here except
a complete revolution. 
Things were no better in the provinces. We have most material about Gaul.
Here there was still a free small peasantry in addition to coloni. In order to
be secured against oppression by officials, judges, and usurers, these peasants
often placed themselves under the protection, the patronage, of a powerful
person; and it was not only individuals who did so, but whole communities, so
that in the fourth century the emperors frequently prohibited the practice. But
what help was this protection to those who sought it? Their patron made it a
condition that they should transfer to him the rights of ownership in their
pieces of land, in return for which he guaranteed them the use of the land for
their lifetime – a trick which the Holy Church took note of and in the
ninth and tenth centuries lustily imitated, to the increase of God’s
glory and its own lands. At this time, it is true, about the year 475, Bishop
Salvianus of Marseilles still inveighs indignantly against such theft. He
relates that oppression by Roman officials and great landlords had become so
heavy that many “Romans” fled into districts already occupied by
the barbarians, and that the Roman citizens settled there feared nothing so
much as a return to Roman rule. That parents owing to their poverty often sold
their children into slavery at this time is proved by a decree prohibiting the
practice. 
In return for liberating the Romans from their own state, the German
barbarians took from them two-thirds of all the land and divided it among
themselves. The division was made according to the gentile constitution. The
conquerors being relatively few in number, large tracts of land were left
undivided, as the property partly of the whole people, partly of the individual
tribes and gentes. Within each gens the arable and meadow land was distributed
by lot in equal portions among the individual households. We do not know
whether reallotments of the land were repeatedly carried out at this time, but
in any event they were soon discontinued in the Roman provinces and the
individual lots became alienable private property, allodium. Woods and
pastures remained undivided for common use; the provisions regulating their
common use, and the manner in which the divided land was to be cultivated, were
settled in accordance with ancient custom and by the decision of the whole
community. The longer the gens remained settled in its village and the more the
Germans and the Romans gradually merged, the more the bond of union lost its
character of kinship and became territorial. The gens was lost in the mark
community, in which, however, traces of its origin in the kinship of its
members are often enough still visible. Thus, at least in those countries where
the mark community maintained itself – northern France, England, Germany and
Scandinavia – the gentile constitution changed imperceptibly into a local
constitution and thus became capable of incorporation into the state. But it
nevertheless retained that primitive democratic character which distinguishes
the whole gentile constitution, and thus even in its later enforced
degeneration and up to the most recent times it kept something of the gentile
constitution alive, to be a weapon in the hands of the oppressed. 
This weakening of the bond of blood in the gens followed from the
degeneration of the organs of kinship also in the tribe and in the entire
people as a result of their conquests. As we know, rule over subjugated peoples
is incompatible with the gentile constitution. Here we can see this on a large
scale. The German peoples, now masters of the Roman provinces, had to organize
what they had conquered. But they could neither absorb the mass of Romans into
the gentile bodies nor govern them through these bodies. At the head of the
Roman local governing bodies, many of which continued for the time being to
function, had to be placed a substitute for the Roman state, and this
substitute could only be another state. The organs of the gentile constitution
had to be transformed into state organs, and that very rapidly, for the situation
was urgent. But the immediate representative of the conquering people was their
military leader. To secure the conquered territory against attack from within
and without, it was necessary to strengthen his power. The moment had come to
transform the military leadership into kingship: the transformation was made.

Let us take the country of the Franks. Here the victorious Salian people had
come into complete possession, not only of the extensive Roman state domains,
but also of the very large tracts of land which had not been distributed among
the larger and smaller district and mark communities, in particular all the
larger forest areas. On his transformation from a plain military chief into the
real sovereign of a country, the first thing which the king of the Franks did
was to transform this property of the people into crown lands, to steal it from
the people and to give it, outright or in fief, to his retainers. This retinue,
which originally consisted of his personal following of warriors and of the
other lesser military leaders, was presently increased not only by Romans
– Romanized Gauls, whose education, knowledge of writing, familiarity
with the spoken Romance language of the country and the written Latin language,
as well as with the country's laws, soon made them indispensable to him, but
also by slaves, serfs and freedmen, who composed his court and from whom he
chose his favorites. All these received their portions of the people's land, at
first generally in the form of gifts, later of benefices, usually conferred, to
begin with, for the king's lifetime. Thus, at the expense of the people the
foundation of a new nobility was laid. 
And that was not all. The wide extent of the kingdom could not be governed
with the means provided by the old gentile constitution; the council of chiefs,
even if it had not long since become obsolete, would have been unable to meet,
and it was soon displaced by the permanent retinue of the king; the old
assembly of the people continued to exist in name, but it also increasingly
became a mere assembly of military leaders subordinate to the king, and of the
new rising nobility. By the incessant civil wars and wars of conquest (the
latter were particularly frequent under Charlemagne), the free land-owning
peasants, the mass of the Frankish people, were reduced to the same state of
exhaustion and penury as the Roman peasants in the last years of the Republic.
Though they had originally constituted the whole army and still remained its
backbone after the conquest of France, by the beginning of the ninth century
they were so impoverished that hardly one man in five could go to the wars. The
army of free peasants raised directly by the king was replaced by an army
composed of the serving-men of the new nobles, including bondsmen, descendants
of men who in earlier times had known no master save the king and still earlier
no master at all, not even a king. The internal wars under Charlemagne's
successors, the weakness of the authority of the crown, and the corresponding
excesses of the nobles (including the counts instituted by Charlemagne, who
were now striving to make their office hereditary), had already brought ruin on
the Frankish peasantry, and the ruin was finally completed by the invasions of
the Norsemen. Fifty years after the death of Charlemagne, the Empire of the
Franks lay as defenseless at the feet of the Norsemen as the Roman Empire, four
hundred years earlier, had lain at the feet of the Franks. 
Not only was there the same impotence against enemies from without, but
there was almost the same social order or rather disorder within. The free
Frankish peasants were in a plight similar to their predecessors, the Roman
coloni. Plundered, and ruined by wars, they had been forced to put themselves
under the protection of the new nobles or of the Church, the crown being too
weak to protect them. But they had to pay dearly for it. Like the Gallic
peasants earlier, they had to transfer their rights of property in land to
their protecting lord and received the land back from him in tenancies of
various and changing forms, but always only in return for services and dues.
Once in this position of dependence, they gradually lost their personal freedom
also; after a few generations most of them were already serfs. How rapid was
the disappearance of the free peasantry is shown by Irminon’s records of
the monastic possessions of the Abbey of Saint Germain des Prés, at that time
near, now in, Paris. On the huge holdings of this Abbey, which were scattered
in the surrounding country, there lived in Charlemagne’s time 2,788
households, whose members were almost without exception Franks with German
names. They included 2,080 coloni, 35 lites [semi-free
peasants – Ed.], 220 slaves, and only eight freehold tenants! The
godless practice, as Salvianus had called it, by which the protecting lord had
the peasant’s land transferred to himself as his own property, and only
gave it back to the peasant for use during life, was now commonly employed by
the Church against the peasants. The forced services now imposed with
increasing frequency had had their prototype as much in the Roman angariae,
compulsory labor for the state, as in the services provided by members of the
German marks for bridge and road-making and other common purposes. To all
appearances, therefore, after four hundred years, the mass of the people were
back again where they had started. 
But that only proved two things: first, that the social stratification and
the distribution of property in the declining Roman Empire completely
correspond to the level of agricultural and industrial production at that time,
and had therefore been inevitable; secondly, that this level of production had
neither risen nor fallen significantly during the following four centuries and
had therefore with equal necessity again produced the same distribution of
property and the same classes in the population. In the last centuries of the
Roman Empire the town had lost its former supremacy over the country, and in
the first centuries of German rule it had not regained it. This implies a low
level of development both in agriculture and industry. This general situation
necessarily produces big ruling landowners and a dependent small peasantry. How
impossible it was to graft onto such a society either the Roman system of
latifundia worked by slave-labor or the newer large-scale agriculture worked by
forced services is proved by Charlemagne's experiments with the famous imperial
country estates (villae). These experiments were gigantic in scope, but they
left scarcely a trace. They were continued only by the monasteries, and only
for them were they fruitful. But the monasteries were abnormal social bodies,
founded on celibacy; they could produce exceptional results, but for that very
reason necessarily continued to be exceptional themselves. 
And yet progress was made during these four hundred years. Though at the end
we find almost the same main classes as at the beginning, the human beings who
formed these classes were different. Ancient slavery had gone, and so had the
pauper freemen who despised work as only fit for slaves. Between the Roman
colonus and the new bondsman had stood the free Frankish peasant. The “useless
memories and aimless strife” of decadent Roman culture were dead and buried.
The social classes of the ninth century had been formed, not in the rottenness
of a decaying civilization, but in the birth-pangs of a new civilization.
Compared with their Roman predecessors, the new breed, whether masters or
servants, was a breed of men. The relation of powerful landowners and subject
peasants which had meant for the ancient world the final ruin, from which there
was no escape, was for them the starting-point of a new development. And,
further, however unproductive these four centuries appear, one great product
they did leave: the modern nationalities, the new forms and structures through
which west European humanity was to make coming history. The Germans had, in
fact, given Europe new life, and therefore the break-up of the states in the
Germanic period ended, not in subjugation by the Norsemen and Saracens, but in
the further development of the system of benefices and protection into
feudalism, and in such an enormous increase of the population that scarcely two
centuries later the severe blood-letting of the Crusades was borne without
injury. 
But what was the mysterious magic by which the Germans breathed new life
into a dying Europe? Was it some miraculous power innate in the Germanic race,
such as our chauvinist historians romance about? Not a bit of it. The Germans,
especially at that time, were a highly gifted Aryan tribe, and in the full
vigor of development. It was not, however, their specific national qualities
which rejuvenated Europe, but simply – their barbarism, their gentile
constitution. 
Their individual ability and courage, their sense of freedom, their
democratic instinct which in everything of public concern felt itself
concerned; in a word, all the qualities which had been lost to the Romans and
were alone capable of forming new states and making new nationalities grow out
of the slime of the Roman world-what else were they than the characteristics of
the barbarian of the upper stage, fruits of his gentile constitution? 
If they recast the ancient form of monogamy, moderated the supremacy of the
man in the family, and gave the woman a higher position than the classical
world had ever known, what made them capable of doing so if not their
barbarism, their gentile customs, their living heritage from the time of
mother-right? 
If in at least three of the most important countries, Germany, northern
France and England, they carried over into the feudal state a genuine piece of
gentile constitution, in the form of mark communities, thus giving the
oppressed class, the peasants, even under the harshest medieval serfdom, a
local center of solidarity and a means of resistance such as neither the slaves
of classical times nor the modern proletariat found ready to their hand – to
what was this due, if not to their barbarism, their purely barbarian method of
settlement in kinship groups? 
Lastly: they were able to develop and make universal the milder form of
servitude they had practiced in their own country, which even in the Roman
Empire increasingly displaced slavery; a form of servitude which, as Fourier
first stressed, gives to the bondsmen the means of their gradual liberation as
a class (“fournit aux cultivateurs des moyens d'affranchissement collectif et
progressif”); a form of servitude which thus stands high above slavery, where
the only possibility is the immediate release, without any transitional stage,
of individual slaves (abolition of slavery by successful rebellion is unknown
to antiquity), whereas the medieval serfs gradually won their liberation as a
class. And to what do we owe this if not to their barbarism, thanks to which
they had not yet reached the stage of fully developed slavery, neither the
labor slavery of the classical world nor the domestic slavery of the Orient?

All the vigorous and creative life which the Germans infused into the Roman
world was barbarism. Only barbarians are able to rejuvenate a world in the
throes of collapsing civilization. And precisely the highest stage of
barbarism, to which and in which the Germans worked their way upwards before
the migrations, was the most favorable for this process. That explains
everything. 



Footnotes 


[1] The number assumed here
is confirmed by a statement of Diodorus about the Celts of Gaul: “In Gaul dwell
many peoples of varying strength. Among those that are greatest the number is
about 200,000, among the smallest, 50,000” (Diodorus Siculus, V, 75). On an
average, therefore, 125,000; it can undoubtedly be assumed that, owing to their
higher stage of development, the single peoples among the Gauls were rather
larger than among the Germans. 


[2] According to Bishop
Liutprand of Cremona, in the tenth century the chief industry of Verdun –
in the Holy German Empire, observe – was the manufacture of eunuchs, who
were exported at great profit to Spain for the Moorish harems. 



Chapter Seven | Chapter Nine 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## Barbarism and Civilization









Origins of the Family - Chapter IX



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
IX. Barbarism and Civilization


We have now traced the dissolution of the gentile constitution
in the three great instances of the Greeks, the Romans, and the Germans. In
conclusion, let us examine the general economic conditions which already
undermined the gentile organization of society at the upper stage of barbarism
and with the coming of civilization overthrew it completely. Here we shall need
Marx's Capital as much as Morgan’s book. 
Arising in the middle stage of savagery, further developed during its upper
stage, the gens reaches its most flourishing period, so far as our sources
enable us to judge, during the lower stage of barbarism. We begin therefore
with this stage. 
Here – the American Indians must serve as our example – we find
the gentile constitution fully formed. The tribe is now grouped in several
gentes, generally two. With the increase in population, each of these original
gentes splits up into several daughter gentes, their mother gens now appearing
as the phratry. The tribe itself breaks up into several tribes, in each of
which we find again, for the most part, the old gentes. The related tribes, at
least in some cases, are united in a confederacy. This simple organization
suffices completely for the social conditions out of which it sprang. It is
nothing more than the grouping natural to those conditions, and it is capable
of settling all conflicts that can arise within a society so organized. War
settles external conflicts; it may end with the annihilation of the tribe, but
never with its subjugation. It is the greatness, but also the limitation, of
the gentile constitution that it has no place for ruler and ruled. Within the
tribe there is as yet no difference between rights and duties; the question
whether participation in public affairs, in blood revenge or atonement, is a
right or a duty, does not exist for the Indian; it would seem to him just as
absurd as the question whether it was a right or a duty to sleep, eat, or hunt.
A division of the tribe or of the gens into different classes was equally
impossible. And that brings us to the examination of the economic basis of
these conditions. 

The population is extremely sparse; it is dense only at the tribe’s
place of settlement, around which lie in a wide circle first the hunting
grounds and then the protective belt of neutral forest, which separates the
tribe from others. The division of labor is purely primitive, between the sexes
only. The man fights in the wars, goes hunting and fishing, procures the raw
materials of food and the tools necessary for doing so. The woman looks after
the house and the preparation of food and clothing, cooks, weaves, sews. They
are each master in their own sphere: the man in the forest, the woman in the
house. Each is owner of the instruments which he or she makes and uses: the man
of the weapons, the hunting and fishing implements, the woman of the household
gear. The housekeeping is communal among several and often many families. [1] What is made
and used in common is common property – the house, the garden, the long-boat.
Here therefore, and here alone, there still exists in actual fact that
“property created by the owner’s labor” which in civilized
society is an ideal fiction of the jurists and economists, the last lying legal
pretense by which modern capitalist property still bolsters itself up. 
But humanity did not everywhere remain at this stage. In Asia they found
animals which could be tamed and, when once tamed, bred. The wild buffalo-cow
had to be hunted; the tame buffalo-cow gave a calf yearly and milk as well. A
number of the most advanced tribes – the Aryans, Semites, perhaps already
also the Turanians – now made their chief work first the taming of
cattle, later their breeding and tending only. Pastoral tribes separated
themselves from the mass of the rest of the barbarians: the first great social
division of labor. The pastoral tribes produced not only more necessities of
life than the other barbarians, but different ones. They possessed the
advantage over them of having not only milk, milk products and greater supplies
of meat, but also skins, wool, goat-hair, and spun and woven fabrics, which
became more common as the amount of raw material increased. Thus for the first
time regular exchange became possible. At the earlier stages only occasional
exchanges can take place; particular skill in the making of weapons and tools
may lead to a temporary division of labor. Thus in many places undoubted
remains of workshops for the making of stone tools have been found, dating from
the later Stone Age. The artists who here perfected their skill probably worked
for the whole community, as each special handicraftsman still does in the
gentile communities in India. In no case could exchange arise at this stage
except within the tribe itself, and then only as an exceptional event. But now,
with the differentiation of pastoral tribes, we find all the conditions ripe
for exchange between branches of different tribes and its development into a
regular established institution. Originally tribes exchanged with tribe through
the respective chiefs of the gentes; but as the herds began to pass into
private ownership, exchange between individuals became more common, and,
finally, the only form. Now the chief article which the pastoral tribes
exchanged with their neighbors was cattle; cattle became the commodity by which
all other commodities were valued and which was everywhere willingly taken in
exchange for them – in short, cattle acquired a money function and
already at this stage did the work of money. With such necessity and speed,
even at the very beginning of commodity exchange, did the need for a money
commodity develop. 
Horticulture, probably unknown to Asiatic barbarians of the lower stage, was
being practiced by them in the middle stage at the latest, as the forerunner of
agriculture. In the climate of the Turanian plateau, pastoral life is
impossible without supplies of fodder for the long and severe winter. Here,
therefore, it was essential that land should be put under grass and corn
cultivated. The same is true of the steppes north of the Black Sea. But when
once corn had been grown for the cattle, it also soon became food for men. The
cultivated land still remained tribal property; at first it was allotted to the
gens, later by the gens to the household communities and finally to individuals
for use. The users may have had certain rights of possession, but nothing more.

Of the industrial achievements of this stage, two are particularly
important. The first is the loom, the second the smelting of metal ores and the
working of metals. Copper and tin and their alloy, bronze, were by far the most
important. Bronze provided serviceable tools and weapons, though it could not
displace stone tools; only iron could do that, and the method of obtaining iron
was not yet understood. Gold and silver were beginning to be used for ornament
and decoration, and must already have acquired a high value as compared with
copper and bronze. 
The increase of production in all branches – cattle-raising,
agriculture, domestic handicrafts – gave human labor-power the capacity
to produce a larger product than was necessary for its maintenance. At the same
time it increased the daily amount of work to be done by each member of the
gens, household community or single family. It was now desirable to bring in
new labor forces. War provided them; prisoners of war were turned into slaves.
With its increase of the productivity of labor, and therefore of wealth, and
its extension of the field of production, the first great social division of
labor was bound, in the general historical conditions prevailing, to bring
slavery in its train. From the first great social division of labor arose the
first great cleavage of society into two classes: masters and slaves,
exploiters and exploited. 
As to how and when the herds passed out of the common possession of the
tribe or the gens into the ownership of individual heads of families, we know
nothing at present. But in the main it must have occurred during this stage.
With the herds and the other new riches, a revolution came over the family. To
procure the necessities of life had always been the business of the man; he
produced and owned the means of doing so. The herds were the new means of
producing these necessities; the taming of the animals in the first instance
and their later tending were the man’s work. To him, therefore, belonged
the cattle, and to him the commodities and the slaves received in exchange for
cattle. All the surplus which the acquisition of the necessities of life now
yielded fell to the man; the woman shared in its enjoyment, but had no part in
its ownership. The “savage” warrior and hunter had been content to
take second place in the house, after the woman; the “gentler”
shepherd, in the arrogance of his wealth, pushed himself forward into the first
place and the woman down into the second. And she could not complain. The
division of labor within the family had regulated the division of property
between the man and the woman. That division of labor had remained the same;
and yet it now turned the previous domestic relation upside down, simply
because the division of labor outside the family had changed. The same cause
which had ensured to the woman her previous supremacy in the house – that
her activity was confined to domestic labor – this same cause now ensured
the man's supremacy in the house: the domestic labor of the woman no longer
counted beside the acquisition of the necessities of life by the man; the
latter was everything, the former an unimportant extra. We can already see from
this that to emancipate woman and make her the equal of the man is and remains
an impossibility so long as the woman is shut out from social productive labor
and restricted to private domestic labor. The emancipation of woman will only
be possible when woman can take part in production on a large, social scale,
and domestic work no longer claims anything but an insignificant amount of her
time. And only now has that become possible through modern large-scale
industry, which does not merely permit of the employment of female labor over a
wide range, but positively demands it, while it also tends towards ending
private domestic labor by changing it more and more into a public industry. 
The man now being actually supreme in the house, the last barrier to his
absolute supremacy had fallen. This autocracy was confirmed and perpetuated by
the overthrow of mother-right, the introduction of father-right, and the
gradual transition of the pairing marriage into monogamy. But this tore a
breach in the old gentile order; the single family became a power, and its rise
was a menace to the gens. 
The next step leads us to the upper stage of barbarism, the period when all
civilized peoples have their Heroic Age: the age of the iron sword, but also of
the iron plowshare and ax. Iron was now at the service of man, the last and
most important of all the raw materials which played a historically
revolutionary role – until the potato. Iron brought the tillage of large
areas, the clearing of wide tracts of virgin forest; iron gave to the
handicraftsman tools so hard and sharp that no stone, no other known metal
could resist them. All this came gradually; the first iron was often even
softer than bronze. Hence stone weapons only disappeared slowly; not merely in
the Hildebrandslied, but even as late as Hastings in 1066, 
stone axes were still used for fighting. But progress could not now be stopped;
it went forward with fewer checks and greater speed. The town, with its houses
of stone or brick, encircled by stone walls, towers and ramparts, became the
central seat of the tribe or the confederacy of tribes – an enormous
architectural advance, but also a sign of growing danger and need for
protection. Wealth increased rapidly, but as the wealth of individuals. The
products of weaving, metal-work and the other handicrafts, which were becoming
more and more differentiated, displayed growing variety and skill. In addition
to corn, leguminous plants and fruit, agriculture now provided wine and oil,
the preparation of which had been learned. Such manifold activities were no
longer within the scope of one and the same individual; the second great
division of labor took place: handicraft separated from agriculture. The
continuous increase of production and simultaneously of the productivity of
labor heightened the value of human labor-power. Slavery, which during the
preceding period was still in its beginnings and sporadic, now becomes an
essential constituent part of the social system; slaves no longer merely help
with production – they are driven by dozens to work in the fields and the
workshops. With the splitting up of production into the two great main
branches, agriculture and handicrafts, arises production directly for exchange,
commodity production; with it came commerce, not only in the interior and on
the tribal boundaries, but also already overseas. All this, however, was still
very undeveloped; the precious metals were beginning to be the predominant and
general money commodity, but still uncoined, exchanging simply by their naked
weight. 
The distinction of rich and poor appears beside that of freemen and slaves –
with the new division of labor, a new cleavage of society into classes. The
inequalities of property among the individual heads of families break up the
old communal household communities wherever they had still managed to survive,
and with them the common cultivation of the soil by and for these communities.
The cultivated land is allotted for use to single families, at first
temporarily, later permanently. The transition to full private property is
gradually accomplished, parallel with the transition of the pairing marriage
into monogamy. The single family is becoming the economic unit of society. 
The denser population necessitates closer consolidation both for internal
and external action. The confederacy of related tribes becomes everywhere a
necessity, and soon also their fusion, involving the fusion of the separate
tribal territories into one territory of the nation. The military leader of the
people – rex, basileus, thiudans – becomes an indispensable, permanent
official. The assembly of the people takes form, wherever it did not already
exist. Military leader, council, assembly of the people are the organs of
gentile society developed into military democracy – military, since war
and organization for war have now become regular functions of national life.
Their neighbors' wealth excites the greed of peoples who already see in the
acquisition of wealth one of the main aims of life. They are barbarians: they
think it more easy and in fact more honorable to get riches by pillage than by
work. War, formerly waged only in revenge for injuries or to extend territory
that had grown too small, is now waged simply for plunder and becomes a regular
industry. Not without reason the bristling battlements stand menacingly about
the new fortified towns; in the moat at their foot yawns the grave of the
gentile constitution, and already they rear their towers into civilization.
Similarly in the interior. The wars of plunder increase the power of the
supreme military leader and the subordinate commanders; the customary election
of their successors from the same families is gradually transformed, especially
after the introduction of father-right, into a right of hereditary succession,
first tolerated, then claimed, finally usurped; the foundation of the
hereditary monarchy and the hereditary nobility is laid. Thus the organs of the
gentile constitution gradually tear themselves loose from their roots in the
people, in gens, phratry, tribe, and the whole gentile constitution changes
into its opposite: from an organization of tribes for the free ordering of
their own affairs it becomes an organization for the plundering and oppression
of their neighbors; and correspondingly its organs change from instruments of
the will of the people into independent organs for the domination and
oppression of the people. That, however, would never have been possible if the
greed for riches had not split the members of the gens into rich and poor, if
“the property differences within one and the same gens had not
transformed its unity of interest into antagonism between its members”
(Marx), if the extension of slavery had not already begun to make working for a
living seem fit only for slaves and more dishonorable than pillage. 

We have now reached the threshold of civilization. Civilization opens with a
new advance in the division of labor. At the lowest stage of barbarism men
produced only directly for their own needs; any acts of exchange were isolated
occurrences, the object of exchange merely some fortuitous surplus. In the
middle stage of barbarism we already find among the pastoral peoples a
possession in the form of cattle which, once the herd has attained a certain
size, regularly produces a surplus over and above the tribe’s own
requirements, leading to a division of labor between pastoral peoples and
backward tribes without herds, and hence to the existence of two different
levels of production side by side with one another and the conditions necessary
for regular exchange. The upper stage of barbarism brings us the further
division of labor between agriculture and handicrafts, hence the production of
a continually increasing portion of the products of labor directly for
exchange, so that exchange between individual producers assumes the importance
of a vital social function. Civilization consolidates and intensifies all these
existing divisions of labor, particularly by sharpening the opposition between
town and country (the town may economically dominate the country, as in
antiquity, or the country the town, as in the middle ages), and it adds a third
division of labor, peculiar to itself and of decisive importance: it creates a
class which no longer concerns itself with production, but only with the
exchange of the products – the merchants. Hitherto whenever classes had
begun to form, it had always been exclusively in the field of production; the
persons engaged in production were separated into those who directed and those
who executed, or else into large-scale and small-scale producers. Now for the
first time a class appears which, without in any way participating in
production, captures the direction of production as a whole and economically
subjugates the producers; which makes itself into an indispensable middleman
between any two producers and exploits them both. Under the pretext that they
save the producers the trouble and risk of exchange, extend the sale of their
products to distant markets and are therefore the most useful class of the
population, a class of parasites comes into being, “genuine social
ichneumons,” who, as a reward for their actually very insignificant
services, skim all the cream off production at home and abroad, rapidly amass
enormous wealth and correspondingly social influence, and for that reason
receive under civilization ever higher honors and ever greater control of
production, until at last they also bring forth a product of their own –
the periodical trade crises. 
At our stage of development, however, the young merchants had not even begun
to dream of the great destiny awaiting them. But they were growing and making
themselves indispensable, which was quite sufficient. And with the formation of
the merchant class came also the development of metallic money, the minted
coin, a new instrument for the domination of the non-producer over the producer
and his production. The commodity of commodities had been discovered, that
which holds all other commodities hidden in itself, the magic power which can
change at will into everything desirable and desired. The man who had it ruled
the world of production–and who had more of it than anybody else? The
merchant. The worship of money was safe in his hands. He took good care to make
it clear that, in face of money, all commodities, and hence all producers of
commodities, must prostrate themselves in adoration in the dust. He proved
practically that all other forms of wealth fade into mere semblance beside this
incarnation of wealth as such. Never again has the power of money shown itself
in such primitive brutality and violence as during these days of its youth.
After commodities had begun to sell for money, loans and advances in money came
also, and with them interest and usury. No legislation of later times so
utterly and ruthlessly delivers over the debtor to the usurious creditor as the
legislation of ancient Athens and ancient Rome–and in both cities it
arose spontaneously, as customary law, without any compulsion other than the
economic. 
Alongside wealth in commodities and slaves, alongside wealth in money, there
now appeared wealth in land also. The individuals’ rights of possession
in the pieces of land originally allotted to them by gens or tribe had now
become so established that the land was their hereditary property. Recently
they had striven above all to secure their freedom against the rights of the
gentile community over these lands, since these rights had become for them a
fetter. They got rid of the fetter – but soon afterwards of their new
landed property also. Full, free ownership of the land meant not only power,
uncurtailed and unlimited, to possess the land; it meant also the power to
alienate it. As long as the land belonged to the gens, no such power could
exist. But when the new landed proprietor shook off once and for all the
fetters laid upon him by the prior right of gens and tribe, he also cut the
ties which had hitherto inseparably attached him to the land. Money, invented
at the same time as private property in land, showed him what that meant. Land
could now become a commodity; it could be sold and pledged. Scarcely had
private property in land been introduced than the mortgage was already invented
(see Athens). As hetaerism and prostitution dog the heels of monogamy, so from
now onwards mortgage dogs the heels of private land ownership. You asked for
full, free alienable ownership of the land and now you have got it –
“tu l'as voulu, Georges Dandin.” [It's your
fault, Georges Dandin, from Molière’s play].

With trade expansion, money and usury, private property in land and
mortgages, the concentration and centralization of wealth in the hands of a
small class rapidly advanced, accompanied by an increasing impoverishment of
the masses and an increasing mass of impoverishment. The new aristocracy of
wealth, in so far as it had not been identical from the outset with the old
hereditary aristocracy, pushed it permanently into the background (in Athens,
in Rome, among the Germans). And simultaneous with this division of the
citizens into classes according to wealth there was an enormous increase,
particularly in Greece, in the number of slaves, [2] whose forced labor was the foundation on which the
superstructure of the entire society was reared. 
Let us now see what had become of the gentile constitution in this social
upheaval. Confronted by the new forces in whose growth it had had no share, the
gentile constitution was helpless. The necessary condition for its existence
was that the members of a gens or at least of a tribe were settled together in
the same territory and were its sole inhabitants. That had long ceased to be
the case. Every territory now had a heterogeneous population belonging to the
most varied gentes and tribes; everywhere slaves, protected persons and aliens
lived side by side with citizens. The settled conditions of life which had only
been achieved towards the end of the middle stage of barbarism were broken up
by the repeated shifting and changing of residence under the pressure of trade,
alteration of occupation and changes in the ownership of the land. The members
of the gentile bodies could no longer meet to look after their common concerns;
only unimportant matters, like the religious festivals, were still
perfunctorily attended to. In addition to the needs and interests with which
the gentile bodies were intended and fitted to deal, the upheaval in productive
relations and the resulting change in the social structure had given rise to
new needs and interests, which were not only alien to the old gentile order,
but ran directly counter to it at every point. The interests of the groups of
handicraftsmen which had arisen with the division of labor, the special needs
of the town as opposed to the country, called for new organs. But each of these
groups was composed of people of the most diverse gentes, phratries, and
tribes, and even included aliens. Such organs had therefore to be formed
outside the gentile constitution, alongside of it, and hence in opposition to
it. And this conflict of interests was at work within every gentile body,
appearing in its most extreme form in the association of rich and poor, usurers
and debtors, in the same gens and the same tribe. Further, there was the new
mass of population outside the gentile bodies, which, as in Rome, was able to
become a power in the land and at the same time was too numerous to be
gradually absorbed into the kinship groups and tribes. In relation to this
mass, the gentile bodies stood opposed as closed, privileged corporations; the
primitive natural democracy had changed into a malign aristocracy. Lastly, the
gentile constitution had grown out of a society which knew no internal
contradictions, and it was only adapted to such a society. It possessed no
means of coercion except public opinion. But here was a society which by all
its economic conditions of life had been forced to split itself into freemen
and slaves, into the exploiting rich and the exploited poor; a society which
not only could never again reconcile these contradictions, but was compelled
always to intensify them. Such a society could only exist either in the
continuous open fight of these classes against one another, or else under the
rule of a third power, which, apparently standing above the warring classes,
suppressed their open conflict and allowed the class struggle to be fought out
at most in the economic field, in so-called legal form. The gentile
constitution was finished. It had been shattered by the division of labor and
its result, the cleavage of society into classes. It was replaced by the state.



The three main forms in which the state arises on the ruins of the gentile
constitution have been examined in detail above. Athens provides the purest,
classic form; here the state springs directly and mainly out of the class
oppositions which develop within gentile society itself. In Rome, gentile
society becomes a closed aristocracy in the midst of the numerous plebs who
stand outside it, and have duties but no rights; the victory of plebs breaks up
the old constitution based on kinship, and erects on its ruins the state, into
which both the gentile aristocracy and the plebs are soon completely absorbed.
Lastly, in the case of the German conquerors of the Roman Empire, the state
springs directly out of the conquest of large foreign territories, which the
gentile constitution provides no means of governing. But because this conquest
involves neither a serious struggle with the original population nor a more
advanced division of labor; because conquerors and conquered are almost on the
same level of economic development, and the economic basis of society remains
therefore as before–for these reasons the gentile constitution is able to
survive for many centuries in the altered, territorial form of the mark
constitution and even for a time to rejuvenate itself in a feebler shape in the
later noble and patrician families, and indeed in peasant families, as in
Ditmarschen. [3] 
The state is therefore by no means a power imposed on society from without;
just as little is it “the reality of the moral idea,” “the
image and the reality of reason,” as Hegel maintains. Rather, it is a
product of society at a particular stage of development; it is the admission
that this society has involved itself in insoluble self-contradiction and is
cleft into irreconcilable antagonisms which it is powerless to exorcise. But in
order that these antagonisms, classes with conflicting economic interests,
shall not consume themselves and society in fruitless struggle, a power,
apparently standing above society, has become necessary to moderate the
conflict and keep it within the bounds of “order”; and this power,
arisen out of society, but placing itself above it and increasingly alienating
itself from it, is the state. 
In contrast to the old gentile organization, the state is distinguished
firstly by the grouping of its members on a territorial basis. The old gentile
bodies, formed and held together by ties of blood, had, as we have seen, become
inadequate largely because they presupposed that the gentile members were bound
to one particular locality, whereas this had long ago ceased to be the case.
The territory was still there, but the people had become mobile. The
territorial division was therefore taken as the starting point and the system
introduced by which citizens exercised their public rights and duties where
they took up residence, without regard to gens or tribe. This organization of
the citizens of the state according to domicile is common to all states. To us,
therefore, this organization seems natural; but, as we have seen, hard and
protracted struggles were necessary before it was able in Athens and Rome to
displace the old organization founded on kinship. 
The second distinguishing characteristic is the institution of a public
force which is no longer immediately identical with the people’s own
organization of themselves as an armed power. This special public force is
needed because a self-acting armed organization of the people has become
impossible since their cleavage into classes. The slaves also belong to the
population: as against the 365,000 slaves, the 90,000 Athenian citizens
constitute only a privileged class. The people’s army of the Athenian
democracy confronted the slaves as an aristocratic public force, and kept them
in check; but to keep the citizens in check as well, a police-force was needed,
as described above. This public force exists in every state; it consists not
merely of armed men, but also of material appendages, prisons and coercive
institutions of all kinds, of which gentile society knew nothing. It may be
very insignificant, practically negligible, in societies with still undeveloped
class antagonisms and living in remote areas, as at times and in places in the
United States of America. But it becomes stronger in proportion as the class
antagonisms within the state become sharper and as adjoining states grow larger
and more populous. It is enough to look at Europe today, where class struggle
and rivalry in conquest have brought the public power to a pitch that it
threatens to devour the whole of society and even the state itself. 
In order to maintain this public power, contributions from the state
citizens are necessary – taxes. These were completely unknown to gentile
society. We know more than enough about them today. With advancing
civilization, even taxes are not sufficient; the state draws drafts on the
future, contracts loans – state debts. Our old Europe can tell a tale about
these, too. 
In possession of the public power and the right of taxation, the officials
now present themselves as organs of society standing above society. The free,
willing respect accorded to the organs of the gentile constitution is not
enough for them, even if they could have it. Representatives of a power which
estranges them from society, they have to be given prestige by means of special
decrees, which invest them with a peculiar sanctity and inviolability. The
lowest police officer of the civilized state has more “authority”
than all the organs of gentile society put together; but the mightiest prince
and the greatest statesman or general of civilization might envy the humblest
of the gentile chiefs the unforced and unquestioned respect accorded to him.
For the one stands in the midst of society; the other is forced to pose as
something outside and above it. 
As the state arose from the need to keep class antagonisms in check, but
also arose in the thick of the fight between the classes, it is normally the
state of the most powerful, economically ruling class, which by its means
becomes also the politically ruling class, and so acquires new means of holding
down and exploiting the oppressed class. The ancient state was, above all, the
state of the slave-owners for holding down the slaves, just as the feudal state
was the organ of the nobility for holding down the peasant serfs and bondsmen,
and the modern representative state is the instrument for exploiting wage-labor
by capital. Exceptional periods, however, occur when the warring classes are so
nearly equal in forces that the state power, as apparent mediator, acquires for
the moment a certain independence in relation to both. This applies to the
absolute monarchy of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, which balances
the nobility and the bourgeoisie against one another; and to the Bonapartism of
the First and particularly of the Second French Empire, which played off the
proletariat against the bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie against the
proletariat. The latest achievement in this line, in which ruler and ruled look
equally comic, is the new German Empire of the Bismarckian nation; here the
capitalists and the workers are balanced against one another and both of them
fleeced for the benefit of the decayed Prussian cabbage Junkers. [German:Krautjunker, translated as ‘country
squire’, but with pejorative overtones.] 
Further, in most historical states the rights conceded to citizens are
graded on a property basis, whereby it is directly admitted that the state is
an organization for the protection of the possessing class against the
non-possessing class. This is already the case in the Athenian and Roman
property classes. Similarly in the medieval feudal state, in which the extent
of political power was determined by the extent of landownership. Similarly,
also, in the electoral qualifications in modern parliamentary states. This
political recognition of property differences is, however, by no means
essential. On the contrary, it marks a low stage in the development of the
state. The highest form of the state, the democratic republic, which in our
modern social conditions becomes more and more an unavoidable necessity and is
the form of state in which alone the last decisive battle between proletariat
and bourgeoisie can be fought out – the democratic republic no longer
officially recognizes differences of property. Wealth here employs its power
indirectly, but all the more surely. It does this in two ways: by plain
corruption of officials, of which America is the classic example, and by an
alliance between the government and the stock exchange, which is effected all
the more easily the higher the state debt mounts and the more the joint-stock
companies concentrate in their hands not only transport but also production
itself, and themselves have their own center in the stock exchange. In addition
to America, the latest French republic illustrates this strikingly, and honest
little Switzerland has also given a creditable performance in this field. But
that a democratic republic is not essential to this brotherly bond between
government and stock exchange is proved not only by England, but also by the
new German Empire, where it is difficult to say who scored most by the
introduction of universal suffrage, Bismarck or the Bleichroder bank. And
lastly the possessing class rules directly by means of universal suffrage. As
long as the oppressed class – in our case, therefore, the proletariat
– is not yet ripe for its self-liberation, so long will it, in its
majority, recognize the existing order of society as the only possible one and
remain politically the tail of the capitalist class, its extreme left wing. But
in the measure in which it matures towards its self-emancipation, in the same
measure it constitutes itself as its own party and votes for its own
representatives, not those of the capitalists. Universal suffrage is thus the
gauge of the maturity of the working class. It cannot and never will be
anything more in the modern state; but that is enough. On the day when the
thermometer of universal suffrage shows boiling-point among the workers, they
as well as the capitalists will know where they stand. 
The state, therefore, has not existed from all eternity. There have been
societies which have managed without it, which had no notion of the state or
state power. At a definite stage of economic development, which necessarily
involved the cleavage of society into classes, the state became a necessity
because of this cleavage. We are now rapidly approaching a stage in the
development of production at which the existence of these classes has not only
ceased to be a necessity, but becomes a positive hindrance to production. They
will fall as inevitably as they once arose. The state inevitably falls with
them. The society which organizes production anew on the basis of free and
equal association of the producers will put the whole state machinery where it
will then belong – into the museum of antiquities, next to the spinning
wheel and the bronze ax. 

Civilization is, therefore, according to the above analysis, the stage of
development in society at which the division of labor, the exchange between
individuals arising from it, and the commodity production which combines them
both, come to their full growth and revolutionizes the whole of previous
society. 
At all earlier stages of society production was essentially collective, just
as consumption proceeded by direct distribution of the products within larger
or smaller communistic communities. This collective production was very
limited; but inherent in it was the producers’ control over their process
of production and their product. They knew what became of their product: they
consumed it; it did not leave their hands. And so long as production remains on
this basis, it cannot grow above the heads of the producers nor raise up
incorporeal alien powers against them, as in civilization is always and
inevitably the case. 
But the division of labor slowly insinuates itself into this process of
production. It undermines the collectivity of production and appropriation,
elevates appropriation by individuals into the general rule, and thus creates
exchange between individuals – how it does so, we have examined above.
Gradually commodity production becomes the dominating form. 
With commodity production, production no longer for use by the producers but
for exchange, the products necessarily change hands. In exchanging his product,
the producer surrenders it; he no longer knows what becomes of it. When money,
and with money the merchant, steps in as intermediary between the producers,
the process of exchange becomes still more complicated, the final fate of the
products still more uncertain. The merchants are numerous, and none of them
knows what the other is doing. The commodities already pass not only from hand
to hand; they also pass from market to market; the producers have lost control
over the total production within their own spheres, and the merchants have not
gained it. Products and production become subjects of chance. 
But chance is only the one pole of a relation whose other pole is named
“necessity.” In the world of nature, where chance also seems to
rule, we have long since demonstrated in each separate field the inner
necessity and law asserting itself in this chance. But what is true of the
natural world is true also of society. The more a social activity, a series of
social processes, becomes too powerful for men's conscious control and grows
above their heads, and the more it appears a matter of pure chance, then all
the more surely within this chance the laws peculiar to it and inherent in it
assert themselves as if by natural necessity. Such laws also govern the chances
of commodity production and exchange. To the individuals producing or
exchanging, they appear as alien, at first often unrecognized, powers, whose
nature Must first be laboriously investigated and established. These economic
laws of commodity production are modified with the various stages of this form
of production; but in general the whole period of civilization is dominated by
them. And still to this day the product rules the producer; still to this day
the total production of society is regulated, not by a jointly devised plan,
but by blind laws, which manifest themselves with elemental violence, in the
final instance in the storms of the periodical trade crises. 
We saw above how at a fairly early stage in the development of production,
human labor-power obtains the capacity of producing a considerably greater
product than is required for the maintenance of the producers, and how this
stage of development was in the main the same as that in which division of
labor and exchange between individuals arise. It was not long then before the
great “truth” was discovered that man also can be a commodity; that
human energy can be exchanged and put to use by making a man into a slave.
Hardly had men begun to exchange than already they themselves were being
exchanged. The active became the passive, whether the men liked it or not. 
With slavery, which attained its fullest development under civilization,
came the first great cleavage of society into an exploiting and an exploited
class. This cleavage persisted during the whole civilized period. Slavery is
the first form of exploitation, the form peculiar to the ancient world; it is
succeeded by serfdom in the middle ages, and wage-labor in the more recent
period. These are the three great forms of servitude, characteristic of the
three great epochs of civilization; open, and in recent times disguised,
slavery always accompanies them. 

The stage of commodity production with which civilization begins is
distinguished economically by the introduction of (1) metal money, and with it
money capital, interest and usury; (2) merchants, as the class of
intermediaries between the producers; (3) private ownership of land, and the
mortgage system; (4) slave labor as the dominant form of production The form of
family corresponding to civilization and coming to definite supremacy with it
is monogamy, the domination of the man over the woman, and the single family as
the economic unit of society. The central link in civilized society is the
state, which in all typical periods is without exception the state of the
ruling class, and in all cases continues to be essentially a machine for
holding down the oppressed, exploited class. Also characteristic of
civilization is the establishment of a permanent opposition between town and
country as basis of the whole social division of labor; and, further, the
introduction of wills, whereby the owner of property is still able to dispose
over it even when he is dead. This institution, which is a direct affront to
the old gentile constitution, was unknown in Athens until the time of Solon; in
Rome it was introduced early, though we do not know the date; [4] among the Germans it was the clerics
who introduced it, in order that there might be nothing to stop the pious
German from leaving his legacy to the Church. 
With this as its basic constitution, civilization achieved things of which
gentile society was not even remotely capable. But it achieved them by setting
in motion the lowest instincts and passions in man and developing them at the
expense of all his other abilities. From its first day to this, sheer greed was
the driving spirit of civilization; wealth and again wealth and once more
wealth, wealth, not of society, but of the single scurvy individual – here
was its one and final aim. If at the same time the progressive development of
science and a repeated flowering of supreme art dropped into its lap, it was
only because without them modern wealth could not have completely realized its
achievements. 
Since civilization is founded on the exploitation of one class by another
class, its whole development proceeds in a constant contradiction. Every step
forward in production is at the same time a step backwards in the position of
the oppressed class, that is, of the great majority. Whatever benefits some
necessarily injures the others; every fresh emancipation of one class is
necessarily a new oppression for another class. The most striking proof of this
is provided by the introduction of machinery, the effects of which are now
known to the whole world. And if among the barbarians, as we saw, the
distinction between rights and duties could hardly be drawn, civilization makes
the difference and antagonism between them clear even to the dullest
intelligence by giving one class practically all the rights and the other class
practically all the duties. 

But that should not be: what is good for the ruling class must also be good
for the whole of society, with which the ruling-class identifies itself.
Therefore the more civilization advances, the more it is compelled to cover the
evils it necessarily creates with the cloak of love and charity, to palliate
them or to deny them – in short, to introduce a conventional hypocrisy
which was unknown to earlier forms of society and even to the first stages of
civilization, and which culminates in the pronouncement: the exploitation of
the oppressed class is carried on by the exploiting class simply and solely in
the interests of the exploited class itself; and if the exploited class cannot
see it and even grows rebellious, that is the basest ingratitude to its
benefactors, the exploiters. [5] 
And now, in conclusion, Morgan’s judgment of civilization: 
Since the advent of civilization, the outgrowth of property
has been so immense, its forms so diversified, its uses so expanding and its
management so intelligent in the interests of its owners, that it has become,
on the part of the people, an unmanageable power. The human mind stands
bewildered in the presence of its own creation. The time will come,
nevertheless, when human intelligence will rise to the mastery over property,
and define the relations of the state to the property it protects, as well as
the obligations and the limits of the rights of its owners. The interests of
society are paramount to individual interests, and the two must be brought into
just and harmonious relations. A mere property career is not the final destiny
of mankind, if progress is to be the law of the future as it has been of the
past. The time which has passed away since civilization began is but a fragment
of the past duration of man’s existence; and but a fragment of the ages
yet to come. The dissolution of society bids fair to become the termination of
a career of which property is the end and aim; because such a career contains
the elements of self-destruction. Democracy in government, brotherhood in
society, equality in rights and privileges, and universal education, foreshadow
the next higher plane of society to which experience, intelligence and
knowledge are steadily tending. It will be a revival, in a higher form, of the
liberty, equality and fraternity of the ancient gentes. 
[Morgan, op. cit., p. 562.–Ed.]
 



Footnotes 

[1] Especially on the
north-west coast of America – see Bancroft. Among the Haidahs on Queen
Charlotte Islands there are households with as many as 700 persons under one
roof. Among the Nootkas whole tribes used to live under one roof. 

[2] For the number of slaves
in Athens, see above, page 107. In Corinth, at the height of its power, the
number of slaves was 460,000; in Ægina, 470,000. In both cases, ten times the
population of free citizens. 

[3] The first historian who
had at any rate an approximate conception of the nature of the gens was
Niebuhr, and for this he had to thank his acquaintance with the Ditmarechen
families, though he was overhasty in transferring their characteristics to the
gens. 

[4] The second part of
Lassalle’s System der erworbenen Rechte (System of Acquired
Rights) turns chiefly on the proposition that the Roman testament is as
old as Rome itself, that there was never in Roman history “a time when there
were no testaments“; that, on the contrary, the testament originated in
pre-Roman times out of the cult of the dead. Lassalle, as a faithful Hegelian
of the old school, derives the provisions of Roman law not from the social
relations of the Romans, but from the “speculative concept” of the human will,
and so arrives at this totally unhistorical conclusion. This is not to be
wondered at in a book which comes to the conclusion, on the ground of the same
speculative concept, that the transfer of property was a purely secondary
matter in Roman inheritance. Lassalle not only believes in the illusions of the
Roman jurists, particularly of the earlier periods; he outdoes them. 

[5] I originally intended to
place the brilliant criticism of civilization which is found scattered through
the work of Charles Fourier beside that of Morgan and my own. Unfortunately, I
have not the time. I will only observe that Fourier already regards monogamy
and private property in land as the chief characteristics of civilization, and
that he calls civilization a war of the rich against the poor. We also find
already in his work the profound recognition that in all societies which are
imperfect and split into antagonisms single families (les families
incohérentes) are the economic units. 



Chapter Eight | Appendix 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## Appendix: A Recently Discovered Case of Group Marriage









Origins of the Family-- Appendix




Frederick Engels

Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

Appendix. A Recently Discovered Case of Group Marriage



                                  1892
                          From Die Neue Zeit
                       Vol. XI, No. I, pp. 373-75

Since it has recently become fashionable among certain rationalistic
ethnographers to deny the existence of group marriage, the following
report is of interest; I translate it from the Russkiye Vyedomosti,
Moscow, October 14, 1892 (Old Style).  Not only group marriage, i.e.,
the right of mutual sexual intercourse between a number of men and a
number of women, is expressly affirmed to be in full force, but a form
of group marriage which closely follows the punaluan marriage of the
Hawaiians, the most developed and classic phase of group marriage. 
While the typical punaluan family consists of a number of brothers (own
and collateral), who are married to a number of own and collateral
sisters, we here find on the island of Sakhalin that a man is married
to all the wives of his brothers and to all the sisters of his wife,
which means, seen from the woman's side, that his wife may freely
practice sexual intercourse with the brothers of her husband and the
husbands of her sisters.  It therefore differs from the typical form of
punaluan marriage only in the fact that the brothers of the husband and
the husbands of the sisters are not necessarily the same persons.


It should further be observed that this report again confirms what I
said in The Origin of the Family, 4th edition, pp. 28-29: that group
marriage does not look at all like what our brother-obsessed philistine
imagines; that the partners in group marriage do not lead in public the
same kind of lascivious life as he practices in secret, but that this
form of marriage, at least in the instances still known to occur today,
differs in practice from a loose pairing marriage or from polygamy only
in the fact that custom permits sexual intercourse in a number of cases
where otherwise it would be severely punished.  That the actual
exercise of these rights is gradually dying out only proves that this
form of marriage is itself destined to die out, which is further
confirmed by its infrequency.


The whole description, moreover, is interesting because it again
demonstrates the similarity, even the identity in their main
characteristics, of the social institutions of primitive peoples at
approximately the same stage of development.  Most of what the report
states about these Mongoloids on the island of Sakhalin also holds for
the Dravidian tribes of India, the South Sea Islanders at the time of
their discovery, and the American Indians.  The report runs:


     "At the session of October 10 (Old Style; October 22, New Style)
     of the Anthropological Section of the Society of the Friends of
     Natural Science, N. A. Yanchuk read an interesting communication
     from Mr. Sternberg on the Gilyaks, a little-studied tribe on the
     island of Sakhalin, who are at the cultural level of savagery. 
     The Gilyaks are acquainted neither with agriculture nor with
     pottery; they procure their food chiefly by hunting and fishing;
     they warm water in wooden vessels by throwing in heated stones,
     etc.  Of particular interest are their institutions relating to
     the family and to the gens. The Gilyak addresses as father, not
     only his own natural father, but also all the brothers of his
     father; all the wives of these brothers, as well as all the
     sisters of his mother, he addresses as his mothers; the children
     of all these 'fathers' and 'mothers' he addresses as his brothers
     and sisters. This system of address also exists, as is well known,
     among the Iroquois and other Indian tribes of North America, as
     also among some tribes of India.  But whereas in these cases it
     has long since ceased to correspond to the actual conditions,
     among the Gilyaks it serves to designate a state still valid
     today.  To this day every Gilyak has the rights of a husband in
     regard to the wives of his brothers and to the sisters of his
     wife; at any rate, the exercise of these rights is not regarded as
     impermissible.  These survivals of group marriage on the basis of
     the gens are reminiscent of the well-known punaluan marriage,
     which still existed in the Sandwich Islands in the first half of
     this century.  Family and gens relations of this type form the
     basis of the whole gentile order and social constitution of the
     Gilyaks.


     "The gens of a Gilyak consists of all-nearer and more remote, real
     and nominal-brothers of his father, of their fathers and mothers
     of the children of his brothers, and of his own children.


One can readily understand that a gens so constituted may comprise an
enormous number of people.  Life within the gens proceeds according to
the following principles.  Marriage within the gens is unconditionally
prohibited.  When a Gilyak dies, his wife passes by decision of the
gens to one of his brothers, own or nominal.  The gens provides for the
maintenance of all of its members who are unable to work.  'We have no
poor,' said a Gilyak to the writer.  'Whoever is in need, is fed by the
khal [gens].' The members of the gens are further united by common
sacrificial ceremonies and festivals, a common burial place, etc.


"The gens guarantees the life and security of its members against
attacks by non-gentiles; the means of repression used is blood-revenge,
though under Russian rule the practice has very much declined.  Women
are completely excepted from gentile blood-revenge.  In some very rare
cases the gens adopts members of other gentes.  It is a general rule
that the property of a deceased member may not pass out of the gens; in
this respect the famous provision of the Twelve Tables holds literally
among the Gilyaks: si suos heredes non habet, gentiles familiam habento
– if he has no heirs of his own, the members of the gens shall
inherit.  No important event takes place in the life of a Gilyak
without participation by the gens.  Not very long ago, about one or two
generations, the oldest gentile member was the head of the community,
the starosta of the gens; today the functions of the chief elder of the
gens are restricted almost solely to presiding over religious
ceremonies.  The gentes are often dispersed among widely distant
places, but even when separated the members of a gens still remember
one another and continue to give one another hospitality, and to
provide mutual assistance and protection, etc.  Except under the most
extreme necessity, the Gilyak never leaves the fellow-members of his
gens or the graves of his gens.  Gentile society has impressed a very
definite stamp on the whole mental life of the Gilyaks, on their
character, their customs and institutions.  The habit of common
discussion and decision on all matters, the necessity of continually
taking an active part in all questions affecting the members of the
gens, the solidarity of blood-revenge, the fact of being compelled and
accustomed to live together with ten or more like himself in great
tents (yurtas), and to be, in short, always with other people-all this
has given the Gilyak a sociable and open character.  The Gilyak is
extraordinarily hospitable; he loves to entertain guests and to come
himself as a guest.  This admirable habit of hospitality is especially
prominent in times of distress.  In a bad year, when a Gilyak has
nothing for himself or for his dogs to eat, he does not stretch out his
hand for alms, but confidently seeks hospitality, and is fed, often for
a considerable time.


     "Among the Gilyaks of Sakhalin crimes from motives of personal
     gain practically never occur.  The Gilyak keeps his valuables in a
     storehouse, which is never locked.  He has such a keen sense of
     shame that if he is convicted of a disgraceful act, he immediately
     goes into the forest and hangs himself.  Murder is very rare, and
     is hardly ever committed except in anger, never from intentions of
     gain.  In his dealings with other people, the Gilyak shows himself
     honest, reliable, and conscientious.


     "Despite their long subjection to the Manchurians, now become
     Chinese, and despite the corrupting influence of the settlement of
     the Amur district, the Gilyaks still preserve in their moral
     character many of the virtues of a primitive tribe.  But the fate
     awaiting their social order cannot be averted.  One or two more
     generations, and the Gilyaks on the mainland will have been
     completely Russianized, and together with the benefits of culture
     they will also acquire its defects.  The Gilyaks on the island of
     Sakhalin, being more or less remote from the centers of Russian
     settlement, have some prospect of preserving their way of life
     unspoiled rather longer.  But among them, too, the influence of
     their Russian neighbors is beginning to make itself felt.  The
     Gilyaks come into the villages to trade, they go to Nikolaievsk to
     look for work; and every Gilyak who returns from such work to his
     home brings with him the same atmosphere which the Russian worker
     takes back from the town into his village.  And at the same time,
     working in the town, with its chances and changes of fortune,
     destroys more and more that primitive equality which is such a
     prominent feature of the artlessly simple economic life of these
     peoples.


     "Mr.  Sternberg's article, which also contains information about
     their religious views and customs and their legal institutions,
     will appear unabridged in the Etnografitcheskoye Obozrenie
     (Ethnographical Review).





Origins of the Family

Marx/Engels Works Index




==========

## Foreword







Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy  —  Foreword




Frederick Engels
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy

Foreword

 
In the preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, published in Berlin, 1859, Karl Marx relates how the two of us in Brussels in the year 1845 set about: “to work out in common the opposition of our view” — the materialist conception of history which was elaborated mainly by Marx — to the ideological view of German philosophy, in fact, to settle accounts with our erstwhile philosophical conscience. The resolve was carried out in the form of a criticism of post-Hegelian philosophy. The manuscript, two large octavo volumes, had long reached its place of publication in Westphalia when we received the news that altered circumstances did not allow of its being printed. We abandoned the manuscript to the gnawing criticism of the mice all the more willingly as we had achieved our main purpose — self-clarification!
 Since then more than 40 years have elapsed and Marx died without either of us having had an opportunity of returning to the subject. We have expressed ourselves in various places regarding our relation to Hegel, but nowhere in a comprehensive, connected account. To Feuerbach, who after all in many respects forms an intermediate link between Hegelian philosophy and our conception, we never returned.
 In the meantime, the Marxist world outlook has found representatives far beyond the boundaries of Germany and Europe and in all the literary languages of the world. On the other hand, classical German philosophy is experiencing a kind of rebirth abroad, especially in England and Scandinavia, and even in Germany itself people appear to be getting tired of the pauper’s broth of eclecticism which is ladled out in the universities there under the name of philosophy.
 In these circumstances, a short, coherent account of our relation to the Hegelian philosophy, of how we proceeded, as well as of how we separated, from it, appeared to me to be required more and more. Equally, a full acknowledgement of the influence which Feuerbach, more than any other post-Hegelian philosopher, had upon us during our period of storm and stress, appeared to me to be an undischarged debt of honor. I therefore willingly seized the opportunity when the editors of Neue Zeit asked me for a critical review of Starcke’s book on Feuerbach. My contribution was published in that journal in the fourth and fifth numbers of 1886 and appears here in revised form as a separate publication.
Before sending these lines to press, I have once again ferreted out and looked over the old manuscript of 1845–46 [The German Ideology].
The section dealing with Feuerbach is not completed. The finished portion consists of an exposition of the materialist conception of history which proves only how incomplete our knowledge of economic history still was at that time. It contains no criticism of Feuerbach’s doctrine itself; for the present purposes, therefore, it was unusable. On the other hand, in an old notebook of Marx’s I have found the 11 Theses on Feuerbach, printed here as an appendix.
These are notes hurriedly scribbled down for later elaboration, absolutely not intended for publication, but invaluable as the first document in which is deposited the brilliant germ of the new world outlook.
Frederick Engels
London
February 21, 1888
 
Part 1: Hegel
 

Table of Contents: Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy


==========

## Part 1: Hegel







Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy - Part 1: Hegel



Frederick Engels
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy

Part 1: Hegel

 

The volume before us (1) carries us back to a period which, although in time no more than a generation behind us, has become as foreign to the present generation in Germany as if it were already a hundred years old. Yet it was the period of Germany’s preparation for the Revolution of 1848; and all that has happened since then in our country has been merely a continuation of 1848, merely the execution of the last will and testament of the revolution.
Just as in France in the 18th century, so in Germany in the 19th, a philosophical revolution ushered in the political collapse. But how different the two looked! The French were in open combat against all official science, against the church and often also against the state; their writings were printed across the frontier, in Holland or England, while they themselves were often in jeopardy of imprisonment in the Bastille. On the other hand, the Germans were professors, state-appointed instructors of youth; their writings were recognized textbooks, and the termination system of the whole development — the Hegelian system — was even raised, as it were, to the rank of a royal Prussian philosophy of state! Was it possible that a revolution could hide behind these professors, behind their obscure, pedantic phrases, their ponderous, wearisome sentences? Were not precisely these people who were then regarded as the representatives of the revolution, the liberals, the bitterest opponents of this brain-confusing philosophy? But what neither the government nor the liberals saw was seen at least by one man as early as 1833, and this man was indeed none other than Heinrich Heine.[A]
Let us take an example. No philosophical proposition has earned more gratitude from narrow-minded governments and wrath from equally narrow-minded liberals than Hegel’s famous statement: “All that is real is rational; and all that is rational is real.” That was tangibly a sanctification of things that be, a philosophical benediction bestowed upon despotism, police government, Star Chamber proceedings and censorship. That is how Frederick William III and how his subjects understood it. But according to Hegel certainly not everything that exists is also real, without further qualification. For Hegel the attribute of reality belongs only to that which at the same time is necessary: “In the course of its development reality proves to be necessity.” A particular governmental measure — Hegel himself cites the example of “a certain tax regulation” — is therefore for him by no means real without qualification. That which is necessary, however, proves itself in the last resort to be also rational; and, applied to the Prussian state of that time, the Hegelian proposition, therefore, merely means: this state is rational, corresponds to reason, insofar as it is necessary; and if it nevertheless appears to us to be evil, but still, in spite of its evil character, continues to exist, then the evil character of the government is justified and explained by the corresponding evil character of its subjects. The Prussians of that day had the government that they deserved.
Now, according to Hegel, reality is, however, in no way an attribute predictable of any given state of affairs, social or political, in all circumstances and at all times. On the contrary. The Roman Republic was real, but so was the Roman Empire, which superseded it. In 1789, the French monarchy had become so unreal, that is to say, so robbed of all necessity, so irrational, that it had to be destroyed by the Great Revolution, of which Hegel always speaks with the greatest enthusiasm. In this case, therefore, the monarchy was the unreal and the revolution the real. And so, in the course of development, all that was previously real becomes unreal, loses it necessity, its right of existence, its rationality. And in the place of moribund reality comes a new, viable reality — peacefully if the old has enough intelligence to go to its death without a struggle; forcibly if it resists this necessity. Thus the Hegelian proposition turns into its opposite through Hegelian dialectics itself: All that is real in the sphere of human history, becomes irrational in the process of time, is therefore irrational by its very destination, is tainted beforehand with irrationality, and everything which is rational in the minds of men is destined to become real, however much it may contradict existing apparent reality. In accordance with all the rules of the Hegelian method of thought, the proposition of the rationality of everything which is real resolves itself into the other proposition: All that exists deserves to perish.
But precisely therein lay the true significance and the revolutionary character of the Hegelian philosophy (to which, as the close of the whole movement since Kant, we must here confine ourselves), that it once and for all dealt the death blow to the finality of all product of human thought and action. Truth, the cognition of which is the business of philosophy, was in the hands of Hegel no longer an aggregate of finished dogmatic statements, which, once discovered, had merely to be learned by heart. Truth lay now in the process of cognition itself, in the long historical development of science, which mounts from lower to ever higher levels of knowledge without ever reaching, by discovering so-called absolute truth, a point at which it can proceed no further, where it would have nothing more to do than to fold its hands and gaze with wonder at the absolute truth to which it had attained. And what holds good for the realm of philosophical knowledge holds good also for that of every other kind of knowledge and also for practical action. Just as knowledge is unable to reach a complete conclusion in a perfect, ideal condition of humanity, so is history unable to do so; a perfect society, a perfect “state”, are things which can only exist in imagination. On the contrary, all successive historical systems are only transitory stages in the endless course of development of human society from the lower to the higher. Each stage is necessary, and therefore justified for the time and conditions to which it owes its origin. But in the face of new, higher conditions which gradually develop in its own womb, it loses vitality and justification. It must give way to a higher stage which will also in its turn decay and perish. Just as the bourgeoisie by large-scale industry, competition, and the world market dissolves in practice all stable time-honored institutions, so this dialectical philosophy dissolves all conceptions of final, absolute truth and of absolute states of humanity corresponding to it. For it [dialectical philosophy], nothing is final, absolute, sacred. It reveals the transitory character of everything and in everything; nothing can endure before it except the uninterrupted process of becoming and of passing away, of endless ascendancy from the lower to the higher. And dialectical philosophy itself is nothing more than the mere reflection of this process in the thinking brain. It has, of course, also a conservative side; it recognizes that definite stages of knowledge and society are justified for their time and circumstances; but only so far. The conservatism of this mode of outlook is relative; its revolutionary character is absolute — the only absolute dialectical philosophy admits.
It is not necessary, here, to go into the question of whether this mode of outlook is thoroughly in accord with the present state of natural science, which predicts a possible end even for the Earth, and for its habitability a fairly certain one; which therefore recognizes that for the history of mankind, too, there is not only an ascending but also a descending branch. At any rate, we still find ourselves a considerable distance from the turning-point at which the historical course of society becomes one of descent, and we cannot expect Hegelian philosophy to be concerned with a subject which natural science, in its time, had not at all placed upon the agenda as yet.
But what must, in fact, be said here is this: that in Hegel the views developed above are not so sharply delineated. They are a necessary conclusion from his method, but one which he himself never drew with such explicitness. And this, indeed, for the simple reason that he was compelled to make a system and, in accordance with traditional requirements, a system of philosophy must conclude with some sort of absolute truth. Therefore, however much Hegel, especially in his Logic, emphasized that this eternal truth is nothing but the logical, or, the historical, process itself, he nevertheless finds himself compelled to supply this process with an end, just because he has to bring his system to a termination at some point or other. In his Logic, he can make this end a beginning again, since here the point of the conclusion, the absolute idea — which is only absolute insofar as he has absolutely nothing to say about it — “alienates”, that is, transforms, itself into nature and comes to itself again later in the mind, that is, in thought and in history. But at the end of the whole philosophy, a similar return to the beginning is possible only in one way. Namely, by conceiving of the end of history as follows: mankind arrives at the cognition of the self-same absolute idea, and declares that this cognition of the absolute idea is reached in Hegelian philosophy. In this way, however, the whole dogmatic content of the Hegelian system is declared to be absolute truth, in contradiction to his dialectical method, which dissolves all dogmatism. Thus the revolutionary side is smothered beneath the overgrowth of the conservative side. And what applies to philosophical cognition applies also to historical practice. Mankind, which, in the person of Hegel, has reached the point of working out the absolute idea, must also in practice have gotten so far that it can carry out this absolute idea in reality. Hence the practical political demands of the absolute idea on contemporaries may not be stretched too far. And so we find at the conclusion of the Philosophy of Right that the absolute idea is to be realized in that monarchy based on social estates which Frederick William III so persistently but vainly promised to his subjects, that is, in a limited, moderate, indirect rule of the possessing classes suited to the petty-bourgeois German conditions of that time; and, moreover, the necessity of the nobility is demonstrated to us in a speculative fashion.
The inner necessities of the system are, therefore, of themselves sufficient to explain why a thoroughly revolutionary method of thinking produced an extremely tame political conclusion. As a matter of fact, the specific form of this conclusion springs from this, that Hegel was a German, and like his contemporary Goethe had a bit of the philistine’s queue dangling behind. Each of them was an Olympian Zeus in his own sphere, yet neither of them ever quite freed himself from German philistinism.
But all this did not prevent the Hegelian system from covering an incomparably greater domain than any earlier system, nor from developing in this domain a wealth of thought, which is astounding even today. The phenomenology of mind (which one may call a parallel of the embryology and palaeontology of the mind, a development of individual consciousness through its different stages, set in the form of an abbreviated reproduction of the stages through which the consciousness of man has passed in the course of history), logic, natural philosophy, philosophy of mind, and the latter worked out in its separate, historical subdivisions: philosophy of history, of right, of religion, history of philosophy, aesthetics, etc. — in all these different historical fields Hegel labored to discover and demonstrate the pervading thread of development. And as he was not only a creative genius but also a man of encyclopaedic erudition, he played an epoch-making role in every sphere. It is self-evident that owing to the needs of the “system” he very often had to resort to those forced constructions about which his pigmy opponents make such a terrible fuss even today. But these constructions are only the frame and scaffolding of his work. If one does not loiter here needlessly, but presses on farther into the immense building, one finds innumerable treasures which today still possess undiminshed value. With all philosophers it is precisely the “system” which is perishable; and for the simple reason that it springs from an imperishable desire of the human mind — the desire to overcome all contradictions. But if all contradictions are once and for all disposed of, we shall have arrived at so-called absolute truth — world history will be at an end. And yet it has to continue, although there is nothing left for it to do — hence, a new, insoluble contradiction. As soon as we have once realized — and in the long run no one has helped us to realize it more than Hegel himself — that the task of philosophy thus stated means nothing but the task that a single philosopher should accomplish that which can only be accomplished by the entire human race in its progressive development — as soon as we realize that, there is an end to all philosophy in the hitherto accepted sense of the word. One leaves alone “absolute truth”, which is unattainable along this path or by any single individual; instead, one pursues attainable relative truths along the path of the positive sciences, and the summation of their results by means of dialectical thinking. At any rate, with Hegel philosophy comes to an end; on the one hand, because in his system he summed up its whole development in the most splendid fashion; and on the other hand, because, even though unconsciously, he showed us the way out of the labyrinth of systems to real positive knowledge of the world.
One can imagine what a tremendous effect this Hegelian system must have produced in the philosophy-tinged atmosphere of Germany. It was a triumphant procession which lasted for decades and which by no means came to a standstill on the death of Hegel. On the contrary, it was precisely from 1830 to 1840 that “Hegelianism” reigned most exclusively, and to a greater or lesser extent infected even its opponents. It was precisely in this period that Hegelian views, consciously or unconsciously, most extensively penetrated the most diversified sciences and leavened even popular literature and the daily press, from which the average “educated consciousness” derives its mental pabulum. But this victory along the whole front was only the prelude to an internal struggle.
As we have seen, the doctrine of Hegel, taken as a whole, left plenty of room for giving shelter to the most diverse practical party views. And in the theoretical Germany of that time, two things above all were practical: religion and politics. Whoever placed the chief emphasis on the Hegelian system could be fairly conservative in both spheres; whoever regarded the dialectical method as the main thing could belong to the most extreme opposition, both in politics and religion. Hegel himself, despite the fairly frequent outbursts of revolutionary wrath in his works, seemed on the whole to be more inclined to the conservative side. Indeed, his system had cost him much more “hard mental plugging” than his method. Towards the end of the thirties, the cleavage in the school became more and more apparent. The Left wing, the so-called Young Hegelians, in their fight with the pietist orthodox and the feudal reactionaries, abandoned bit by bit that philosophical-genteel reserve in regard to the burning questions of the day which up to that time had secured state toleration and even protection for their teachings. And when in 1840, orthodox pietism and absolutist feudal reaction ascended the throne with Frederick William IV, open partisanship became unavoidable. The fight was still carried on with philosophical weapons, but no longer for abstract philosophical aims. It turned directly on the destruction of traditional religion and of the existing state. And while in the Deutsche Jahrbucher [B]the practical ends were still predominantly put forward in philosophical disguise, in the Rheinische Zeitung of 1842 the Young Hegelian school revealed itself directly as the philosophy of the aspiring radical bourgeoisie and used the meagre cloak of philosophy only to deceive the censorship.
At that time, however, politics was a very thorny field, and hence the main fight came to be directed against religion; this fight, particularly since 1840, was indirectly also political. Strauss’ Life of Jesus, published in 1835, had provided the first impulse. The theory therein developed of the formation of the gospel myths was combated later by Bruno Bauer with proof that a whole series of evangelic stories had been fabricated by the authors themselves. The controversy between these two was carried out in the philosophical disguise of a battle between “self-consciousness” and “substance”. The question whether the miracle stories of the gospels came into being through unconscious-traditional myth-creation within the bosom of the community or whether they were fabricated by the evangelists themselves was magnified into the question whether, in world history, “substance” or “self-consciousness” was the decisive operative force. Finally came Stirner, the prophet of contemporary anarchism — Bakunin has taken a great deal from him — and capped the sovereign “self-consciousness” by his sovereign “ego”[C].
We will not go further into this side of the decomposition process of the Hegelian school. More important for us is the following: the main body of the most determined Young Hegelians was, by the practical necessities of its fight against positive religion, driven back to Anglo-French materialism. This brought them into conflict with the system of their school. While materialism conceives nature as the sole reality, nature in the Hegelian system represents merely the “alienation” of the absolute idea, so to say, a degradation of the idea. At all events, thinking and its thought-product, the idea, is here the primary, nature the derivative, which only exists at all by the condescension of the idea. And in this contradiction they floundered as well or as ill as they could.
Then came Feuerbach’s Essence of Christianity[D]. With one blow, it pulverized the contradiction, in that without circumlocutions it placed materialism on the throne again. Nature exists independently of all philosophy. It is the foundation upon which we human beings, ourselves products of nature, have grown up. Nothing exists outside nature and man, and the higher beings our religious fantasies have created are only the fantastic reflection of our own essence. The spell was broken; the “system” was exploded and cast aside, and the contradiction, shown to exist only in our imagination, was dissolved. One must himself have experienced the liberating effect of this book to get an idea of it. Enthusiasm was general; we all became at once Feuerbachians. How enthusiastically Marx greeted the new conception and how much — in spite of all critical reservations — he was influenced by it, one may read in the The Holy Family[E].
Even the shortcomings of the book contributed to its immediate effect. Its literary, sometimes even high-flown, style secured for it a large public and was at any rate refreshing after long years of abstract and abstruse Hegelianizing. The same is true of its extravagant deification of love, which, coming after the now intolerable sovereign rule of “pure reason”, had its excuse, if not justification. But what we must not forget is that it was precisely these two weaknesses of Feuerbach that “true Socialism”, which had been spreading like a plague in educated Germany since 1844, took as its starting-point, putting literary phrases in the place of scientific knowledge, the liberation of mankind by means of “love” in place of the emancipation of the proletariat through the economic transformation of production — in short, losing itself in the nauseous fine writing and ecstacies of love typified by Herr Karl Grun.
Another thing we must not forget is this: the Hegelian school disintegrated, but Hegelian philosophy was not overcome through criticism; Strauss and Bauer each took one of its sides and set it polemically against the other. Feuerbach smashed the system and simply discarded it. But a philosophy is not disposed of by the mere assertion that it is false. And so powerful a work as Hegelian philosophy, which had exercised so enormous an influence on the intellectual development of the nation, could not be disposed of by simply being ignored. It had to be “sublated” in its own sense, that is, in the sense that while its form had to be annihilatedhrough criticism, the new content which had been won through it had to be saved. How this was brought about we shall see below.
But in the meantime, the Revolution of 1848 thrust the whole of philosophy aside as unceremoniously as Feuerbach had thrust aside Hegel. And in the process, Feuerbach himself was also pushed into the background.
 
Part 2: Materialism
 

Notes
1. Ludwig Feuerbach, by K.N. Starcke, Ph.D., Stuttgart, Ferd. Enke. 1885.
A. Engels had in mind Heine’s remarks on the “German philosophical revolution” contained in the latter’s sketches Zur Geschichte der Religion und Philosophie in Deutschland (On the History of Religion and Philosophy in Germany), written in 1833.
B. The Deutsche Jahrbücher fur Wissenschaft und Kunst (German Annuals of Science and Art): Organ of the Young Hegelians edited by A. Ruge and T. Echtermeyer, and published in Leipzig from 1841 to 1843.
C. Engels refers to Max Stirner’s (pseudonym for Kaspar Schmidt) Der Einzige und sein Eigentum (The Ego and His Own), which appeared in 1845.
D. Feuerbach’s Das Wesen des Christentums (The Essence of Christianity) appeared in Leipzig in 1841.
E. The full title of this book by Marx and Engels is: Die Heilige Familie oder Kritik der kritischen Kritik.  Gegen Bruno Bauer und Konsorten (The Holy Family, or a Criticism of Critical Criticism. Against Bruno Bauer and Co.). It was originally published in Frankfort on the Main in 1845.

Table of Contents: Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy



==========

## Part 2: Materialism







Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy - Part 2: Materialism



Frederick Engels
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy

Part 2: Materialism

 

The great basic question of all philosophy, especially of more recent philosophy, is that concerning the relation of thinking and being. From the very early times when men, still completely ignorant of the structure of their own bodies, under the stimulus of dream apparitions (1) came to believe that their thinking and sensation were not activities of their bodies, but of a distinct soul which inhabits the body and leaves it at death — from this time men have been driven to reflect about the relation between this soul and the outside world. If, upon death, it took leave of the body and lived on, there was no occassion to invent yet another distinct death for it. Thus arose the idea of immortality, which at that stage of development appeared not at all as a consolation but as a fate against which it was no use fighting, and often enough, as among the Greeks, as a positive misfortune. The quandry arising from the common universal ignorance of what to do with this soul, once its existence had been accepted, after the death of the body, and not religious desire for consolation, led in a general way to the tedious notion of personal immortality. In an exactly similar manner, the first gods arose through the personification of natural forces. And these gods in the further development of religions assumed more and more extramundane form, until finally by a process of abstraction, I might almost say of distillation, occurring naturally in the course of man’s intellectual development, out of the many more or less limited and mutually limiting gods there arose in the minds of men the idea of the one exclusive God of the monotheistic religions.
Thus the question of the relation of thinking to being, the relation of the spirit to nature — the paramount question of the whole of philosophy — has, no less than all religion, its roots in the narrow-minded and ignorant notions of savagery. But this question could for the first time be put forward in its whole acuteness, could achieve its full significance, only after humanity in Europe had awakened from the long hibernation of the Christian Middle Ages. The question of the position of thinking in relation to being, a question which, by the way, had played a great part also in the scholasticism of the Middle Ages, the question: which is primary, spirit or nature — that question, in relation to the church, was sharpened into this: Did God create the world or has the world been in existence eternally?
The answers which the philosophers gave to this question split them into two great camps. Those who asserted the primacy of spirit to nature and, therefore, in the last instance, assumed world creation in some form or other — and among the philosophers, Hegel, for example, this creation often becomes still more intricate and impossible than in Christianity — comprised the camp of idealism. The others, who regarded nature as primary, belong to the various schools of materialism.
These two expressions, idealism and materialism, originally signify nothing else but this; and here too they are not used in any other sense. What confusion arises when some other meaning is put to them will be seen below.
But the question of the relation of thinking and being had yet another side: in what relation do our thoughts about the world surrounding us stand to this world itself? Is our thinking capable of the cognition of the real world? Are we able in our ideas and notions of the real world to produce a correct reflection of reality? In philosophical language this question is called the question of identity of thinking and being, and the overwhelming majority of philosophers give an affirmative answer to this question. With Hegel, for example, its affirmation is self-evident; for what we cognize in the real world is precisely its thought-content — that which makes the world a gradual realization of the absolute idea, which absolute idea has existed somewhere from eternity, independent of the world and before the world. But it is manifest without further proof that thought can know a content which is from the outset a thought-content. It is equally manifest that what is to be proved here is already tacitly contained in the premises. But that in no way prevents Hegel from drawing the further conclusion from his proof of the identity of thinking and being that his philosophy, because it is correct for his thinking, is therefore the only correct one, and that the identity of thinking and being must prove its validity by mankind immediately translating his philosophy from theory into practice and transforming the whole world according to Hegelian principles. This is an illusion which he shares with well-nigh all philosophers.
In addition, there is yet a set of different philosophers — those who question the possibility of any cognition, or at least of an exhaustive cognition, of the world. To them, among the more modern ones, belong Hume and Kant, and they played a very important role in philosophical development. What is decisive in the refutation of this view has already been said by Hegel, in so far as this was possible from an idealist standpoint. The materialistic additions made by Feuerbach are more ingenious than profound. The most telling refutation of this as of all other philosophical crotchets is practice — namely, experiment and industry. If we are able to prove the correctness of our conception of a natural process by making it ourselves, bringing it into being out of its conditions and making it serve our own purposes into the bargain, then there is an end to the Kantian ungraspable “thing-in-itself”. The chemical substances produced in the bodies of plants and animals remained just such “things-in-themselves” until organic chemistry began to produce them one after another, whereupon the “thing-in-itself” became a thing for us — as, for instance, alizarin, the coloring matter of the madder, which we no longer trouble to grow in the madder roots in the field, but produce much more cheaply and simply from coal tar. For 300 years, the Copernican solar system was a hypothesis with 100, 1,000, 10,000 to 1 chances in its favor, but still always a hypothesis. But then Leverrier, by means of the data provided by this system, not only deduced the necessity of the existence of an unknown planet, but also calculated the position in the heavens which this planet must necessarily occupy, and when [Johann] Galle really found this planet [Neptune, discovered 1846, at Berlin Observatory], the Copernican system was proved. If, nevertheless, the neo-Kantians are attempting to resurrect the Kantian conception in Germany, and the agnostics that of Hume in England (where in fact it never became extinct), this is, in view of their theoretical and practical refutation accomplished long ago, scientifically a regression and practically merely a shamefaced way of surreptitiously accepting materialism, while denying it before the world.
But during this long period from Descartes to Hegel and from Hobbes to Feuerbach, these philosophers were by no means impelled, as they thought they were, solely by the force of pure reason. On the contrary, what really pushed them forward most was the powerful and ever more rapidly onrushing progress of natural science and industry. Among the materialists this was plain on the surface, but the idealist systems also filled themselves more and more with a materialist content and attempted pantheistically to reconcile the antithesis between mind and matter. Thus, ultimately, the Hegelian system represents merely a materialism idealistically turned upside down in method and content.
It is, therefore, comprehensible that Starcke in his characterization of Feuerbach first of all investigates the latter’s position in regard to this fundamental question of the relation of thinking and being. After a short introduction, in which the views of the preceding philosophers, particularly since Kant, are described in unnecessarily ponderous philosophical language, and in which Hegel, by an all too formalistic adherence to certain passages of his works, gets far less his due, there follows a detailed description of the course of development of Feuerbach’s “metaphysics” itself, as this course was successively reflected in those writings of this philosopher which have a bearing here. This description is industriously and lucidly elaborated; only, like the whole book, it is loaded with a ballast of philosophical phraseology by no means everywhere unavoidable, which is the more disturbing in its effect the less the author keeps to the manner of expression of one and the same school, or even of Feuerbach himself, and the more he interjects expressions of very different tendencies, especially of the tendencies now rampant and calling themselves philosophical.
The course of evolution of Feuerbach is that of a Hegelian — a never quite orthodox Hegelian, it is true — into a materialist; an evolution which at a definite stage necessitates a complete rupture with the idealist system of his predecessor. With irresistible force, Feuerbach is finally driven to the realization that the Hegelian premundane existence of the “absolute idea”, the “pre-existence of the logical categories” before the world existed, is nothing more than the fantastic survival of the belief in the existence of an extra-mundane creator; that the material, sensuously perceptible world to which we ourselves belong is the only reality; and that our consciousness and thinking, however supra-sensuous they may seem, are the product of a material, bodily organ, the brain. Matter is not a product of mind, but mind itself is merely the highest product of matter. This is, of course, pure materialism. But, having got so far, Feuerbach stops short. He cannot overcome the customary philosophical prejudice, prejudice not against the thing but against the name materialism. He says:
“To me materialism is the foundation of the edifice of human essence and knowledge; but to me it is not what it is to the physiologist, to the natural scientists in the narrower sense, for example, to Moleschott, and necessarily is from their standpoint and profession, namely, the edifice itself. Backwards I fully agree with the materialists; but not forwards.”
Here, Feuerbach lumps together the materialism that is a general world outlook resting upon a definite conception of the relation between matter and mind, and the special form in which this world outlook was expressed at a definite historical stage — namely, in the 18th century. More than that, he lumps it with the shallow, vulgarized form in which the materialism of the 18th century continues to exist today in the heads of naturalists and physicians, the form which was preached on their tours in the fifties by Buchner, Vogt, and Moleschott. But just as idealism underwent a series of stages of development, so also did materialism. With each epoch-making discovery even in the sphere of natural science, it has to change its form; and after history was also subjected to materialistic treatment, a new avenue of development has opened here, too.
The materialism of the last century was predominantly mechanical, because at that time, of all natural sciences, only mechanics, and indeed only the mechanics of solid bodies — celestial and terrestrial — in short, the mechanics of gravity, had come to any definite close. Chemistry at that time existed only in its infantile, phlogistic form [A]. Biology still lay in swaddling clothes; vegetable and animal organisms had been only roughly examined and were explained by purely mechanical causes. What the animal was to Descartes, man was to the materialists of the 18th century — a machine. This exclusive application of the standards of mechanics to processes of a chemical and organic nature — in which processes the laws of mechanics are, indeed, also valid, but are pushed into the backgrounds by other, higher laws — constitutes the first specific but at that time inevitable limitations of classical French materialism.
The second specific limitation of this materialism lay in its inability to comprehend the universe as a process, as matter undergoing uninterrupted historical development. This was in accordance with the level of the natural science of that time, and with the metaphysical, that is, anti-dialectical manner of philosophizing connected with it. Nature, so much was known, was in eternal motion. But according to the ideas of that time, this motion turned, also eternally, in a circle and therefore never moved from the spot; it produced the same results over and over again. This conception was at that time inevitable. The Kantian theory of the origin of the Solar System [that the Sun and planets originated from incandescent rotating nebulous masses] had been put forward but recently and was still regarded merely as a curiosity. The history of the development of the Earth, geology, was still totally unknown, and the conception that the animate natural beings of today are the result of a long sequence of development from the simple to the complex could not at that time scientifically be put forward at all. The unhistorical view of nature was therefore inevitable. We have the less reason to reproach the philosophers of the 18th century on this account since the same thing is found in Hegel. According to him, nature, as a mere “alienation” of the idea, is incapable of development in time — capable only of extending its manifoldness in space, so that it displays simultaneously and alongside of one another all the stages of development comprised in it, and is condemned to an eternal repetition of the same processes. This absurdity of a development in space, but outside of time — the fundamental condition of all development — Hegel imposes upon nature just at the very time when geology, embryology, the physiology of plants and animals, and organic chemistry were being built up, and when everywhere on the basis of these new sciences brilliant foreshadowings of the later theory of evolution were appearing (for instance, Goethe and Lamarck). But the system demanded it; hence the method, for the sake of the system, had to become untrue to itself.
This same unhistorical conception prevailed also in the domain of history. Here the struggle against the remnants of the Middle Ages blurred the view. The Middle Ages were regarded as a mere interruption of history by a thousand years of universal barbarism. The great progress made in the Middle Ages — the extension of the area of European culture, the viable great nations taking form there next to each other, and finally the enormous technical progress of the 14th and 15th centuries — all this was not seen. Thus a rational insight into the great historical interconnectedness was made impossible, and history served at best as a collection of examples and illustrations for the use of philosophers.
The vulgarizing pedlars, who in Germany in the fifties dabbled in materialism, by no means overcame this limitation of their teachers. All the advances of natural science which had been made in the meantime served them only as new proofs against the existence of a creator of the world; and, indeed, they did not in the least make it their business to develop the theory any further. Though idealism was at the end of its tether and was dealt a death-blow by the Revolution of 1848, it had the satisfaction of seeing that materialism had for the moment fallen lower still. Feuerbach was unquestionably right when he refused to take responsibility for this materialism; only he should not have confounded the doctrines of these itinerant preachers with materialism in general.
Here, however, there are two things to be pointed out. First, even during Feuerbach’s lifetime, natural science was still in that process of violent fermentation which only during the last 15 years had reached a clarifying, relative conclusion. New scientific data were acquired to a hitherto unheard-of extent, but the establishing of interrelations, and thereby the bringing of order into this chaos of discoveries following closely upon each other’s heels, has only quite recently become possible. It is true that Feuerbach had lived to see all three of the decisive discoveries — that of the cell, the transformation of energy, and the theory of evolution named after Darwin. But how could the lonely philosopher, living in rural solitude, be able sufficiently to follow scientific developments in order to appreciate at their full value discoveries which natural scientists themselves at that time either still contested or did not know how to make adequate use of? The blame for this falls solely upon the wretched conditions in Germany, in consequence of which cobweb-spinning eclectic flea-crackers had taken possession of the chairs of philosophy, while Feuerbach, who towered above them all, had to rusticate and grow sour in a little village. It is therefore not Feuerbach’s fault that this historical conception of nature, which had now become possible and which removed all the one-sidedness of French materialism, remained inaccessible to him.
Secondly, Feuerbach is quite correct in asserting that exclusively natural-scientific materialism is indeed “the foundation of the edifice of human knowledge, but not the edifice itself”. For we live not only in nature but also in human society, and this also no less than nature has its history of development and its science. It was therefore a question of bringing the science of society, that is, the sum total of the so-called historical and philosophical sciences, into harmony with the materialist foundation, and of reconstructing it thereupon. But it did not fall to Feuerbach’s lot to do this. In spite of the “foundation”, he remained here bound by the traditional idealist fetters, a fact which he recognizes in these words: “Backwards I agree with the materialists, but not forwards!”
But it was Feuerbach himself who did not go “forwards” here; in the social domain, who did not get beyond his standpoint of 1840 or 1844. And this was again chiefly due to this reclusion which compelled him, who, of all philosophers, was the most inclined to social intercourse, to produce thoughts out of his solitary head instead of in amicable and hostile encounters with other men of his calibre. Later, we shall see in detail how much he remained an idealist in this sphere.
It need only be added here that Starcke looks for Feuerbach’s idealism in the wrong place.
“Feuerbach is an idealist; he believes in the progress of mankind.” (p.19)
“The foundation, the substructure of the whole, remains nevertheless idealism. Realism for us is nothing more than a protection again aberrations, while we follow our ideal trends. Are not compassion, love, and enthusiasm for truth and justice ideal forces?” (p.VIII)
In the first place, idealism here means nothing, but the pursuit of ideal aims. But these necessarily have to do at the most with Kantian idealism and its “categorical imperative”; however, Kant himself called his philosophy “transcendental idealism” by no means because he dealt therein also with ethical ideals, but for quite other reasons, as Starcke will remember. The superstitition that philosophical idealism is pivoted round a belief in ethical, that is, social, ideals, arose outside philosophy, among the German philistines, who learned by heart from Schiller’s poems the few morsels of philosophical culture they needed. No one has criticized more severely the impotent “categorical imperative” of Kant — impotent because it demands the impossible, and therefore never attains to any reality — no one has more cruelly derided the philistine sentimental enthusiasm for unrealizable ideals purveyed by Schiller than precisely the complete idealist Hegel (see, for example, his Phenomenology).
In the second place, we simply cannot get away from the fact that everything that sets men acting must find its way through their brains — even eating and drinking, which begins as a consequence of the sensation of hunger or thirst transmitted through the brain, and ends as a result of the sensation of satisfaction likewise transmitted through the brain. The influences of the external world upon man express themselves in his brain, are reflected therein as feelings, impulses, volitions — in short, as “ideal tendencies”, and in this form become “ideal powers”. If, then, a man is to be deemed an idealist because he follows “ideal tendencies” and admits that “ideal powers” have an influence over him, then every person who is at all normally developed is a born idealist and how, in that case, can there still be any materialists?
In the third place, the conviction that humanity, at least at the present moment, moves on the whole in a progressive direction has absolutely nothing to do with the antagonism between materialism and idealism. The French materialists no less than the deists Voltaire and Rousseau held this conviction to an almost fanatical degree, and often enough made the greatest personal sacrifices for it. If ever anybody dedicated his whole life to the “enthusiasm for truth and justice” — using this phrase in the good sense — it was Diderot, for instance. If, therefore, Starcke declares all this to be idealism, this merely proves that the word materialism, and the whole antagonism between the two trends, has lost all meaning for him here.
The fact is that Starcke, although perhaps unconsciously, in this makes an unpardonable concession to the traditional philistine prejudice against the word materialism resulting from its long-continued defamation by the priests. By the word materialism, the philistine understands gluttony, drunkenness, lust of the eye, lust of the flesh, arrogance, cupidity, avarice, covetousness, profit-hunting, and stock-exchange swindling — in short, all the filthy vices in which he himself indulges in private. By the word idealism he understands the belief in virtue, universal philanthropy, and in a general way a “better world”, of which he boasts before others but in which he himself at the utmost believes only so long as he is having the blues or is going through the bankruptcy consequent upon his customary “materialist” excesses. It is then that he sings his favorite song, What is man? — Half beast, half angel.
For the rest, Starcke takes great pains to defend Feuerbach against the attacks and doctrines of the vociferous assistant professors who today go by the name of philosophers in Germany. For people who are interested in this afterbirth of classical German philosophy this is, of course, a matter of importance; for Starcke himself it may have appeared necessary. We, however, will spare the reader this.
 
Part 3: Feuerbach
 

 
(1) Among savages and lower barbarians the idea is still universal that the human forms which appear in dreams are souls which have temporarily left their bodies; the real man is, therefore, held responsible for acts committed by his dream apparition against the dreamer. Thus Imthurn found this belief current, for example, among the Indians of Guiana in 1884.
[A] Phlogistic Theory: The theory prevailing in chemistry during the 17th and 18th centuries that combustion takes place due to the presence in certain bodies of a special substance named phlogiston.

Table of Contents: Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy



==========

## Part 3: Feuerbach







Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy - Part 3: Feuerbach



Frederick Engels
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy

Part 3: Feuerbach

 

The real idealism of Feuerbach becomes evident as soon as we come to his philosophy of religion and ethics. He by no means wishes to abolish religion; he wants to perfect it. Philosophy itself must be absorbed in religion.
“The periods of humanity are distinguished only by religious changes. A historical movement is fundamental only when it is rooted in the hearts of men. The heart is not a form of religion, so that the latter should exist also in the heart; the heart is the essence of religion.” (Quoted by Starcke, p.168.)
According to Feuerbach, religion is the relation between human beings based on the affections, the relation based on the heart, which relation until now has sought its truth in a fantastic mirror image of reality — in the mediation of one or many gods, the fantastic mirror images of human qualities — but now finds it directly and without any mediation in the love between “I” and “Thou”. Thus, finally, with Feuerbach sex love becomes one of the highest forms, if not the highest form, of the practice of his new religion.
Now relations between human beings, based on affection, and especially between the two sexes, have existed as long as mankind has. Sex love in particular has undergone a development and won a place during the last 800 years which has made it a compulsory pivotal point of all poetry during this period. The existing positive religions have limited themselves to the bestowal of a higher consecration upon state-regulated sex love — that is, upon the marriage laws — and they could all disappear tomorrow without changing in the slightest the practice of love and friendship. Thus the Christian religion in France, as a matter of fact, so completely disappeared in the year 1793–95 that even Napoleon could not re-introduce it without opposition and difficulty; and this without any need for a substitute in Feuerbach’s sense, making itself in the interval.
Feuerbach’s idealism consists here in this: he does not simply accept mutual relations based on reciprocal inclination between human beings, such as sex love, friendship, compassion, self-sacrifice, etc., as what they are in themselves — without associating them with any particular religion which to him, too, belongs to the past; but instead he asserts that they will attain their full value only when consecrated by the name of religion. The chief thing for him is not that these purely human relations exist, but that they shall be conceived of as the new, true, religion. They are to have full value only after they have been marked with a religious stamp. Religion is derived from religare [“to bind”] and meant, originally, a bond. Therefore, every bond between two people is a religion. Such etymological tricks are the last resort of idealist philosophy. Not what the word means according to the historical development of its actual use, but what it ought to mean according to its derivation is what counts. And so sex love, and the intercourse between the sexes, is apotheosized to a religion, merely in order that the word religion, which is so dear to idealistic memories, may not disappear from the language. The Parisian reformers of the Louis Blanc trend used to speak in precisely the same way in the forties. They, likewise, could conceive of a man without religion only as a monster, and used to say to us: “Donc, l’atheisme c’est votre religion!” [“Well, then atheism is your religion!”] If Feuerbach wishes to establish a true religion upon the basis of an essentially materialist conception of nature, that is the same as regarding modern chemistry as true alchemy. If religion can exist without its god, alchemy can exist without its philosopher’s stone. By the way, there exists a very close connection between alchemy and religion. The philosopher’s stone has many godlike properties and the Egyptian-Greek alchemists of the first two centuries of our era had a hand in the development of Christian doctrines, as the data given by Kopp and Bertholet have proved.
Feuerbach’s assertion that “the periods of humanity are distinguished only by religious changes” is decidedly false. Great historical turning-points have been accompanied by religious changes only so far as the three world religions which have existed up to the present — Buddhism, Christianity, and Islam — are concerned. The old tribal and national religions, which arose spontaneously, did not proselytize and lost all their power of resistance as soon as the independence of the tribe or people was lost. For the Germans, it was sufficient to have simple contact with the decaying Roman world empire and with its newly adopted Christian world religion which fitted its economic, political, and ideological conditions. Only with these world religions, arisen more or less artificially, particularly Christianity and Islam, do we find that the more general historical movements acquire a religious imprint. Even in regard to Christianity, the religious stamp in revolutions of really universal significance is restricted to the first stages of the bourgeoisie’s struggle for emancipation — from the 13th to the 17th century — and is to be accounted for, not as Feuerbach thinks by the hearts of men and their religious needs, but by the entire previous history of the Middle Ages, which knew no other form of ideology than religion and theology. But when the bourgeoisie of the 18th century was strengthened enough likewise to posses an ideology of its own, suited to its own class standpoint, it made its great and conclusive revolution — the French —, appealing exclusively to juristic and political ideas, and troubling itself with religion only in so far as it stood in its way. But it never occurred to it to put a new religion in place of the old. Everyone knows how Robespierre failed in his attempt [to set up a religion of the “highest being”].
The possibility of purely human sentiments in our intercourse with other human beings has nowadays been sufficiently curtailed by the society in which we must live, which is based upon class antagonism and class rule. We have no reason to curtail it still more by exalting these sentiments to a religion. And similarly the understanding of the great historical class struggles has already been sufficiently obscured by current historiography, particularly in Germany, so that there is also no need for us to make such an understanding totally impossible by transforming the history of these struggles into a mere appendix of ecclesiastical history. Already here it becomes evident how far today we have moved beyond Feuerbach. His “finest” passages in glorification of his new religion of love are totally unreadable today.
The only religion which Feuerbach examines seriously is Christianity, the world religion of the Occident, based upon monotheism. He proves that the Christian god is only a fantastic reflection, a mirror image, of man. Now, this god is, however, himself the product of a tedious process of abstraction, the concentrated quintessence of the numerous earlier tribal and national gods. And man, whose image this god is, is therefore also not a real man, but likewise the quintessence of the numerous real men, man in the abstract, therefore himself again a mental image. Feuerbach, who on every page preaches sensuousness, absorption in the concrete, in actuality, becomes thoroughly abstract as soon as he begins to talk of any other than mere sex relations between human beings.
Of these relations, only one aspect appeals to him: morality. And here we are again struck by Feuerbach’s astonishing poverty when compared to Hegel. The latter’s ethics, or doctrine of moral conduct, is the philosophy of right, and embraces: (1) abstract right; (2) morality; (3) social ethics [Sittlichkeit], under which are comprised: the family, civil society, and the state.
Here the content is as realistic as the form is idealistic. Besides morality, the whole sphere of law, economy, politics is here included. With Feuerbach, it is just the reverse. In the form he is realistic since he takes his start from man; but there is absolutely no mention of the world in which this man lives; hence, this man remains always the same abstract man who occupied the field in the philosophy of religion. For this man is not born of woman; he issues, as from a chrysalis, from the god of monotheistic religions. He therefore does not live in a real world historically come into being and historically determined. True, he has intercourse with other men; however, each one of them is just as much an abstraction as he himself. In his philosophy of religion we still had men and women, but in his ethics even this last distinction disappears. Feuerbach, to be sure, at long intervals makes such statements as: “Man thinks differently in a palace and in a hut.” “If because of hunger, of misery, you have no stuff in your body, you likewise have no stuff for morality in your head, in your mind, or heart.” “Politics must become our religion,” etc.
But Feuerbach is absolutely incapable of achieving anything with these maxims. They remain mere phrases, and even Starcke has to admit that for Feuerbach politics constituted an impassable frontier and the “science of society, sociology, was terra incognita to him”.
He appears just as shallow, in comparison with Hegel, in his treatment of the antithesis of good and evil.
“One believes one is saying something great,” Hegel remarks, “if one says that ‘man is naturally good’. But one forgets that one says something far greater when one says ‘man is naturally evil’.”
With Hegel, evil is the form in which the motive force of historical development presents itself. This contains the twofold meaning that, on the one hand, each new advance necessarily appears as a sacrilege against things hallowed, as a rebellion against condition, though old and moribund, yet sanctified by custom; and that, on the other hand, it is precisely the wicked passions of man — greed and lust for power — which, since the emergence of class antagonisms, serve as levers of historical development — a fact of which the history of feudalism and of the bourgeoisie, for example, constitutes a single continual proof. But it does not occur to Feuerbach to investigate the historical role of moral evil. To him, history is altogether an uncanny domain in which he feels ill at ease. Even his dictum: “Man as he sprang originally from nature was only a mere creature of nature, not a man. Man is a product of man, of culture, of history” — with him, even this dictum remains absolutely sterile.
What Feuerbach has to tell us about morals can, therefore, only be extremely meagre. The urge towards happiness is innate in man, and must therefore form the basis of all morality. But the urge towards happiness is subject to a double correction. First, by the natural consequences of our actions: after the debauch comes the “blues”, and habitual excess is followed by illness. Secondly, by its social consequences: if we do not respect the similar urge of other people towards happiness they will defend themselves, and so interfere with our own urge toward happiness. Consequently, in order to satisfy our urge, we must be in a position to appreciate rightly the results of our conduct and must likewise allow others an equal right to seek happiness. Rational self-restraint with regard to ourselves, and love — again and again love! — in our intercourse with others — these are the basic laws of Feuerbach’s morality; from them, all others are derived. And neither the most spirited utterances of Feuerbach nor the strongest eulogies of Starcke can hide the tenuity and banality of these few propositions.
Only very exceptionally, and by no means to this and other people’s profit, can an individual satisfy his urge towards happiness by preoccupation with himself. Rather, it requires preoccupation with the outside world, with means to satisfy his needs — that is to say, food, an individual of the opposite sex, books, conversation, argument, activities, objects for use and working up. Feuerbach’s morality either presupposes that these means and objects of satisfaction are given to every individual as a matter of course, or else it offers only inapplicable good advice and is, therefore, not worth a brass farthing to people who are without these means. And Feuerbach himself states this in plain terms:
“Man thinks differently in a palace and in a hut. If because of hunger, of misery, you have no stuff in your body, you likewise have no stuff for morality in your head, in your mind, or heart.”
Do matters fare any better in regard to the equal right of others to satisfy their urge towards happiness? Feuerbach posed this claim as absolute, as holding good for all times and circumstances. But since when has it been valid? Was there ever in antiquity between slaves and masters, or in the Middle Ages between serfs and barons, any talk about an equal right to the urge towards happiness? Was not the urge towards happiness of the oppressed class sacrificed ruthlessly and “by the right of law” to that of the ruling class? Yes, that was indeed immoral; nowadays, however, equality of rights is recognized. Recognized in words ever since and inasmuch as the bourgeoisie, in its fight against feudalism and in the development of capitalist production, was compelled to abolish all privileges of estate, that is, personal privileges, and to introduce the equality of all individuals before law, first in the sphere in private law, then gradually also in the sphere of public law. But the urge towards happiness thrives only to a trivial extent on ideal rights. To the greatest extent of all it thrives on material means; and capitalist production takes care to ensure that the great majority of those equal rights shall get only what is essential for bare existence. Capitalist production has, therefore, little more respect, if indeed any more, for the equal right to the urge towards happiness of the majority than had slavery or serfdom. And are we better off in regard to the mental means of happiness, the educational means? Is not even “the schoolmaster of Sadowa” a mythical person? [A]
More. According to Feuerbach’s theory of morals, the Stock Exchange is the highest temple of moral conduct, provided only that one always speculates right. If my urge towards happiness leads me to the Stock Exchange, and if there I correctly gauge the consequences of my actions so that only agreeable results and no disadvantages ensue — that is, I always win — then I am fulfilling Feuerbach’s precept. Moreover, I do not thereby interfere with the equal right of another person to pursue his happiness; for that other man went to the Exchange just as voluntarily as I did and in concluding the speculative transaction with me he has followed his urge towards happiness as I have followed mine. If he loses his money, his action is ipso facto proved to have been unethical, because of his bad reckoning, and since I have given him the punishment he deserves, I can even slap my chest proudly, like a modern Rhadamanthus. Love, too, rules on the Stock Exchange, in so far as it is not simply a sentimental figure of speech, for each finds in others the satisfaction of his own urge towards happiness, which is just what love ought to achieve and how it acts in practice. And if I gamble with correct prevision of the consequences of my operations, and therefore with success, I fulfil all the strictest injunctions of Feuerbachian morality — and becomes a rich man into the bargain. In other words, Feuerbach’s morality is cut exactly to the pattern of modern capitalist society, little as Feuerbach himself might desire or imagine it.
But love! — yes, with Feuerbach, love is everywhere and at all times the wonder-working god who should help to surmount all difficulties of practical life — and at that in a society which is split into classes with diametrically opposite interests. At this point, the last relic of the revolutionary character disappears from his philosophy, leaving only the old cant: Love one another — fall into each other’s arms regardless of distinctions of sex or estate — a universal orgy of reconciliation!
In short, the Feuerbachian theory of morals fares like all its predecessors. It is designed to suit all periods, all peoples and all conditions, and precisely for that reason it is never and nowhere applicable. It remains, as regards the real world, as powerless as Kant’s categorical imperative. In reality every class, even every profession, has its own morality, and even this it violates whenever it can do so with impunity. And love, which is to unite all, manifests itself in wars, altercations, lawsuits, domestic broils, divorces, and every possible exploitation of one by another.
Now how was it possible that the powerful impetus given by Feuerbach turned out to be so unfruitful for himself? For the simple reason that Feuerbach himself never contrives to escape from the realm of abstraction — for which he has a deadly hatred — into that of living reality. He clings fiercely to nature and man; but nature and man remain mere words with him. He is incapable of telling us anything definite either about real nature or real men. But from the abstract man of Feuerbach, one arrives at real living men only when one considers them as participants in history. And that is what Feuerbach resisted,and therefore the year 1848, which he did not understand, meant to him merely the final break with the real world, retirement into solitude. The blame for this again falls chiefly on the conditions them obtaining in Germany, which condemned him to rot away miserably.
But the step which Feuerbach did not take nevertheless had to be taken. The cult of abstract man, which formed the kernel of Feuerbach’s new religion, had to be replaced by the science of real men and of their historical development. This further development of Feuerbach’s standpoint beyond Feuerbach was inaugurated by Marx in 1845 in The Holy Family.
 
Chapter 4: Marx
 

 
[A] The schoolmaster of Sadowa: An expression currently used by German bourgeois publicists after the victory of the Prussians at Sadowa (in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866), the implications being that the Prussian victory was to be attributed to the superiority of the Prussian system of public education.
Table of Contents: Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy



==========

## Part 4: Marx







Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy - Part 4: Marx



Frederick Engels
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy

Part 4: Marx

 

Strauss, Bauer, Stirner, Feuerbach — these were the offshoots of Hegelian philosophy, in so far as they did not abandon the field of philosophy. Strauss, after his Life of Jesus and Dogmatics, produced only literary studies in philosophy and ecclesiastical history after the fashion of Renan. Bauer only achieved something in the field of the history of the origin of Christianity, though what he did here was important. Stirner remained a curiosity, even after Bakunin blended him with Proudhon and labelled the blend “anarchism”. Feuerbach alone was of significance as a philosopher. But not only did philosophy — claimed to soar above all special sciences and to be the science of sciences connecting them — remain to him an impassable barrier, an inviolable holy thing, but as a philosopher, too, he stopped half-incapable of disposing of Hegel through criticism; he simply threw him aside as useless, while he himself, compared with the encyclopaedic wealth of the Hegelian system, achieved nothing positive beyond a turgid religion of love and a meagre, impotent morality.
Out of the dissolution of the Hegelian school, however, there developed still another tendency, the only one which has borne real fruit. And this tendency is essentially connected with the name of Marx (1).
The separation from Hegelian philosophy was here also the result of a return to the materialist standpoint. That means it was resolved to comprehend the real world — nature and history — just as it presents itself to everyone who approaches it free from preconceived idealist crotchets. It was decided mercilessly to sacrifice every idealist fancy which could not be brought into harmony with the facts conceived in their own and not in a fantastic interconnection. And materialism means nothing more than this. But here the materialistic world outlook was taken really seriously for the first time and was carried through consistently — at least in its basic features — in all domains of knowledge concerned.
Hegel was not simply put aside. On the contrary, a start was made from his revolutionary side, described above, from the dialectical method. But in its Hegelian form, this method was unusable. According to Hegel, dialectics is the self-development of the concept. The absolute concept does not only exist — unknown where — from eternity, it is also the actual living soul of the whole existing world. It develops into itself through all the preliminary stages which are treated at length in the Logic and which are all included in it. Then it “alienates” itself by changing into nature, where, unconscious of itself, disguised as a natural necessity, it goes through a new development and finally returns as man’s consciousness of himself. This self-consciousness then elaborates itself again in history in the crude form until finally the absolute concept again comes to itself completely in the Hegelian philosophy. According to Hegel, therefore, the dialectical development apparent in nature and history — that is, the causal interconnection of the progressive movement from the lower to the higher, which asserts itself through all zigzag movements and temporary retrogression — is only a copy [Abklatsch] of the self-movement of the concept going on from eternity, no one knows where, but at all events independently of any thinking human brain. This ideological perversion had to be done away with. We again took a materialistic view of the thoughts in our heads, regarding them as images [Abbilder] of real things instead of regarding real things as images of this or that stage of the absolute concept. Thus dialectics reduced itself to the science of the general laws of motion, both of the external world and of human thought — two sets of laws which are identical in substance, but differ in their expression in so far as the human mind can apply them consciously, while in nature and also up to now for the most part in human history, these laws assert themselves unconsciously, in the form of external necessity, in the midst of an endless series of seeming accidents. Thereby the dialectic of concepts itself became merely the conscious reflex of the dialectical motion of the real world and thus the dialectic of Hegel was turned over; or rather, turned off its head, on which it was standing, and placed upon its feet. And this materialist dialectic, which for years has been our best working tool and our sharpest weapon, was, remarkably enough, discovered not only by us but also, independently of us and even of Hegel, by a German worker, Joseph Dietzgen. (2)
In this way, however, the revolutionary side of Hegelian philosophy was again taken up and at the same time freed from the idealist trimmings which with Hegel had prevented its consistent execution. The great basic thought that the world is not to be comprehended as a complex of readymade things, but as a complex of processes, in which the things apparently stable no less than their mind images in our heads, the concepts, go through an uninterrupted change of coming into being and passing away, in which, in spite of all seeming accidentally and of all temporary retrogression, a progressive development asserts itself in the end — this great fundamental thought has, especially since the time of Hegel, so thoroughly permeated ordinary consciousness that in this generality it is now scarcely ever contradicted. But to acknowledge this fundamental thought in words and to apply it in reality in detail to each domain of investigation are two different things. If, however, investigation always proceeds from this standpoint, the demand for final solutions and eternal truths ceases once for all; one is always conscious of the necessary limitation of all acquired knowledge, of the fact that it is conditioned by the circumstances in which it was acquired. On the other hand, one no longer permits oneself to be imposed upon by the antithesis, insuperable for the still common old metaphysics, between true and false, good and bad, identical and different, necessary and accidental. One knows that these antitheses have only a relative validity; that that which is recognized now as true has also its latent false side which will later manifest itself, just as that which is now regarded as false has also its true side by virtue of which it could previously be regarded as true. One knows that what is maintained to be necessary is composed of sheer accidents and that the so-called accidental is the form behind which necessity hides itself — and so on.
The old method of investigation and thought which Hegel calls “metaphysical”, which preferred to investigate things as given, as fixed and stable, a method the relics of which still strongly haunt people’s minds, had a great deal of historical justification in its day. It was necessary first to examine things before it was possible to examine processes. One had first to know what a particular thing was before one could observe the changes it was undergoing. And such was the case with natural science. The old metaphysics, which accepted things as finished objects, arose from a natural science which investigated dead and living things as finished objects. But when this investigation had progressed so far that it became possible to take the decisive step forward, that is, to pass on the systematic investigation of the changes which these things undergo in nature itself, then the last hour of the old metaphysic struck in the realm of philosophy also. And in fact, while natural science up to the end of the last century was predominantly a collecting science, a science of finished things, in our century it is essentially a systematizing science, a science of the processes, of the origin and development of these things and of the interconnection which binds all these natural processes into one great whole. Physiology, which investigates the processes occurring in plant and animal organisms; embryology, which deals with the development of individual organisms from germs to maturity; geology, which investigates the gradual formation of the Earth’s surface — all these are the offspring of our century.
But, above all, there are three great discoveries which have enabled our knowledge of the interconnection of natural processes to advance by leaps and bounds:
First, the discovery of the cell as the unit from whose multiplication and differentiation the whole plant and animal body develops. Not only is the development and growth of all higher organisms recognized to proceed according to a single general law, but the capacity of the cell to change indicates the way by which organisms can change their species and thus go through a more than individual development.
Second, the transformation of energy, which has demonstrated to us that all the so-called forces operative in the first instance in inorganic nature — mechanical force and its complement, so-called potential energy, heat, radiation (light, or radiant heat), electricity, magnetism, and chemical energy — are different forms of manifestation of universal motion, which pass into one another in definite proportions so that in place of a certain quantity of the one which disappears, a certain quantity of another makes its appearance and thus the whole motion of nature is reduced to this incessant process of transformation from one form into another.
Finally, the proof which Darwin first developed in connected form that the stock of organic products of nature environing us today, including man, is the result of a long process of evolution from a few originally unicellular germs, and that these again have arisen from protoplasm or albumen, which came into existence by chemical means.
Thanks to these three great discoveries, and the other immense advances in natural science, we have now arrived at the point where we can demonstrate the interconnection between the processes in nature not only in particular spheres but also the interconnection of these particular spheres on the whole, and so can present in an approximately systematic form a comprehensive view of the interconnection in nature by means of the facts provided by an empirical science itself. To furnish this comprehensive view was formerly the task of so-called natural philosophy. It could do this only by putting in place of the real but as yet unknown interconnections ideal, fancied ones, filling in the missing facts by figments of the mind and bridging the actual gaps merely in imagination. In the course of this procedure it conceived many brilliant ideas and foreshadowed many later discoveries, but it also produced a considerable amount of nonsense, which indeed could not have been otherwise. Today, when one needs to comprehend the results of natural scientific investigation only dialetically, that is, in the sense of their own interconnection, in order to arrive at a “system of nature” sufficient for our time; when the dialectical character of this interconnection is forcing itself against their will even into the metaphysically-trained minds of the natural scientists, today natural philosophy is finally disposed of. Every attempt at resurrecting it would be not only superfluous but a step backwards.
But what is true of nature, which is hereby recognized also as a historical process of development, is likewise true of the history of society in all its branches and of the totality of all sciences which occupy themselves with things human (and divine). Here, too, the philosophy of history, of right, of religion, etc., has consisted in the substitution of an interconnection fabricated in the mind of the philosopher for the real interconnection to be demonstrated in the events; has consisted in the comprehension of history as a whole as well as in its separate parts, as the gradual realization of ideas — and naturally always only the pet ideas of the philosopher himself. According to this, history worked unconsciously but of necessity towards a certain ideal goal set in advance — as, for example, in Hegel, towards the realization of his absolute idea — and the unalterable trend towards this absolute idea formed the inner interconnection in the events of history. A new mysterious providence — unconscious or gradually coming into consciousness — was thus put in the place of the real, still unknown interconnection. Here, therefore, just as in the realm of nature, it was necessary to do away with these fabricated, artificial interconnections by the discovery of the real ones — a task which ultimately amounts to the discovery of the general laws of motion which assert themselves as the ruling ones in the history of human society.
In one point, however, the history of the development of society proves to be essentially different from that of nature. In nature — in so far as we ignore man’s reaction upon nature — there are only blind, unconscious agencies acting upon one another, out of whose interplay the general law comes into operation. Nothing of all that happens — whether in the innumerable apparent accidents observable upon the surface, or in the ultimate results which confirm the regularity inherent in these accidents — happens as a consciously desired aim. In the history of society, on the contrary, the actors are all endowed with consciousness, are men acting with deliberation or passion, working towards definite goals; nothing happens without a conscious purpose, without an intended aim. But this distinction, important as it is for historical investigation, particularly of single epochs and events, cannot alter the fact that the course of history is governed by inner general laws. For here, also, on the whole, in spite of the consciously desired aims of all individuals, accident apparently reigns on the surface. That which is willed happens but rarely; in the majority of instances the numerous desired ends cross and conflict with one another, or these ends themselves are from the outset incapable of realization, or the means of attaining them are insufficient. thus the conflicts of innumerable individual wills and individual actions in the domain of history produce a state of affairs entirely analogous to that prevailing in the realm of unconscious nature. The ends of the actions are intended, but the results which actually follow from these actions are not intended; or when they do seem to correspond to the end intended, they ultimately have consequences quite other than those intended. Historical events thus appear on the whole to be likewise governed by chance. But where on the surface accident holds sway, there actually it is always governed by inner, hidden laws, and it is only a matter of discovering these laws.
Men make their own history, whatever its outcome may be, in that each person follows his own consciously desired end, and it is precisely the resultant of these many wills operating in different directions, and of their manifold effects upon the outer world, that constitutes history. Thus it is also a question of what the many individuals desire. The will is determined by passion or deliberation. But the levers which immediately determine passion or deliberation are of very different kinds. Partly they may be external objects, partly ideal motives, ambition, “enthusiasm for truth and justice”, personal hatred, or even purely individual whims of all kinds. But, on the one hand, we have seen that the many individual wills active in history for the most part produce results quite other than those intended — often quite the opposite; that their motives, therefore, in relation to the total result are likewise of only secondary importance. On the other hand, the further question arises: What driving forces in turn stand behind these motives? What are the historical forces which transform themselves into these motives in the brains of the actors?
The old materialism never put this question to itself. Its conception of history, in so far as it has one at all, is therefore essentially pragmatic; it divides men who act in history into noble and ignoble and then finds that as a rule the noble are defrauded and the ignoble are victorious. hence, it follows for the old materialism that nothing very edifying is to be got from the study of history, and for us that in the realm of history the old materialism becomes untrue to itself because it takes the ideal driving forces which operate there as ultimate causes, instead of investigating what is behind them, what are the driving forces of these driving forces. This inconsistency does not lie in the fact that ideal driving forces are recognized, but in the investigation not being carried further back behind these into their motive causes. On the other hand, the philosophy of history, particularly as represented by Hegel, recognizes that the ostensible and also the really operating motives of men who act in history are by no means the ultimate causes of historical events; that behind these motives are other motive powers, which have to be discovered. But it does not seek these powers in history itself, it imports them rather from outside, from philosophical ideology, into history. Hegel, for example, instead of explaining the history of ancient Greece out of its own inner interconnections, simply maintains that it is nothing more than the working out of “forms of beautiful individuality”, the realization of a “work of art” as such. He says much in this connection about the old Greeks that is fine and profound, but that does not prevent us today from refusing to be put off with such an explanation, which is a mere manner of speech.
When, therefore, it is a question of investigating the driving powers which — consciously or unconsciously, and indeed very often unconsciously — lie behind the motives of men who act in history and which constitute the real ultimate driving forces of history, then it is not a question so much of the motives of single individuals, however eminent, as of those motives which set in motion great masses, whole people, and again whole classes of the people in each people; and this, too, not merely for an instant, like the transient flaring up of a straw-fire which quickly dies down, but as a lasting action resulting in a great historical transformation. To ascertain the driving causes which here in the minds of acting masses and their leaders — to so-called great men — are reflected as conscious motives, clearly or unclearly, directly or in an ideological, even glorified, form — is the only path which can put us on the track of the laws holding sway both in history as a whole, and at particular periods and in particular lands. Everything which sets men in motion must go through their minds; but what form it will take in the mind will depend very much upon the circumstances. The workers have by no means become reconciled to capitalist machine industry, even though they no longer simply break the machines to pieces, as they still did in 1848 on the Rhine.
But while in all earlier periods the investigation of these driving causes of history was almost impossible — on account of the complicated and concealed interconnections between them and their effects — our present period has so far simplified these interconnections that the riddle could be solved. Since the establishment of large-scale industry — that is, at least since the European peace of 1815 — it has been no longer a secret to any man in England that the whole political struggle there pivoted on the claims to supremacy of two classes: the landed aristocracy and the bourgeoisie (middle class). In France, with the return of the Bourbons, the same fact was perceived, the historians of the Restoration period, from Thierry to Guisot, Mignet, and Thiers, speak of it everywhere as the key to the understanding of all French history since the Middle Ages. And since 1830, the working class, the proletariat, has been recognized in both countries as a third competitor for power. Conditions had become so simplified that one would have had to close one’s eyes deliberately not to see in the light of these three great classes and in the conflict of their interests the driving force of modern history — at least in the two most advanced countries.
But how did these classes come into existence? If it was possible at first glance still to ascribe the origin of the great, formerly feudal landed property — at least in the first instance — to political causes, to taking possession by force, this could not be done in regard to the bourgeoise and the proletariat. Here, the origin and development of two great classes was seen to lie clearly and palpably in purely economic causes. And it was just as clear that in the struggle between landed property and the bourgeoisie, no less than in the struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, it was a question, first and foremost, of economic interests, to the furtherance of which political power was intended to serve merely as a means. Bourgeoisie and proletariat both arose in consequences of a transformation of the economic conditions, more precisely, of the mode of production. The transition, first from guild handicrafts to manufacture, and then from manufacture to large-scale industry, with steam and mechanical power, had caused the development of these two classes. At a certain stage, the new productive forces set in motion by the bourgeoisie — in the first place the division of labor and the combination of many detail laborers [Teilarbeiter] in one general manufactory — and the conditions and requirements of exchange, developed through these productive forces, became incompatible with the existing order of production handed down by history and sanctified by law — that is to say, incompatible with the privileges of the guild and the numerous other personal and local privileges (which were only so many fetters to the unprivileged estates) of the feudal order to society. The productive forces represented by the bourgeoisie rebelled against the order of production represented by the feudal landlords and the guild-masters. The result is known, the feudal fetters were smashed, gradually in England, at one blow in France. In Germany, the process is not yet finished. But just as, at a definite stage of its development, manufacture came into conflict with the feudal order of production, so now large-scale industry has already come into conflict with the bourgeois order or production established in its place.Tied down by this order, by the narrow limits of the capitalist mode of production, this industry produces, on the one hand, an ever-increasingly proletarianziation of the great mass of the people, and on the other hand, an ever greater mass of unsalable products. Overproduction and mass misery, each the cause of the other — that is the absurd contradiction which is its outcome, and which of necessity calls for the liberation of the productive forces by means of a change in the mode of production.
In modern history at least it is, therefore, proved that all political struggles are class struggles, and all class struggles for emancipation, despite their necessarily political form — for every class struggle is a political struggle — turn ultimately on the question of economic emancipation. Therefore, here at least, the state — the political order — is the subordination, and civil society — the realm of economic relations — the decisive element. The traditional conception, to which Hegel, too, pays homage, saw in the state the determining element, and in civil society the element determined by it. Appearances correspond to this. As all the driving forces of the actions of any individual person must pass through his brain, and transform themselves into motives of his will in order to set him into action, so also all the needs of civil society — no matter which class happens to be the ruling one — must pass through the will of the state in order to secure general validity in the form of laws. That is the formal aspect of the matter — the one which is self-evident. The question arises, however, what is the content of this merely formal will — of the individual as well as of the state — and whence is this content derived? Why is just this willed and not something else? If we enquire into this, we discover that in modern history the will of the state is, on the whole, determined by the changing needs of civil society, but the supremacy of this or that class, in the last resort, by the development of the productive forces and relations of exchange.
But if even in our modern era, with its gigantic means of production and communication, the state is not an independent domain with an independent development, but one whose existence as well as development is to be explained in the last resort by the economic conditions of life of society, then this must be still more true of all earlier times when the production of the material life of man was not yet carried on with these abundant auxiliary means, and when, therefore, the necessity of such production must have exercised a still greater mastery over men. If the state even today, in the era of big industry and of railways, is on the whole only a reflection, in concentrated form, of the economic needs of the class controlling production, then this must have been much more so in an epoch when each generation of men was forced to spend a far greater part of its aggregate lifetime in satisfying material needs, and was therefore much more dependent on them than we are today. An examination of the history of earlier periods, as soon as it is seriously undertaken from this angle, most abundantly confirms this. But, of course, this cannot be gone into here.
If the state and public law are determined by economic relations, so, too, of course, is private law, which indeed in essence only sanctions the existing economic relations between individuals which are normal in the given circumstances. The form in which this happens can, however, vary considerably. It is possible, as happened in England, in harmony with the whole national development, to retain in the main the forms of the old feudal laws while giving them a bourgeois content; in fact, directly reading a bourgeois meaning into the feudal name. But, also, as happened in Western continental Europe, roman law, the first world law of a commodity-producing society, with its unsurpassably fine elaboration of all the essential legal relations of simple commodity owners (of buyers and sellers, debtors and creditors, contracts, obligations, etc.) can be taken as the foundation. In which case, for the benefit of a still petty-bourgeois and semi-feudal society, it can either be reduced to the level of such a society simply through judicial practice (common law) or, with the help of allegedly enlightened, moralizing jurists it can be worked into a special code of law to correspond with such social level — a code which in these circumstances will be a bad one also from the legal standpoint (for instance, Prussian Landrecht). But after a great bourgeois revolution it is, however, also possible for such a classic law code of bourgeois society as the French Code Civile to be worked out upon the basis of this same Roman Law. If, therefore, bourgeois legal rules merely express the economic life conditions of society in legal form, then they can do so well or ill according to circumstances.
The state presents itself to us as the first ideological power over man. Society creates for itself an organ for the safeguarding of its common interests against internal and external attacks. This organ is the state power. Hardly come into being, this organ makes itself independent vis-a-vis society; and, indeed, the more so, the more it becomes the organ of a particular class, the more it directly enforces the supremacy of that class. The fight of the oppressed class against the ruling class becomes necessarily a political fight, a fight first of all against the political dominance of this class. The consciousness of the interconnection between this political struggle and its economic basis becomes dulled and can be lost altogether. While this is not wholly the case with the participants, it almost always happens with the historians. Of the ancient sources on the struggles within the Roman Republic, only Appian tells us clearly and distinctly what was at issue in the last resort — namely, landed property.
But once the state has become an independent power vis-a-vis society, it produces forthwith a further ideology. It is indeed among professional politicians, theorists of public law, and jurists of private law, that the connection with economic facts gets lost for fair. Since in each particular case, the economic facts must assume the form of juristic motives in order to receive legal sanction; and since, in so doing, consideration of course has to be given to the whole legal system already in operation, the juristic form is, in consequence, made everything and the economic content nothing. Public law and private law are treated as independent spheres, each being capable of and needing a systematic presentation by the consistent elimination of all inner contradictions.
Still higher ideologies, that is, such as are still further removed from the material, economic basis, take the form of philosophy and religion. Here the interconnection between conceptions and their material conditions of existence becomes more and more complicated, more and more obscured by intermediate links. But the interconnection exists. Just as the whole Renaissance period, from the middle of the 15th century, was an essential product of the towns and, therefore, of the burghers, so also was the subsequently newly-awakened philosophy. Its content was in essence only the philosophical expression of the thoughts corresponding to the development of the small and middle burghers into a big bourgeoisie. Among last century’s Englishmen and Frenchmen who in many cases were just as much political economists as philosophers, this is clearly evident; and we have proved it above in regard to the Hegelian school.
We will now in addition deal only briefly with religion, since the latter stands further away from material life and seems to be most alien to it. Religion arose in very primitive times from erroneous, primitive conceptions of men about their own nature and external nature surrounding them. Every ideology, however, once it has arisen, develops in connection with the given concept-material, and develops this material further; otherwise, it would not be an ideology, that is, occupation with thoughts as with independent entities, developing independently and subject only to their own laws. In the last analysis, the material life conditions of the persons inside whose heads this thought process goes on determine the course of the process, which of necessity remains unknown to these persons, for otherwise there would be an end to all ideology. These original religious notions, therefore, which in the main are common to each group of kindred peoples, develop, after the group separates, in a manner peculiar to each people, according to the conditions of life falling to their lot. For a number of groups of peoples, and particularly for the Aryans (so-called Indo-Europeans) this process has been shown in detail by comparative mythology. The gods thus fashioned within each people were national gods, whose domain extended no farther than the national territory which they were to protect; on the other side of its boundaries, other gods held undisputed sway. They could continue to exist, in imagination, only as long as the nation existed; they fell with its fall. The Roman world empire, the economic conditions of whose origin we do not need to examine here, brought about this downfall of the old nationalities. The old national gods decayed, even those of the Romans, which also were patterned to suit only the narrow confines of the city of Rome. The need to complement the world empire by means of a world religion was clearly revealed in the attempts made to recognize all foreign gods that were the least bit respectable and provide altars for them in Rome alongside the native gods. But a new world religion is not to be made in this fashion, by imperial decree. The new world religion, Christianity, had already quietly come into being, out of a mixture of generalized Oriental, particularly Jewish, theology, and vulgarized Greek, particularly Stoic, philosophy. What it originally looked like has to be first laboriously discovered, since its official form, as it has been handed down to us, is merely that in which it became the state religion to which purpose it was adapted by the Council of Nicaea. The fact that already after 250 years it became the state religion suffices to show that it was the religion in correspondence with the conditions of the time. In the Middle Ages, in the same measure as feudalism developed, Christianity grew into the religious counterpart to it, with a corresponding feudal hierarchy. And when the burghers began to thrive, there developed, in opposition to feudal Catholicism, the Protestant heresy, which first appeared in Southern France among the Albigenses[A], at the time the cities there reached the highest point of their florescence. The Middle Ages had attached to theology all the other forms of ideology — philosophy, politics, jurisprudence — and made them subdivision of theology. It thereby constrained every social and political movement to take on a theological form. The sentiments of the masses were fed with religion to the exclusion of all else; it was therefore necessary to put forward their own interests in a religious guise in order to produce a great tempest. And just as the burghers from the beginning brought into being an appendage of propertyless urban plebeians, day laborers and servants of all kinds, belonging to no recognized social estate, precursors of the later proletariat, so likewise heresy soon became divided into a burgher-moderate heresy and a plebeian-revolutionary one, the latter an abomination to the burgher heretics themselves.
The ineradicability of the Protestant heresy corresponded to the invincibility of the rising burghers. When these burghers had become sufficiently strengthened, their struggle against the feudal nobility, which till then had been predominantly local, began to assume national dimensions. The first great action occurred in Germany — the so-called reformation. The burghers were neither powerful enough nor sufficiently developed to be able to unite under their banner the remaining rebellious estates — the plebeians of the towns, the lower nobility, and the peasants on the land. At first, the nobles were defeated; the peasants rose in a revolt which formed the peak of the whole revolutionary struggle; the cities left them in the lurch, and thus the revolution succumbed to the armies of the secular princes who reaped the whole profit. Thenceforward, Germany disappears for three centuries from the ranks of countries playing an independent active part in history. But, beside the German Luther appeared the Frenchman Calvin. With true French acuity, he put the bourgeois character of the Reformation in the forefront, republicanized and democratized the Church. While the Lutheran Reformation in Germany degenerated and reduced the country to rack and ruin, the Calvinist Reformation served as a banner for the republicans in Geneva, in Holland, and in Scotland, freed Holland from Spain and from the German Empire, and provided the ideological costume for the second act of the bourgeois revolution, which was taking place in England. Here, Calvinism justified itself as the true religious disguise of the interests of the bourgeoisie of that time, and on this account did not attain full recognition when the revolution ended in 1689 in a compromise between one part of the nobility and the bourgeoisie. The English state Church was re-established; but not in its earlier form of a Catholicism which had the king for its pope, being, instead, strongly Calvinized. The old state Church had celebrated the merry Catholic Sunday and had fought against the dull Calvinist one. The new, bourgeoisified Church introduced the latter, which adorns England to this day.
In France, the Calvinist minority was suppressed in 1685 and either Catholized or driven out of the country. But what was the good? Already at that time the freethinker Pierre Bayle was at the height of his activity, and in 1694 Voltaire was born. The forcible measures of Louis XIV only made it easier for the French bourgeoisie to carry through its revolution in the irreligious, exclusively political form which alone was suited to a developed bourgeoisie. Instead of Protestants, freethinkers took their seats in the national assemblies. Thereby Christianity entered into its final stage. It was incapable of doing any future service to any progressive class as the ideological garb of its aspirations. It became more and more the exclusive possession of the ruling classes; they apply it as a mere means of government, to keep the lower classes within bounds. Moreover, each of the different classes uses its own appropriate religion: the landed nobility — Catholic Jesuitism, or Protestant orthodoxy; the liberal and radical bourgeoisie — rationalism; and it makes little difference whether these gentlemen themselves believe in their respective religions or not.
We see, therefore: religion, once formed, always contains traditional material, just as in all ideological domains tradition forms a great conservative force. But the transformations which this material undergoes spring from class relations — that is to say, out of the economic relations of the people who execute these transformations. And here that is sufficient.
In the above, it could only be a question of giving a general sketch of the Marxist conception of history, at most with a few illustrations, as well. The proof must be derived from history itself; and, in this regard, it may be permitted to say that is has been sufficiently furnished in other writings. This conception, however, puts an end to philosophy in the realm of history, just as the dialectical conception of nature makes all natural philosophy both unnecessary and impossible. It is no longer a question anywhere of inventing interconnections from out of our brains, but of discovering them in the facts. For philosophy, which has been expelled from nature and history, there remains only the realm of pure thought, so far as it is left: the theory of the laws of the thought process itself, logic and dialectics.

 
With the Revolution of 1848, “educated” Germany said farewell to theory and went over to the field of practice. Small production and manufacture, based upon manual labor, were superseded by real large-scale industry. Germany again appeared on the world market. The new little German Empire [B] abolished at least the most crying of the abuses with which this development had been obstructed by the system of petty states, the relics of feudalism, and bureaucratic management. But to the same degree that speculation abandoned the philosopher’s study in order to set up its temple in the Stock Exchange, educated Germany lost the great aptitude for theory which had been the glory of Germany in the days of its deepest political humiliation — the aptitude for purely scientific investigation, irrespective of whether the result obtained was practically applicable or not, whether likely to offend the police authorities or not. Official German natural science, it is true, maintained its position in the front rank, particularly in the field of specialized research. But even the American journal Science rightly remarks that the decisive advances in the sphere of the comprehensive correlation of particular facts and their generalization into laws are now being made much more in England, instead of, as formerly, in Germany. And in the sphere of the historical sciences, philosophy included, the old fearless zeal for theory has now disappeared completely, along with classical philosophy. Inane eclecticism and an anxious concern for career and income, descending to the most vulgar job-hunting, occupy its place. The official representatives of these sciences have become the undisguised ideologists of the bourgeoisie and the existing state — but at a time when both stand in open antagonism to the working class.
Only among the working class does the German aptitude for theory remain unimpaired. Here, it cannot be exterminated. Here, there is no concern for careers,for profit-making, or for gracious patronage from above. On the contrary, the more ruthlessly and disinterestedly science proceeds the more it finds itself in harmony with the interest and aspirations of the workers. The new tendency, which recognized that the key to the understanding of the whole history of society lies in the history of the development of labor, from the outset addressed itself by preference to the working class and here found the response which it neither sought nor expected from officially recognized science. The German working-class movement is the inheritor of German classical philosophy.
 

 
(1) Here I may be permitted to make a personal explanation. Lately repeated reference has been made to my share in this theory, and so I can hardly avoid saying a few words here to settle this point. I cannot deny that both before and during my 40 years’ collaboration with Marx I had a certain independent share in laying the foundation of the theory, and more particularly in its elaboration.  But the greater part of its leading basic principles, especially in the realm of economics and history, and, above all, their final trenchant formulation, belong to Marx. What I contributed — at any rate with the exception of my work in a few special fields — Marx could very well have done without me. What Marx accomplished I would not have achieved.  Marx stood higher, saw further, and took a wider and quicker view than all the rest of us. Marx was a genius; we others were at best talented. Without him the theory would not be by far what it is today.  If therefore rightly bears his name.
(2) See Das Wesen der menschlichen Kopfarbeit, dargestellt von einem Handarbeiter [The Nature of Human Brainwork, Described by a Manual Worker]. Hamburg, Meissner.
[A] Albingenses: A religious sect which, during the 12th and 13th centuries, directed a movement against the Roman Catholic Church. The name is derived from the town of Albi, in the south of France.
[B] “The new little German Empire”: This term is applied to the German Empire without Austria, which arose in 1871, under Prussian hegemony.
Table of Contents: Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy



==========

## The Peasant Question in France and Germany






The Peasant Question in France and Germany






Works of Frederick Engels 1894
The Peasant Question in France and Germany


Source: Volume 3 of the Selected Works;
Written: between November 15-22, 1894;
First Published: in Die Neue Zeit, 1894-95;
Translated: by Progress Publishers;
Transcribed: by director@marx.org, October 1993.


Engels' The Peasant Question in France and Germany
was part of the current debate around agrarian issues. Engels wrote it
as rebuttal to various French Socialists (like Vollmar) and the agrarian
programme adopted in Marseilles in 1892 and supplemented in Nantes in 1894
(Frankfurt Congress of German Social-Democrats). In it, Engels discusses
a policy of alliance between the working class and the working peasantry.


Preface

Part 1: France

Part 2: Germany
 



Works on Pre-Capitalist Social Formations and the Peasantry
The Peasant Question in France and Germany, Engels 1894
Afterword to ‘On Social Relations in Russia’, Engels 1894
On The History of Early Christianity, Engels 1894
Origin of the Family, etc., Engels 1884
Letter to Vera Zasulich, Marx 1881
Transition from Ape to Man, Engels 1876
On Social Relations in Russia, Engels 1874
Precapitalist Economic Formations, Marx 1857
The Peasant War in Germany, Engels 1850

The German Ideology, Marx & Engels 1845

 


Subject Archive on Precapitalist formations
Marx Engels Archive




==========

## Introduction to Marx's The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850





Introduction to Class Struggles in France by Engels





Works of Frederick Engels 1895
Introduction to Karl Marx’s
The Class Struggles in France 1848 to 1850
“great importance must be attached to one of the
historical documents of the German labour movement:the Preface written by
Frederick Engels for the 1895 re-issue of Marx's Class Struggles in
France.” — Rosa Luxemburg.

Written: by Engels, March 6,
1895;
Source: Karl Marx Frederick Engels Selected Works, Vol. 1, 1969, Progress Publishers;
First published: in an abridged form in Die Neue
Zeit, Vol. 2, Nos 27 and 28, 1894-1895 and in the book: Karl Marx, Die
Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich 1848 bis 1850, Berlin, 1895.
See Introduction from Marx
Engels Selected Works, Volume 1, Progress Publishers, 1969.

The work republished here was Marx’s first attempt to
explain a piece of contemporary history by means of his materialist conception,
on the basis of the prevailing economic situation. In the Communist
Manifesto, the theory was applied in broad outline to the whole of modern
history; in the articles by Marx and myself in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung,
it was constantly used to interpret political events of the day. Here, on
the other hand, the question was to demonstrate the inner causal connection in
the course of a development which extended over some years, a development as
critical, for the whole of Europe, as it was typical; hence, in accordance with
the conception of the author, to trace political events back to effects of what
were, in the final analysis, economic causes.
If events and series of events are judged by current history, it will never
be possible to go back to the ultimate economic causes. Even today,
when the specialised press provides such rich material, it still remains
impossible even in England to follow day by day the movement of industry and
trade on the world market and the changes which take place in the methods of
production in such a way as to be able to draw a general conclusion for any
point in time from these manifold, complicated and ever-changing, factors, the
most important of which, into the bargain, generally operate a long time in
realms unknown before they suddenly make themselves forcefully felt on the
surface. A clear overall view of the economic history of a given period can
never be obtained contemporaneously, but only subsequently, after the material
has been collected and sifted. Statistics are a necessary auxiliary aid here,
and they always lag behind. For this reason, it is only too often necessary in
current history to treat this, the most decisive, factor as constant, and the
economic situation existing at the beginning of the period concerned as given
and unalterable for the whole period, or else to take notice of only such
changes in this situation as arise out of the patently manifest events
themselves, and are, therefore, likewise patently manifest. So here the
materialist method has quite often to limit itself to tracing political
conflicts back to the struggles between the interests of the existing social
classes and fractions of classes caused by economic development, and to
demonstrate that the particular political parties are the more or less adequate
political expression of these same classes and fractions of classes.
It is self-evident that this unavoidable neglect of contemporaneous changes
in the economic situation, the very basis of all the processes to be examined,
must be a source of error. But all the conditions required for a comprehensive
presentation of current history inevitably include sources of error —
which, however, keeps nobody from writing current history.
When Marx undertook this work, the source of error mentioned was even more
unavoidable. It was simply impossible during the Revolution period of 1848-49
to follow the economic transformations taking place simultaneously or even to
keep them in view. It was the same during his first months of exile in London,
in the autumn and winter of 1849-50. But that was precisely the time when Marx
began this work. And in spite of these unfavourable circumstances, his exact
knowledge both of the economic situation in France before, and of the political
history of that country after, the February Revolution made it possible for him
to present a picture of events which laid bare their inner connections in a way
never attained ever since, and which later passed with flying colours the
double test applied by Marx himself.
The first test arose when, after the spring of 1850, Marx once again found
time for economic studies, and began by applying himself to the economic
history of the previous ten years. What he had hitherto deduced, half a
priori, from sketchy material, thus became absolutely clear to him from
the facts themselves, namely that the world trade crisis of 1847 had been the
true mother of the February and March revolutions, and that the industrial
prosperity which had been returning gradually since the middle of 1848 and
attained full bloom in 1849 and 1850 was the revitalising force of a
restrengthened European reaction. That was crucially important. Whereas in the
first three articles (which appeared in the January, February and March issues
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung Politisch-ökonomische Revue, Hamburg,
1850) there was still the expectation of an early, fresh upsurge of
revolutionary vigour, the historical review written by Marx and myself for the
last issue, a double one (May to October), which was published in the autumn of
1850, breaks with these illusions once and for all: “A new revolution is
possible only in consequence of a new crisis. It is, however, just as certain
as this crisis." But that was
the only major change which had to be made. There was absolutely nothing to
alter in the interpretation of events given in the earlier chapters, or in the
causal connections established therein, as proved by the continuation of the
narrative from March 10 up to the autumn of 1850 in the said review. I have,
therefore, included this continuation as the fourth article in the present new
edition.
The second test was even more severe. Immediately after Louis
Bonaparte’s coup d'état of December 2, 1851, Marx dealt afresh with the
history of France from February 1848 up to this event which concluded the
revolutionary period for the time being. (Der 18. Brumaire des Louis
Bonaparte. Third edition, Hamburg, Meissner, 1885) In this pamphlet the
period depicted in our present publication is again dealt with, albeit in
briefer form. Compare this second presentation, written in the light of the
decisive event which happened over a year later, with ours and it will be found
that the author had very little to change.
What gives our work quite special significance is the fact that it was the
first to express the formula in which, by common agreement, the workers’
parties of all countries in the world briefly summarise their demand for
economic transformation: the appropriation of the means of production by
society. In the second chapter, in connection with the “right to
work”, which is described as “the first clumsy formula wherein the
revolutionary demands of the proletariat are summarised”, it is said:
“but behind the right to work stands the power over capital; behind the
power over capital, the appropriation of the means of production,
their subjection to the associated working class and, therefore, the
abolition of wage labour, of capital and of their mutual relations”.
Thus, here, for the first time, the proposition is formulated by which modern
workers’ socialism is sharply differentiated both from all the different
shades of feudal, bourgeois, petty-bourgeois, etc., socialism and from the
confused community of goods of utopian and of primitive
[naturwüchsigen] workers’ communism. If, later, Marx extended
the formula to include appropriation of the means of exchange, this extension,
which in any case was self-evident after the Communist Manifesto, only
expressed a corollary to the main proposition. A few wiseacres in England have
of late added that the “means of distribution” should also be
handed over to society. These gentlemen would be hard put to say what these
economic means of distribution, distinct from the means of production and
exchange, actually are; unless political means of distribution are
meant, taxes, poor relief, including the Sachsenwald and other endowments. But, first,
these are even now means of distribution in the possession of society as a
whole, either of the state or of the community, and second, it is precisely
these we want to abolish.
* * *
When the February Revolution broke out, all of us, as far as our
conceptions of the conditions and the course of revolutionary movements were
concerned, were under the spell of previous historical experience, particularly
that of France. It was, indeed, the latter which had dominated the whole of
European history since 1789, and from which now once again the signal had gone
forth for general revolutionary change. It was, therefore, natural and
unavoidable that our conceptions of the nature and the course of the
“social” revolution proclaimed in Paris in February 1848, of the
revolution of the proletariat, should be strongly coloured by memories of the
prototypes of 1789 and 1830. Moreover, when the Paris uprising found its echo
in the victorious insurrections in Vienna, Milan and Berlin; when the whole of
Europe right up to the Russian frontier was swept into the movement; when
thereupon in Paris, in June, the first great battle for power between the
proletariat and the bourgeoisie was fought; when even the victory of its class
so shook the bourgeoisie of all countries that it fled back into the arms of
the monarchist-feudal reaction which had just been overthrown — there
could be no doubt for us, under the circumstances then obtaining, that the
great decisive battle had commenced, that it would have to be fought out in a
single, long and vicissitudinous period of revolution, but that it could only
end in the final victory of the proletariat.
After the defeats of 1849 we in no way shared the illusions of the vulgar
democrats grouped around the future provisional governments in
partibus. [In partibus infidelium —
in the land of the infidels, outside reality — an addition to the title
of Catholic bishops appointed to non-Christian countries] These vulgar
democrats reckoned on a speedy and definitive victory of the
“people” over the “tyrants”; we reckoned on a long
struggle, after the removal of the “tyrants”, among the
antagonistic elements concealed within this “people” itself. The
vulgar democrats expected sparks to fly again any day; we declared as early as
autumn 1850 that at least the first chapter of the revolutionary period was
closed and that nothing was to be expected until the outbreak of a new world
economic crisis. For which reason we were excommunicated, as traitors to the
revolution, by the very people who later, almost without exception, made their
peace with Bismarck — so far as Bismarck found them worth the trouble.
But history has shown us too to have been wrong, has revealed our point of
view at that time as an illusion. It has done even more; it has not merely
dispelled the erroneous notions we then held; it has also completely
transformed the conditions under which the proletariat has to fight. The mode
of struggle of 1848 is today obsolete in every respect, and this is a point
which deserves closer examination on the present occasion.
All revolutions up to the present day have resulted in the displacement of
the rule of one class by the rule of another; but all ruling classes up to now
have been only small minorities in relation to the ruled mass of the people.
One ruling minority was thus overthrown; another minority seized the helm of
state in its stead and refashioned the state institutions to suit its own
interests. Thus on every occasion a minority group was enabled and called upon
to rule by the given degree of economic development; and just for that reason,
and only for that reason, it happened that the ruled majority either
participated in the revolution for the benefit of the former or else simply
acquiesced in it. But if we disregard the concrete content in each case, the
common form of all these revolutions was that they were minority revolutions.
Even when the majority took part, it did so — whether wittingly or not
— only in the service of a minority; but because of this, or even simply
because of the passive, unresisting attitude of the majority, this minority
acquired the appearance of being the representative of the whole people.
As a rule, after the first great success, the victorious minority split; one
half was satisfied with what had been gained, the other wanted to go still
further, and put forward new demands, which, partly at least, were also in the
real or apparent interest of the great mass of the people. In isolated cases
these more radical demands were actually forced through, but often only for the
moment; the more moderate party would regain the upper hand, and what had been
won most recently would wholly or partly be lost again; the vanquished would
then cry treachery or ascribe their defeat to accident. In reality, however,
the truth of the matter was usually this: the achievements of the first victory
were only safeguarded by the second victory of the more radical party; this
having been attained, and, with it, what was necessary for the moment, the
radicals and their achievements vanished once more from the stage.
All revolutions of modern times, beginning with the great English Revolution
of the seventeenth century, showed these features, which appeared inseparable
from every revolutionary struggle. They appeared applicable, also, to the
struggle of the proletariat for its emancipation; all the more applicable,
since precisely in 1848 there were but a very few people who had any idea at
all of the direction in which this emancipation was to be sought. The
proletarian masses themselves, even in Paris, after the victory, were still
absolutely in the dark as to the path to be taken. And yet the movement was
there, instinctive, spontaneous, irrepressible. Was not this just the situation
in which a revolution had to succeed, led, it is true, by a minority, though
this time not in the interest of the minority, but in the finest interest of
the majority? If, in all the longer revolutionary periods, it was so easy to
win over the great masses of the people simply by the plausible false
representations of the pressing minorities, why should they be less susceptible
to ideas which were the truest reflection of their economic condition, which
were none other than the clear, rational expression of their needs, of needs
not yet understood but merely vaguely felt by them? To be sure, this
revolutionary mood of the masses had almost always, and usually very speedily,
given way to lassitude or even to a change to the opposite as soon as illusion
evaporated and disappointment set in. But what was involved here were not false
representations, but the implementation of the most vital interests of the
great majority itself, interests which, it is true, were at that time by no
means clear to this great majority, but which were bound to become clear to it
as their practical implementation proceeded, by their convincing obviousness.
And when, as Marx showed in his third article, in the spring of 1850, the
development of the bourgeois republic that arose out of the
“social” Revolution of 1848 had even concentrated real power in the
hands of the big bourgeoisie — monarchistically inclined as it was into
the bargain — and, on the other hand, had grouped all the other social
classes, peasantry as well as petty bourgeoisie, around the proletariat, so
that during and after the common victory, not they but the proletariat grown
wise from experience had to become the decisive factor — was there not
every prospect then of turning the revolution of the minority into a revolution
of the majority?
History has proved us wrong, and all who thought like us. It has made it
clear that the state of economic development on the Continent at that time was
not, by a long way, ripe for the elimination of capitalist production; it has
proved this by the economic revolution which, since 1848, has seized the whole
of the Continent, and has caused big industry to take real root in France,
Austria, Hungary, Poland and, recently, in Russia, while it has made Germany
positively an industrial country of the first rank — all on a capitalist
basis, which in the year 1848, therefore, still had a great capacity for
expansion. But it is precisely this industrial revolution which has everywhere
produced clarity in class relations, has removed a number of intermediate forms
handed down from the period of manufacture and in Eastern Europe even from
guild handicraft, has created a genuine bourgeois and a genuine large-scale
industrial proletariat and has pushed them into the foreground of social
development. However, owing to this, the struggle between these two great
classes, a struggle which, outside England, existed in 1848 only in Paris and,
at the most, in a few big industrial centres, has spread over the whole of
Europe and reached an intensity still inconceivable in 1848. At that time the
many obscure gospels of the sects, with their panaceas; today the single
generally recognised, crystal-clear theory of Marx, sharply formulating
the ultimate aims of the struggle. At that time the masses, sundered and
differing according to locality and nationality, linked only by the feeling of
common suffering, undeveloped, helplessly tossed to and fro from enthusiasm to
despair; today the single great international army of socialists,
marching irresistibly on and growing daily in number, organisation, discipline,
insight and certainty of victory. If even this mighty army of the proletariat
has still not reached its goal, if, far from winning victory by one
mighty stroke, it has slowly to press forward from position to position in
a hard, tenacious struggle, this only proves, once and for all, how impossible
it was in 1848 to win social transformation merely by a surprise attack.
A bourgeoisie split into two dynastic-monarchist sections, a bourgeoisie, however, which
demanded, above all, peace and security for its financial operations, faced by
a proletariat vanquished, indeed, but still a menace, a proletariat around
which petty bourgeois and peasants grouped themselves more and more — the
continual threat of a violent outbreak, which, nevertheless, offered absolutely
no prospect of a final solution — such was the situation, as if
made-to-measure for the coup d'état of the third, the pseudo-democratic
pretender, Louis Bonaparte. On December 2, 1851, by means of the army, he put
an end to the tense situation and secured Europe internal tranquillity, only to
confer upon it the blessing of a new era of wars. The period of revolutions
from below was concluded for the time being; there followed a period of
revolutions from above.
The reversion to the empire in 1851 provided fresh proof of the immaturity
of the proletarian aspirations of that time. But it was itself to create the
conditions under which they were bound to grow mature. Internal tranquillity
ensured the unfettered advancement of the new industrial boom; the necessity of
keeping the army occupied and of diverting the revolutionary currents in an
outward direction produced the wars in which Bonaparte, under the pretext of asserting the
“principle of nationalities”, sought to secure annexations for
France. His imitator, Bismarck, adopted the same policy for Prussia; he carried
out his coup d'état, his revolution from above, in 1866, against the German
Confederation and Austria, and no less against the Prussian
Konfliktskammer. But
Europe was too small for two Bonapartes and thus the irony of history had it
that Bismarck overthrew Bonaparte, and King William of Prussia not only
established the little German empire, but also the French republic. The overall
outcome, however, was that in Europe the independence and internal unity of the
great nations, with the exception of Poland, had become a fact. Within
relatively modest limits, it is true, but for all that on a scale large enough
to allow the development of the working class to proceed without finding
national complications any longer a serious obstacle. The grave-diggers of the
Revolution of 1848 had become the executors of its will. And alongside them
there already rose threateningly the heir of 1848, the proletariat, in the
shape of the International.
After the war of 1870-71, Bonaparte vanished from the stage and
Bismarck’s mission was fulfilled, so that he could now sink back again to
the position of an ordinary Junker. The period, however, was brought to a close
by the Paris Commune. A perfidious attempt by Thiers to steal the cannon of the
Paris National Guard sparked off a victorious rising. It was shown once more
that in Paris none but a proletarian revolution is any longer possible. After
the victory power fell, quite of itself and quite undisputed, into the hands of
the working class. And once again it was proved how impossible even then,
twenty years after the time described in our work, this rule of the working
class still was. On the one hand, France left Paris in the lurch, looked on
while it bled to death from the bullets of MacMahon; on the other hand, the
Commune was consumed in unfruitful strife between the two parties which split
it, the Blanquists (the majority) and the Proudhonists (the minority), neither
of which knew what was to be done. The victory which came as a gift in 1871
remained just as unfruitful as the surprise attack of 1848.
It was believed that the militant proletariat had been finally buried with
the Paris Commune. But, completely to the contrary, it dates its most powerful
resurgence from the Commune and the Franco-Prussian War. The recruitment of the
whole of the population able to bear arms into armies that henceforth could be
counted only in millions, and the introduction of fire-arms, projectiles and
explosives of hitherto unprecedented yield, completely transformed all warfare.
This revolution, on the one hand, put an abrupt end to the Bonapartist war
period and ensured peaceful industrial development by making any war other than
a world war of unprecedented cruelty and absolutely incalculable outcome an
impossibility. On the other hand, it caused military expenditure to rise in
geometrical progression and thereby forced up taxes to exorbitant levels and so
drove the poorer classes of people into the arms of socialism. The annexation
of Alsace-Lorraine, the immediate cause of the mad competition in armaments,
was able to set the French and German bourgeoisie chauvinistically at each
other’s throats; for the workers of the two countries it became a new
bond of unity. And the anniversary of the Paris Commune became the first
universal holiday of the whole proletariat.
The war of 1870-71 and the defeat of the Commune transferred the centre of
gravity of the European workers’ movement in the meantime from France to
Germany, as Marx had foretold. In France it naturally took years to recover
from the blood-letting of May 1871. In Germany, on the other hand, where
industry — fostered, in addition, in positively hothouse fashion by the
blessing of the French milliards — developed at increasing speed,
Social-Democracy experienced a still more rapid and enduring growth. Thanks to
the intelligent use which the German workers made of the universal suffrage
introduced in 1866, the astonishing growth of the party is made plain to all
the world by incontestable figures: 1871, 102,000; 1874, 352,000; 1877, 493,000
Social-Democratic votes. Then came recognition of this advance by high
authority in the shape of the Anti-Socialist Law; the party was temporarily broken up, the number
of votes dropped to 312,000 in 1881. But that was quickly overcome, and then,
under the pressure of the Exceptional Law, without a press, without a legal
organisation and without the right of association and assembly, rapid expansion
began in earnest: 1884, 550,000; 1887, 763,000; 1890, 1,427,000 votes. The hand
of the state was paralysed. The Anti-Socialist Law disappeared; the socialist
vote rose to 1,787,000, over a quarter of all the votes cast. The government
and the ruling classes had exhausted all their expedients — uselessly,
pointlessly, unsuccessfully. The tangible proofs of their impotence, which the
authorities, from night watchman to the imperial chancellor had had to accept
— and that from the despised workers! — these proofs were counted
in millions. The state was at the end of its tether, the workers only at the
beginning of theirs.
But, besides, the German workers rendered a second great service to their
cause in addition to the first, a service performed by their mere existence as
the strongest, most disciplined and most rapidly growing socialist party. They
supplied their comrades in all countries with a new weapon, and one of the most
potent, when they showed them how to make use of universal suffrage.
There had long been universal suffrage in France, but it had fallen into
disrepute through the way it had been abused by the Bonapartist government.
After the Commune there was no workers’ party to make use of it. It had
also existed in Spain since the republic but in Spain election boycotts had
been the rule for all serious opposition parties from time immemorial. The
experience of the Swiss with universal suffrage was also anything but
encouraging for a workers’ party. The revolutionary workers of the Latin
countries had been wont to regard the suffrage as a snare, as an instrument of
government trickery. It was different in Germany. The Communist Manifesto
had already proclaimed the winning of universal suffrage, of democracy, as
one of the first and most important tasks of the militant proletariat, and
Lassalle had again taken up this point. Now that Bismarck found himself
compelled to introduce this franchise as the only means of interesting the mass
of the people in his plans, our workers immediately took it in earnest and sent
August Bebel to the first, constituent Reichstag. And from that day on they
have used the franchise in a way which has paid them a thousandfold and has
served as a model to the workers of all countries. The franchise has been, in
the words of the French Marxist programme, transformé de moyen de duperie
qu'il a été jusquici en instrument d'emancipation — transformed by
them from a means of deception, which it was before, into an instrument of
emancipation. And if
universal suffrage had offered no other advantage than that it allowed us to
count our numbers every three years; that by the regularly established,
unexpectedly rapid rise in our vote it increased in equal measure the
workers’ certainty of victory and the dismay of their opponents, and so
became our best means of propaganda; that it accurately informed us of our own
strength and that of all opposing parties, and thereby provided us with a
measure of proportion second to none for our actions, safeguarding us from
untimely timidity as much as from untimely foolhardiness — if this had
been the only advantage we gained from the suffrage, it would still have been
much more than enough. But it did more than this by far. In election propaganda
it provided us with a means, second to none, of getting in touch with the mass
of the people where they still stand aloof from us; of forcing all parties to
defend their views and actions against our attacks before all the people; and,
further, it provided our representatives in the Reichstag with a platform from
which they could speak to their opponents in parliament, and to the masses
outside, with quite different authority and freedom than in the press or at
meetings. Of what avail was their Anti-Socialist Law to the government and the
bourgeoisie when election campaigning and socialist speeches in the Reichstag
continually broke through it?
With this successful utilisation of universal suffrage, however, an entirely
new method of proletarian struggle came into operation, and this method quickly
took on a more tangible form. It was found that the state institutions, in
which the rule of the bourgeoisie is organised, offer the working class still
further levers to fight these very state institutions. The workers took part in
elections to particular diets, to municipal councils and to trades courts; they
contested with the bourgeoisie every post in the occupation of which a
sufficient part of the proletariat had a say. And so it happened that the
bourgeoisie and the government came to be much more afraid of the legal than of
the illegal action of the workers’ party, of the results of elections
than of those of rebellion.
For here, too, the conditions of the struggle had changed fundamentally.
Rebellion in the old style, street fighting with barricades, which decided the
issue everywhere up to 1848, had become largely outdated.
Let us have no illusions about it: a real victory of insurrection over the
military in street fighting, a victory as between two armies, is one of the
rarest exceptions. And the insurgents counted on it just as rarely. For them it
was solely a question of making the troops yield to moral influences which, in
a fight between the armies of two warring countries, do not come into play at
all or do so to a much smaller extent. If they succeed in this, the troops fail
to respond, or the commanding officers lose their heads, and the insurrection
wins. If they do not succeed in this, then, even where the military are in the
minority, the superiority of better equipment and training, of uniform
leadership, of the planned employment of the military forces and of discipline
makes itself felt. The most that an insurrection can achieve in the way of
actual tactical operations is the proficient construction and defence of a
single barricade. Mutual support, the disposition and employment of reserves
— in short, concerted and co-ordinated action of the individual
detachments, indispensable even for the defence of one borough, not to speak of
the whole of a large town, will be attainable only to a very limited extent,
and usually not at all. Concentration of the military forces at a decisive
point is, of course, out of the question here. Hence passive defence is the
predominant form of struggle; an attack will be mounted here and there, by way
of exception, in the form of occasional thrusts and assaults on the flanks; as
a rule, however, it will be limited to the occupation of positions abandoned by
retreating troops. In addition, the military have at their disposal artillery
and fully equipped corps of trained engineers, means of warfare which, in
nearly every case, the insurgents entirely lack. No wonder, then, that even the
barricade fighting conducted with the greatest heroism — Paris, June
1848; Vienna, October 1848; Dresden, May 1849 — ended in the defeat of
the insurrection as soon as the leaders of the attack, unhampered by political
considerations, acted according to purely military criteria, and their soldiers
remained reliable.
The numerous successes of the insurgents up to 1848 were due to a great
variety of causes. In Paris, in July 1830 and February 1848, as in most of the
Spanish street fighting, a civic guard stood between the insurgents and the
military. This guard either sided directly with the insurrection, or else by
its lukewarm, indecisive attitude caused the troops likewise to vacillate, and
supplied the insurrection with arms into the bargain. Where this civic guard
opposed the insurrection from the outset, as in June 1848 in Paris, the
insurrection was vanquished. In Berlin in 1848, the people were victorious
partly through considerable reinforcements in the shape of new fighting forces
during the night and the morning of March 19th, partly as a result of the
exhaustion and poor rations of the troops, and, finally, partly as a result of
the paralysis engendered by the command. But in all cases the fight was won
because the troops failed to respond, because the commanding officers lost the
faculty to decide or because their hands were tied.
Even in the classic time of street fighting, therefore, the barricade
produced more of a moral than a material effect. It was a means of shaking the
steadfastness of the military. If it held out until this was attained, victory
was won; if not, the outcome was defeat. This is the main point which must be
kept in view, also when examining the outlook for possible future street
fighting. [The last sentence is omitted in Die Neue
Zeit and in the 1895 edition of Die Klassenkampfe in Frankreich 1848
bis 1850]
Back in 1849 already, this outlook was pretty poor. Everywhere the
bourgeoisie had thrown in its lot with the governments, “culture and
property” had hailed and feasted the military moving against
insurrection. The barricade had lost its magic; the soldier no longer saw
behind it “the people”, but rebels, subversives, plunderers,
levellers, the scum of society; the officer had in the course of time become
versed in the tactical forms of street fighting, he no longer marched straight
ahead and without cover against the improvised breastwork, but went round it
through gardens, yards and houses. And this was now successful, with a little
skill, in nine cases out of ten.
But since then there have been very many more changes, and all in favour of
the military. If the big towns have become considerably bigger, the armies have
become bigger still. Paris and Berlin have, since 1848, grown less than
fourfold, but their garrisons have grown more than that. By means of the
railways, these garrisons can, in twenty-four hours, be more than doubled, and
in forty-eight hours they can be increased to huge armies. The arming of this
enormously increased number of troops has become incomparably more effective.
In 1848 the smooth-bore, muzzle-loading percussion gun, today the
small-calibre, breech-loading magazine rifle, which shoots four times as far,
ten times as accurately and ten times as fast as the former. At that time the
relatively ineffective round shot and grape-shot of the artillery; today the
percussion shells, of which one is sufficient to demolish the best barricade.
At that time the pick-axe of the sapper for breaking through fire proof walls;
today the dynamite cartridge.
On the other hand, all the conditions of the insurgents’ side have
grown worse. An insurrection with which all sections of the people sympathise
is hardly likely to recur; in the class struggle all the middle strata will never in
all probability group themselves around the proletariat so exclusively that in
comparison the party of reaction gathered round the bourgeoisie will well-nigh
disappear. The “people”, therefore, will always appear divided, and
thus a most powerful lever, so extraordinarily effective in 1848, is gone. If
more soldiers who have seen service came over to the insurrectionists, the
arming of them would become so much the more difficult. The hunting and fancy
guns of the munitions shops — even if not previously made unusable by the
removal of part of the lock on police orders — are far from being a match
for the magazine rifle of the soldier, even in close fighting. Up to 1848 it
was possible to make the necessary ammunition oneself out of powder and lead;
today the cartridges differ for each gun, and are everywhere alike only in one
point, namely, that they are a complicated product of big industry, and
therefore not to be manufactured ex tempore, with the result that most
guns are useless as long as one does not possess the ammunition suited only to
them. And, finally, since 1848 the newly built quarters of the big cities have
been laid out in long, straight, broad streets, tailor-made to give full effect
to the new cannons and rifles. The revolutionary would have to be mad to choose
of his own accord the new working class districts in the north or east of
Berlin for a barricade fight.
Does that mean that in the future street fighting will no longer play any
role? Certainly not. It only means that the conditions since 1848 have become
far more unfavourable for civilian fighters and far more favourable for the
military. In future, street fighting can, therefore, be victorious only if this
disadvantageous situation is compensated by other factors. Accordingly, it will
occur more seldom at the beginning of a great revolution than at its later
stages, and will have to be undertaken with greater forces. These, however, may
then well prefer, as in the whole great French Revolution or on September 4 and
October 31, 1870, in Paris, the open attack to passive barricade tactics.
Does the reader now understand why the powers-that-be positively want to get
us to go where the guns shoot and the sabres slash? Why they accuse us today of
cowardice, because we do not take without more ado to the streets, where we are
certain of defeat in advance? Why they so earnestly implore us to play for once
the part of cannon fodder?
The gentlemen pour out their petitions and their challenges for nothing, for
absolutely nothing. We are not that stupid. They might just as well demand from
their enemy in the next war that he should accept battle in the line formation
of old Fritz, [Frederick II] or in the columns of
whole divisions a la Wagram and Waterloo, and with the flint-lock in his hands at that. If
conditions have changed in the case of war between nations, this is no less
true in the case of the class struggle. The time of surprise attacks, of
revolutions carried through by small conscious minorities at the head of masses
lacking consciousness is past. Where it is a question of a complete
transformation of the social organisation, the masses themselves must also be
in on it, must themselves already have grasped what is at stake, what they are
fighting for, body and soul.
The history of the last fifty years has taught us that. But in order that
the masses may understand what is to be done, long, persistent work is
required, and it is just this work that we are now pursuing, and with a success
which drives the enemy to despair.
In the Latin countries, too, it is being realised more and more that the old
tactics must be revised. Everywhere the German example of utilising the
suffrage, of winning all posts accessible to us, has been imitated; everywhere
the unprepared launching of an attack has been relegated to the background.
[In Die Neue Zeit and in the 1895 edition of
Die Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich the words “everywhere the
unprepared launching of an attack has been relegated to the background”
are omitted.] In France, where for more than a hundred years the ground
has been undermined by one revolution after another, where there is not a
single party which has not done its share in conspiracies, insurrections and
all other revolutionary actions; in France, where, as a result, the government
is by no means sure of the army and where the conditions for an insurrectionary
coup de main are altogether far more favourable than in Germany — even in
France the Socialists are realising more and more that no lasting victory is
possible for them unless they first win over the great mass of the people, i.e.
the peasants in this instance. Slow propaganda work and parliamentary activity
are recognised here, too, as the immediate tasks of the party. Successes have
not been lacking. Not only have a whole series of municipal councils been won;
fifty Socialists have seats in the Chambers, and they have already overthrown
three ministries and a president of the republic. In Belgium last year the
workers forced the adoption of the franchise, and have been victorious in a quarter of the
constituencies. In Switzerland, in Italy, in Denmark, yes, even in Bulgaria and
Romania the Socialists are represented in the parliaments. In Austria all
parties agree that our admission to the Imperial Council can no longer be
withheld. We will get in, that is certain; the only question still in dispute
is: by which door? And even in Russia, when the famous Zemsky
Sobor meets — that
National Assembly to which young Nicholas offers such vain resistance —
even there we can reckon with certainty on being represented in it.
Of course, our foreign comrades do not in the least renounce their right to
revolution. The right to revolution is, after all, the only really
“historical right”, the only right on which all modern states
rest without exception, Mecklenburg included, whose aristocratic revolution was
ended in 1755 by the “hereditary settlement”, the glorious charter
of feudalism still valid today.
The right to revolution is so incontestably recognised in the general
consciousness that even General von Boguslawski derives the right to a coup
d'état, which he vindicates for his Kaiser, solely from this popular right.
But whatever may happen in other countries, the German Social-Democrats
occupy a special position and thus, at least in the immediate future, have a
special task. The two million voters whom they send to the ballot box, together
with the young men and women who stand behind them as non-voters, form the most
numerous, most compact mass, the decisive “shock force” of the
international proletarian army. This mass already supplies over a quarter of
the votes cast; and as the by-elections to the Reichstag, the Diet elections in
individual states, the municipal council and trades court elections
demonstrate, it is constantly on the increase. Its growth proceeds as
spontaneously, as steadily, as irresistibly, and at the same time as tranquilly
as a natural process. All government intervention has proved powerless against
it. We can count even today on two and a quarter million voters. If it
continues in this fashion, by the end of the century we shall have the greater
part of the middle strata of society, petty bourgeoisie and small peasants, and
we shall grow into the decisive power in the land, before which all other
powers will have to bow, whether they like it or not. To keep this growth going
without interruption until it gets beyond the control of the prevailing
governmental system of itself, not to fritter away this daily increasing shock
force in vanguard skirmishes, but to keep it intact until the decisive day,
[In Die Neue Zeit and in the 1895 edition of
Die Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich the words “not to fritter away
this daily increasing shock force in vanguard skirmishes, but to keep it intact
until the decisive day” are omitted.] that is our main task. And
there is only one means by which the steady rise of the socialist fighting
forces in Germany could be temporarily halted, and even thrown back for some
time: a clash on a grand scale with the military, a blood-letting like that of
1871 in Paris. In the long run even that would be overcome. To shoot a party
which numbers millions out of existence is too much even for all the magazine
rifles of Europe and America. But the normal development would be impeded, the
shock force would, perhaps, not be available at the critical moment, the
decisive combat [In Die Neue Zeit and in the
1895 edition of Die Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich the words “the
shock force would, perhaps, not be available at the critical moment” are
omitted and instead of “the decisive combat” the word
“decision” is printed.] would be delayed, protracted and
attended by a heavier toll.
The irony of world history turns everything upside down. We, the
“revolutionaries”, the “overthrowers” — we are
thriving far better on legal methods than on illegal methods and overthrow. The
parties of order, as they call themselves, are perishing under the legal
conditions created by themselves. They cry despairingly with Odilon Barrot: la
légalité nous tue, legality is the death of us; whereas we, under this legality, get firm muscles
and rosy cheeks and look like life eternal. And if we are not so crazy
as to let ourselves be driven to street fighting in order to please them, then
in the end there is nothing left for them to do but themselves break through
this dire legality.
Meanwhile they make new laws against overthrows. Again everything is turned
upside down. These anti-overthrow fanatics of today, are they not themselves
the overthrowers of yesterday? Have we perchance evoked the civil war
of 1866? Have we driven the King of Hanover, the Elector of Hesse, and
the Duke of Nassau from their hereditary lawful domains and annexed these
hereditary domains? And these
overthrowers of the German Confederation and three crowns by the grace of God
complain of overthrow! Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes?
[Who would suffer the Gracchi to complain of sedition?,
Juvenal, Satire, 11.24] Who could allow the Bismarck
worshippers to rail at overthrow?
Let them, nevertheless, put through their anti-overthrow bills, make them
still worse, transform the whole penal law into india-rubber, they will gain
nothing but fresh proof of their impotence. If they want to deal
Social-Democracy a serious blow they will have to resort to quite other
measures. They can cope with the Social-Democratic overthrow, which just now is
doing so well by keeping the law, only by an overthrow on the part of the
parties of Order, an overthrow which cannot live without breaking the law. Mr.
Roessler, the Prussian bureaucrat, and Mr. von Boguslawski, the Prussian
general, have shown them the only way perhaps still possible of getting at the
workers, who simply refuse to let themselves be lured into street fighting.
Breach of the constitution, dictatorship, return to absolutism, regis
voluntas suprema lex ! [The King’s will is the
supreme law!]. Therefore, take courage, gentlemen; here half measures
will not do; here you must go the whole hog!
But do not forget that the German empire, like all small states and
generally all modern states, is a product of contract; of the
contract, first, of the princes with one another and, second, of the princes
with the people. If one side breaks the contract, the whole contract falls to
the ground; the other side is then also no longer bound, as Bismarck
demonstrated to us so beautifully in 1866. If, therefore, you break the
constitution of the Reich, Social-Democracy is free, and can do as it pleases
with regard to you. But it will hardly blurt out to you today what it is going
to do then. [In Die Neue Zeit and in the 1895
edition of Die Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich the end of this paragraph
starting with the words “as Bismarck” is omitted.] 
It is now, almost to the year, sixteen centuries since a dangerous party of
overthrow was likewise active in the Roman empire. It undermined religion and
all the foundations of the state; it flatly denied that Caesar’s will was
the supreme law; it was without a fatherland, was international; it spread over
the whole empire, from Gaul to Asia, and beyond the frontiers of the empire. It
had long carried on seditious activities underground in secret; for a
considerable time, however, it had felt itself strong enough to come out into
the open. This party of overthrow, which was known by the name of Christians,
was also strongly represented in the army; whole legions were Christian. When
they were ordered to attend the sacrificial ceremonies of the pagan established
church, in order to do the honours there, the subversive soldiers had the
audacity to stick peculiar emblems — crosses — on their helmets in
protest. Even the customary barrack bullying of their superior officers was
fruitless. The Emperor Diocletian could no longer quietly look on while order,
obedience and discipline in his army were being undermined. He stepped in with
vigour, while there was still time. He promulgated an anti-Socialist — I
beg your pardon, I meant to say anti-Christian-law. The meetings of the
overthrowers were forbidden , their meeting halls were closed or even pulled
down, the Christian emblems, crosses, etc., were, like the red handkerchiefs in
Saxony, prohibited. Christians were declared ineligible for holding public
office; they were not to be allowed to become even corporals. Since at that
time there were no judges so well trained in “respect of persons”
as Mr. von Köller’s anti-overthrow bill assumes, Christians were
forbidden out of hand to seek justice before a court. Even this exceptional law
was to no avail. The Christians tore it down from the walls with scorn; they
are even supposed to have set fire to the Emperor’s palace in Nicomedia
in his presence. Then the latter revenged himself by the great persecution of
Christians in the year 303 A.D. It was the last of its kind. And it was so
effective that seventeen years later the army consisted overwhelmingly of
Christians, and the succeeding autocrat of the whole Roman empire, Constantine,
called the Great by the priests, proclaimed Christianity the state religion.
F. Engels
London, March 6, 1895
 

Class Struggles in France
1895 Works | Marx/Engels Archive 




==========

## Marx to P. V. Annenkov, December 28, 1846









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## Marx to J. Weydemeyer, March 5, 1852 









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## Marx to L. Kugelmann, April 12, 1871 










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871
Marx to Dr Kugelmann
Concerning the Paris Commune
Abstract


Written: April 12-17, 1871;
Transcribed: Zodiac;
HTML Markup: S. Ryan.

[London] April 12, 1871
Dear Kugelmann
Your ‘medical advice’ was effective in so far as I have consulted my Dr Maddison and have for the present put myself under his care. He says however that my lungs are in excellent condition and the cough is due to bronchitis, etc. It probably also affects the liver.
Yesterday we received the by no means soothing news that Lafargue (not Laura) was at present in Paris. [1]

If you look at the last chapter of my Eighteenth Brumaire you will
find that I say that the next attempt of the French revolution will be
no longer, as before, to transfer the bureaucratic-military machine from
one hand to another, but to smash it, and this is essential for every
real people's revolution on the Continent. And this is what our
heroic Party comrades in Paris are attempting.  What elasticity, what
historical initiative, what a capacity for sacrifice in these Parisians!
After six months of hunger and ruin, caused rather by internal treachery
than by the external enemy, they rise, beneath Prussian bayonets, as if
there had never been a war between France and Germany and the enemy were
not at the gates of Paris.  History has no like example of a like
greatness.  If they are defeated only their “good nature” will be to
blame.  They should have marched at once on Versailles, after first
Vinoy and then the reactionary section of the Paris National Guard had
themselves retreated.  The right moment was missed because of
conscientious scruples.  They did not want to start the civil war, as
if that mischievous abortion Thiers had not already started the civil
war with his attempt to disarm Paris.  Second mistake: The Central
Committee surrendered its power too soon, to make way for the Commune. 
Again from a too “honorable” scrupulosity! However that may be, the
present rising in Paris – even if it be crushed by the wolves, swine
and vile curs of the old society – is the most glorious deed of our
Party since the June insurrection in Paris.  Compare these Parisians,
storming heaven, with the slave to heaven of the German-Prussian Holy
Roman Empire, with its posthumous masquerades reeking of the barracks,
the Church, cabbage-junkerdom and above all, of the philistine. 

A propos.  In the official publication of the list of those receiving
direct subsidies from Louis Bonaparte's treasury there is a note that
Vogt received 40,000 francs in August 1859.  I have informed Liebknecht
of the fait, for further use. 
You can send me Haxthausen’s [2] book for lately I have been receiving undamaged various pamphlets, etc, not only from Germany but even from Petersburg.
Thanks for the various newspapers you sent me. (Please let me have more of them, for I want to write something about Germany, the Reichstag, etc.)
Best regards to the Countess and Käuzchen. [3]
Yours
KM

Notes
1. Paul Lafargue had come to Paris from Bordeaux, where he was then living, to obtain from the Commune full powers to organise an armed uprising in Bordeaux  –  Progress Publishers.
2. August Haxthausen (1792-1866)  –  Prussian official and writer, author of a book on survival of communal system in land relations in Russia, reactionary feudalist  –  Progress Publishers.
3. Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann  –  Progress Publishers.
 


1871 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Marx to L. Kugelmann, April 17, 1871 










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871
Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann
In Hanover
Abstract


Written: April 17, 1871;
Source: Marx and Engels Correspondence;
Publisher: International Publishers (1968);
First Published: Gestamtausgabe;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan in 1999;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

[London] April 17, 1871
Dear Kugelmann
Your letter duly received. Just at present I have my hands full. Hence only a few words.

... How you can compare petty-bourgeois demonstrations à la 13 June[1],
1849, etc., with the present struggle in Paris is quite
incomprehensible to me. 

World history would indeed be very easy to make, if the struggle were
taken up only on condition of infallibly favorable chances.  It would,
on the other hand, be a very mystical nature, if “accidents” played no
part.  These accidents themselves fall naturally into the general course
of development and are compensated again by other accidents.  But
acceleration and delay are very dependent upon such “accidents,” which
included the "accident" of the character of those who at first stand at
the head of the movement. 

The decisive, unfavorable “accident” this time is by no means to be
found in the general conditions of French society, but in the presence
of the Prussians in France and their position right before Paris.  Of
this the Parisians were well aware.  But of this, the bourgeois
canaille of Versailles were also well aware.  Precisely for that
reason they presented the Parisians with the alternative of taking up
the fight of succumbing without a struggle.  In the latter case, the
demoralization of the working class against the capitalist class and its
state has entered upon a new phase with the struggle in paris.  Whatever
the immediate results may be, a new point of departure of world-historic
importance has been gained. ... 
Adieu!
KM
Notes
1. On 13 June 1849, the petty-bourgeois party of the Montagne organised a peaceful demonstration in Paris as a protest against the infringements of the French constitution by the president and the majority of the Legislative Assembly. The demonstration was easily dispersed by troops thus confirming the complete bankruptcy of the petty-bourgeois democrats in France  –  Progress Publishers.
 


1871 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Marx to F. Bolte, November 23, 1871 










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871
Marx to Friedrich Bolte
In New York
Abstract


Written: November 23, 1871;
Source: Marx and Engels Correspondence;
Publisher: International Publishers (1968);
First Published: Gestamtausgabe;
Translated: Donna Torr;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan in 1999;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

[London,] November 23, 1871

The International was founded in order to replace the Socialist or semi-Socialist sects by a real organisation of the working class for struggle.  The original Statutes and the Inaugural Address show this at the first glance. On the other hand the Internationalists could not have maintained themselves if the course of history had not already smashed up the sectarian system. The development of the system of Socialist sects and that of the real workers' movement always stand in inverse ratio to each other.  So long as the sects are (historically) justified, the working class is not yet ripe for an independent historic movement. As soon as it has attained this maturity ail sects are essentially reactionary.  Nevertheless what history has shown everywhere was repeated within the International. The antiquated makes an attempt to re-establish and maintain itself within the newly achieved form.
And the history of the International was a continual struggle on the part of the General Council against the sects and amateur experiments which attempted to assert themselves within the International itself against the genuine movement of the working class. This struggle was conducted at the Congresses, but far more in the private dealings of the General Council with the individual sections.

In Paris, as the Proudhonists (Mutualists) were co-founders of the Association, they naturally had the reins in their hands there for the first years. Later, of course, collectivist, positivist, etc., groups were formed in opposition to them.

In Germany – the Lassalle clique. I myself went on corresponding for two years with the notorious Schweitzer and proved irrefutably to him that Lassalle's organisation is nothing but a sectarian organisation and as such hostile to the organisation of the genuine workers' movement striven for by the International.  He had his "reasons" for not understanding this.

At the end of 1868 the Russian, Bakunin, entered the International with the aim of forming inside it a second International called the  “Alliance of Social-Democracy,”  with himself as leader.   He – a  man  devoid of theoretical knowledge – put forward the pretension that this separate body was to represent the scientific propaganda of the International, which was to be made the special function of this second International within the International.

His programme was a superficially scraped together hash of Right and Left – EQUALITY Of CLASSES (!), abolition of the right of inheritance as the starting point of the social movement (St. Simonistic nonsense), atheism as a dogma to be dictated to the members, etc., and as the main dogma (Proudhonist), abstention from the political movement.

This infant's spelling-book found favour (and still has a certain hold) in Italy and Spain, where the real conditions of the workers' movement are as yet little developed, and among a few vain, ambitious and empty doctrinaires in French Switzerland and Belgium.

For Mr. Bakunin the theory (the assembled rubbish he has scraped together from Proudhon, St. Simon, etc.) is a secondary affair – merely a means to his personal self-assertion. If he is a nonentity as a theoretician he is in his element as an intriguer.

For years the General Council had to fight against this conspiracy (which was supported up to a certain point by the French Proudhonists, especially in the south of France). At last, by means of Conference resolutions I  (2)  and (3), IX, XVI, and XVII, it delivered its long prepared blow.

Obviously the General Council does not support in America what it combats in Europe. Resolutions I (2) and (3) and IX now give the New York committee legal weapons with which to put an end to all sectarian formations and amateur groups and if necessary to expel them.

The New York Committee will do well to express its full agreement with the decisions of the Conference in an official communication to the General Council.

Bakunin, personally threatened in addition by Resolution XIV (publication in Égalité of the Netchaev trial) which will bring to light his infamous doings in Russia, is making every possible effort to get a protest started against the Conference among the remnants of his followers.

For this purpose he has got into contact with the demoralised section of the French political refugees in Geneva and London (a numerically weak section, anyway). The slogan given out is that the Geneva Council is dominated by Pan-Germanism (especially Bismarckism). This refers to the unpardonable fact that I am by birth a German and do actually exercise a decisive intellectual influence on the German Council.  (N.B.  The German element on the Council is two-thirds weaker numerically than either the English or the French. The crime therefore consists in the fact that the English and French elements are dominated by the German element where theory is concerned (!) and find this domination, i.e., German science, very useful and indeed indispensable.)

In Geneva, under the patronage of the bourgeois Madame Andrée Léo (who at the Lausanne Congress was shameless enough to denounce Ferré to his executioners in Versailles), they have published a paper, La Révolution Sociale, which conducts arguments against us in almost literally the same words as the Journal de Genève, the most reactionary paper in Europe.

In London they attempted to establish a French section, of whose activities you will find an example in No. 42 of Qui Vive? which I enclose. (Also the number which contains the letter from our French Secretary, Seraillier). This section, consisting of twenty people (including a lot of spies), has not been recognised by the General Council, but another much more numerous section has been.

Actually, despite the intrigues of this bunch of scoundrels, we are carrying on great propaganda in France--and in Russia, where they know what value to place on Bakunin and where my book on capital is just being published in Russian....

N.B. as to political movement: The political movement of the working class has as its object, of course, the conquest of political power for the working class, and for this it is naturally necessary that a previous organisation of the working class, itself arising from their economic struggles, should have been developed up to a certain point.

On the other hand, however, every movement in which the working class comes out as a class against the ruling classes and attempts to force them by pressure from without is a political movement.  For instance, the attempt in a particular factory or even a particular industry to force a shorter working day out of the capitalists by strikes, etc., is a purely economic movement. On the other hand the movement to force an eight-hour day, etc., law is a political movement. And in this way, out of the separate economic movements of the workers there grows up everywhere a political movement, that is to say a movement of the class, with the object of achieving its interests in a general form, in a form possessing a general social force of compulsion. If these movements presuppose a certain degree of previous organisation, they are themselves equally a means of the development of this organisation.

Where the working class is not yet far enough advanced in its organisation to undertake a decisive campaign against the collective power, i.e., the political power of the ruling classes,
it must at any rate be trained for this by continual agitation against and a hostile attitude towards the policy of the ruling classes.  Otherwise it will remain a plaything in their hands, as the September revolution in France showed, and as is also proved up to a certain point by the game Messrs. Gladstone & Co. are bringing off in England even up to the present time.
 


1871 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to A. Bebel, June 20, 1873 










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1873



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1873
Engels to August Bebel
In Hubertsburg
Abstract


Source: Marx and Engels Correspondence, International Publishers (1968);
Additional text from Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Correspondence, Progress Publishers (1975);
First Published: Gesamtausgabe, International Publishers (1942);
Transcribed: Sally Ryan.

London, 20 June, 1873
Dear Bebel
I am answering your letter first because Liebknecht’s is still with Marx, who cannot locate it just now.
It was not Hepner [1] but Yorck’s [2] letter to him, signed by the Committee, which caused us here to be afraid that your imprisonment would be used by the Party authorities, which unfortunately are entirely Lassallean, to transform the Volksstaat into an ‘honest’ Neue-Sozial-Demokrat. Yorck plainly confessed to such an intention, and as the Committee claimed to have the right to appoint and remove the editors the danger was surely great enough. Hepner’s impending deportation [3] gave them another pretext for carrying out these plans. Under these circumstances it was absolutely necessary for us to know what the situation was; hence this correspondence. ... 
...
With regard to the attitude of the Party towards Lassalleanism, you can of course judge what tactics should be adopted better than we, especially in particular cases. But there is also this to be considered. When, as in your case, one is to a certain extent in the position of a competitor to the Allgemeine Deutsche Arbeiter Verein (General Association of German Workers) it is easy to pay too much attention to one's rival and to get into the habit of always thinking about him first.  But both the General Association of German Workers and the Social-Democratic Workers' Party together still only form a very small minority of the German working class. Our view, which we have found confirmed by long practice, is that the correct tactic in propaganda is not to draw away a few individuals and members here and there from one's opponent, but to work on the great mass which still remains apathetic. The primitive force of a single individual whom we have ourselves attracted from the crude mass is worth more than ten Lassallean renegades, who always bring the seeds of their false tendencies into the Party with them. And if one could only get the masses without their local leaders it would still be all right. But one always has to take a whole crowd of these leaders into the bargain, and they are bound by their previous public utterances, if not by their previous views, and have above all things to prove that they have not deserted their principles but that on the contrary the Social-Democratic Workers' Party preaches true Lassalleanism. This was the unfortunate thing at Eisenach, not to be avoided at that time, perhaps, but there is no doubt at all that these elements have done harm to the Party and I am not sure that the Party would not have been at least as strong to-day without that addition.  In any case, however, I should regard it as a misfortune if these elements were reinforced.

One must not allow oneself to be misled by the cry for “unity.” Those who have this word most often on their lips are those who sow the most dissension, just as at present the Jura Bakuninists in Switzerland, who have provoked all the splits, scream for nothing so much as for unity.  Those unity fanatics are either the people of limited intelligence who want to stir everything up together into one nondescript brew, which, the moment it is left to settle, throws up the differences again in much more acute opposition because they are now all together in one pot (you have a fine example of this in Germany with the people who preach the reconciliation of the workers and the petty bourgeoisie)--or else they are people who consciously or unconsciously (like Mühlberger[*], for instance) want to adulterate the movement. For this reason the greatest sectarians and the biggest brawlers and rogues are at certain moments the loudest shouters for unity. Nobody in our lifetime has given us more trouble and been more treacherous than the unity shouters.

Naturally every party leadership wants to see successes and this is quite good too. But there are circumstances in which one must have the courage to sacrifice momentary success for more important things. Especially a party like ours, whose ultimate success is so absolutely certain, and which has developed so enormously in our own lifetime and under our own eyes, momentary success is by no means always and absolutely necessary.  Take the International, for instance. After the Commune it had its colossal success. The bourgeoisie, struck all of a heap, ascribed omnipotence to it. The great mass of the membership believed things would stay like that for all eternity.  We knew very well that the bubble must burst.  All the riff-raff attached themselves to it.  The sectarians within it began to flourish, and misused the International in the hope that the most stupid and mean actions would be permitted them. We did not allow that. Well knowing that the bubble must burst some time all the same, our concern was not to delay the catastrophe but to take care that the International emerged from it pure and unadulterated.  The bubble burst at the Hague, and you know that the majority of Congress members went home sick with disappointment. And yet nearly all these disappointed people, who imagined they would find the ideal of universal brotherhood and reconciliation in the International, had far more bitter quarrels at home than those which broke out at the Hague! Now the sectarian quarrel-mongers are preaching conciliation and decrying us as the intolerant and the dictators. And if we had come out in a conciliatory way at the Hague, if we had hushed up the breaking out of the split--what would have been the result? The sectarians, especially the Bakuninists, would have got another year in which to perpetrate, in the name of the International, much greater stupidities and infamies even; the workers of the most developed countries would have turned away in disgust;  the bubble would not have burst but, pierced by pinpricks, would have slowly collapsed, and the next Congress, which would have been bound to bring the crisis anyhow, would have turned into the lowest kind of personal row, because principles had already been sacrificed at the Hague.  Then the International would indeed have gone to pieces---gone to pieces through "unity"! Instead of this we have now got rid of the rotten elements with honour to ourselves--the members of the Commune who were present at the last decisive session say that no session of the Commune left such a terrible impression upon them as this session of the tribunal which passed judgment on the traitors to the European proletariat--we have left them to expend all their forces in lying, slander and intrigue for ten months--and where are they? They, the alleged representatives of the great majority of the International, now announce
that they do not dare to come to the next Congress (more details in an article which is being sent off for the Volksstaat with this letter). And if we had to do it again we should not, taking it all together, act any differently -- tactical mistakes are of course always committed.

In any case I think the efficient elements among the Lassalleans will fall to you of themselves in course of time and that it would therefore be unwise to break off the fruit before it is ripe, as the unity people want.

For the rest, old Hegel has already said: A party proves itself a victorious party by the fact that it splits and can stand the split.  The movement of the proletariat necessarily passes through different stages of development; at every stage one section of people lags behind and does not join in the further advance; and this alone explains why it is that actually the "solidarity of the proletariat" is everywhere realised in different party groupings which carry on life and death feuds with one another, as the Christian sects in the Roman Empire did amidst the worst persecutions.
If the Neue Sozial-Demokrat for example has more subscribers than the Volksstaat, you ought not to forget either that each sect is necessarily fanatic and through this fanaticism obtains, particularly in regions where it is new (as for instance the General Association of German Workers is in Schleswig-Holstein), much greater momentary successes than the Party, which simply represents the real movement, without any sectarian oddities. But on the other hand, fanaticism does not last long.
I have to close my letter as the mail is about to be dispatched. Let me only add hurriedly: Marx cannot tackle Lassalle [4] until the French translation is finished (approx end of July), after which he will definitely need a rest as he has greatly overworked himself.
That you have been serving your jail sentence stoically and are studying is very good. We shall all be glad to see you here next year.
Cordial greetings to Liebknecht.
Sincerely yours
F Engels
Notes
* Mühlberger, Arthur. A physician, follower of Proudhon; anonymous author of a series of articles on the housing question (1872) to which Engels addressed in his book, The Housing Question.
1. Adolf Hepner (1846-1923)  –  German Social-Democrat, an editor of Volksstaat, delegate to Hague Congress of International (1872), later emigrated to USA  –  Progress Publishers.
2. Theodor Yorck (?-1875)  –  a leading member of German working-class movement, Lassallean, member of Executive of General Association of German Workers, in 1889 joined opposition against Schweitzer and took part in founding of Social-Democratic Workers Party, party Secretary (1871-74)  –  Progress Publishers.
3. Hepner, who was accused of ‘having worked for the International’ and having attended the Hague Congress, was sentenced to four weeks’ imprisonment at the end of 1872, and in the spring of 1873 he was deported from Leipzig  –  Progress Publishers.
4. During 1872 and 1873 Liebknecht and Hepner had asked Marx many times to write a critique of Lassalle’s views either as a pamphlet or a series of articles for the Volksstaat  –  Progress Publishers.
 


1873 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Marx to W. Blos, November 10, 1877 









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## Engels to K. Kautsly, September 12, 1882 










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1882



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1882
Engels to Karl Kautsky
In Vienna
Abstract


Published: Gesamtausgabe, International Publishers, 1942;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

London, 12 September, 1882

You ask me what the English workers think about colonial policy. Well, exactly the same as they think about politics in general: the same as what the bourgeois think. There is no workers' party here, there are only Conservatives and Liberal-Radicals, and the workers gaily share the feast of England's monopoly of the world market and the colonies. In my opinion the colonies proper, i.e., the countries occupied by a European population, Canada, the Cape, Australia, will all become independent; on the other hand the countries inhabited by a native population, which are simply subjugated, India, Algiers, the Dutch, Portuguese and Spanish possessions, must be taken over for the time being by the proletariat and led as rapidly as possible towards independence.  How this process will develop is difficult to say. India will perhaps, indeed very probably, produce a revolution, and as the proletariat emancipating itself cannot conduct any colonial wars, this would have to be given full scope; it would not pass off without all sorts of destruction, of course, but that sort of thing is inseparable from all revolutions.  The same might also take place elsewhere, e.g., in Algiers and Egypt, and would certainly be the best thing for us.  We shall have enough to do at home.  Once Europe is reorganised, and North America, that will furnish such colossal power and such an example that the semi-civilised countries will follow in their wake of their own accord. Economic needs alone will be responsible for this. But as to what social and political phases these countries will then have to pass through before they likewise arrive at socialist organisation, we to-day can only advance rather idle hypotheses, I think. One thing alone is certain: the victorious proletariat can force no blessings of any kind upon any foreign nation without undermining its own victory by so doing.  Which of course by no means excludes defensive wars of various kinds.

The business in Egypt has been contrived by Russian diplomacy. Gladstone is to take Egypt (which he has not got yet by a long way and if he had it he would still be a long way from keeping it) in order that Russia may take Armenia, which according to Gladstone would be a further liberation of a Christian country from the Mohammedan yoke.  Everything else about the affair is a sham, humbug, pretext. Whether the humbug will succeed will soon be seen.
 


1882 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to C. Schmidt, August 5, 1890 










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890
Engels to Conrad Schmidt
In Berlin
Abstract


First published: Sozialistische Monatshefte, Nr. 18-19, Berlin, 1920;
Transcription/Markup: Brian Baggins;
Online Version: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2000.

London, August 5, 1890
 [ ....] 

I saw a review of Paul Barth's book [Die Geschichtsphilosophie Hegels und der Hegelianer bis auf Marx und Hartmann] by that bird of ill omen, Moritz Wirth, in the Vienna Deutsche Worte, and this book itself, as well.  I will have a look at it, but I must say that if "little Moritz" is right when he quotes Barth as stating that the sole example of the dependence of philosophy, etc., on the material conditions of existence which he can find in all Marx's works is that Descartes declares animals to the machines, then I am sorry for the man who can write such a thing.  And if this man has not yet discovered that while the material mode of existence is the primum agens [primary agent, prime cause] this does not preclude the ideological spheres from reacting upon it in their turn, though with a secondary effect, he cannot possibly have understood the subject he is writing about.  However, as I said, all this is secondhand and little Moritz is a dangerous friend.  The materialist conception of history has a lot of them nowadays, to whom it serves as an excuse for  not  studying history.  Just as Marx used to say, commenting on the French "Marxists" of the late [18]70s: "All I know is that I am not a Marxist."


There has also been a discussion in the Volks-Tribune about the distribution of products in future society, whether this will take place according to the amount of work done or otherwise.  The question has been approached very "materialistically" in opposition to certain idealistic phraseology about justice.  But strangely enough it has not struck anyone that, after all, the method of distribution essentially depends on how much there is to distribute, and that this must surely change with the progress of production and social organization, so that the method of distribution may also change.  But everyone who took part in the discussion, "socialist society" appeared not as something undergoing continuous change and progress but as a stable affair fixed once for all, which must, therefore, have a method of distribution fixed once for all.  All one can reasonably do, however, is 1) to try and discover the method of distribution to be used at the beginning, and 2) to try and find the general tendency of the further development.  But about this I do not find a single word in the whole debate.

 
In general, the word "materialistic" serves many of the younger writers in Germany as a mere phrase with which anything and everything is labeled without further study, that is, they stick on this label and then consider the question disposed of.  But our conception of history is above all a guide to study, not a lever for construction after the manner of the Hegelian.  All history must be studied afresh, the conditions of existence of the different formations of society must be examined individually before the attempt is made to deduce them from the political, civil law, aesthetic, philosophic, religious, etc., views corresponding to them.  Up to now but little has been done here because only a few people have got down to it seriously.  In this field we can utilize heaps of help, it is immensely big, anyone who will work seriously can achieve much and distinguish himself.  But instead of this too many of the younger Germans simply make use of the phrase historical materialism (and everything can be turned into a phrase) only in order to get their own relatively scanty historical knowledge — for economic history is still as yet in its swaddling clothes!  — constructed into a neat system as quickly as possible, and they then deem themselves something very tremendous.  And after that a Barth can come along and attack the thing itself, which in his circle has indeed been degraded to a mere phrase.


However, all this will right itself.  We're strong enough in Germany now to stand a lot.  One of the greatest services which the Anti-Socialist Law did us was to free us from the obtuseness of the German intellectual who had got tinged with socialism.  We are now strong enough to digest the German intellectual too, who is giving himself great airs again.  You, who have really done something, must have noticed yourself how few of the young literary men who fasten themselves on to the party give themselves in the trouble to study economics, the history of economics, the history of trade, of industry, of agriculture, of the formations of society.  How many know anything of Maurer except his name!  The self-sufficiency of the journalist must serve for everything here and the result looks like it.  It often seems as if these gentlemen think anything is good enough for the workers.  If these gentlemen only knew that Marx thought his best things were still not good enough for the workers, how he regarded it as a crime to offer the workers anything but the very best!


 [ ....] 

 


1890 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to Otto von Boenigk, August 21, 1890 










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890
Engels to Otto Von Boenigk
In Breslau
Abstract


Transcription/Markup: Brian Baggins;
Online Version: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2000;

Folkestone, near Dover
August 21, 1890

...  I can reply only briefly and in general terms to your inquiries [A], for as concerns the first question I should otherwise have to write a treatise.

Ad. 1. To my mind, the so-called “socialist society” is not anything immutable.  Like all other social formations, it should be conceived in a state of constant flux and change.  Its crucial difference from the present order consists naturally in production organized on the basis of common ownership by the nation of all means of production.  To begin this reorganization tomorrow, but performing it gradually, seems to me quite feasible.  That our workers are capable of it is borne out by their many producer and consumer cooperatives which, whenever they're not deliberately ruined by the police, are equally well and far more honestly run than the bourgeois stock companies.  I cannot see how you can speak of the ignorance of the masses in Germany after the brilliant evidence of political maturity shown by the workers in their victorious struggle against the Anti-Socialist Law.  The patronizing and errant lecturing of our so-called intellectuals seems to me a far greater impediment.  We are still in need of technicians, agronomists, engineers, chemists, architects, etc., it is true, but if the worst comes to the worst we can always buy them just as well as the capitalists buy them, and if a severe example is made of a few of the traders among them — for traders there are sure to be — they will find it to their own advantage to deal fairly with us.  But apart from the specialists, among whom I also include schoolteachers, we can get along perfectly well without the other “intellectuals.”  The present influx of literati and students into the party, for example, may be quite damaging if these gentlemen are not properly kept in check.


The Junker latifundia east of the Elbe could be easily leased under the due technical management to the present day-laborers and other retinue, who work the estates jointly.  If any disturbances occur, the Junkers, who have brutalized people by flouting all the existing school legislation, will alone be to blame.


The biggest obstacles are the small peasants and the importunate super-clever intellectuals who always think they know everything so much the better, the less they understand it.


Once we have a sufficient number of followers among the masses, the big industries and the large-scale latifundia farming can be quickly socialized, provided we hold the political power.  The rest will follow shortly, sooner or later.  And we shall have it all our own way in large-scale production.


You speak of an absence of uniform insight.  This exists — but on the part of the intellectuals to stem from the aristocracy and the bourgeoisie and who do not suspect how much they still have to learn from the workers...

 


[A]
Boenigk asked Engels whether it was possible and advisable to effect socialist transformations considering the differences in education, level of consciousness, etc., among the various classes of society.

 


1890 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to J. Bloch, September 21, 1890










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890
Engels to J. Bloch
In Königsberg
Abstract


Source: Historical Materialism (Marx, Engels, Lenin), p. 294 - 296;
Publisher: Progress Publishers, 1972;
First Published: by  Der sozialistische Akademiker, Berlin, October 1, 1895;
Translated: from German;
Online Version: marxists.org 1999;
Transcription/Markup: Brian Baggins;

London, September 21, 1890
[....]
 


According to the materialist conception of history, the ultimately determining element in history is the production and reproduction of real life. Other than this neither Marx nor I have ever asserted. Hence if somebody twists this into saying that the economic element is the only determining one, he transforms that proposition into a meaningless, abstract, senseless phrase. The economic situation is the basis, but the various elements of the superstructure — political forms of the class struggle and its results, to wit: constitutions established by the victorious class after a successful battle, etc., juridical forms, and even the reflexes of all these actual struggles in the brains of the participants, political, juristic, philosophical theories, religious views and their further development into systems of dogmas — also exercise their influence upon the course of the historical struggles and in many cases preponderate in determining their form. There is an interaction of all these elements in which, amid all the endless host of accidents (that is, of things and events whose inner interconnection is so remote or so impossible of proof that we can regard it as non-existent, as negligible), the economic movement finally asserts itself as necessary. Otherwise the application of the theory to any period of history would be easier than the solution of a simple equation of the first degree.

We make our history ourselves, but, in the first place, under very definite assumptions and conditions. Among these the economic ones are ultimately decisive. But the political ones, etc., and indeed even the traditions which haunt human minds also play a part, although not the decisive one. The Prussian state also arose and developed from historical, ultimately economic, causes. But it could scarcely be maintained without pedantry that among the many small states of North Germany, Brandenburg was specifically determined by economic necessity to become the great power embodying the economic, linguistic and, after the Reformation, also the religious difference between North and South, and not by other elements as well (above all by its entanglement with Poland, owing to the possession of Prussia, and hence with international political relations — which were indeed also decisive in the formation of the Austrian dynastic power). Without making oneself ridiculous it would be a difficult thing to explain in terms of economics the existence of every small state in Germany, past and present, or the origin of the High German consonant permutations, which widened the geographic partition wall formed by the mountains from the Sudetic range to the Taunus to form a regular fissure across all Germany.

In the second place, however, history is made in such a way that the final result always arises from conflicts between many individual wills, of which each in turn has been made what it is by a host of particular conditions of life. Thus there are innumerable intersecting forces, an infinite series of parallelograms of forces which give rise to one resultant — the historical event. This may again itself be viewed as the product of a power which works as a whole unconsciously and without volition. For what each individual wills is obstructed by everyone else, and what emerges is something that no one willed. Thus history has proceeded hitherto in the manner of a natural process and is essentially subject to the same laws of motion. But from the fact that the wills of individuals — each of whom desires what he is impelled to by his physical constitution and external, in the last resort economic, circumstances (either his own personal circumstances or those of society in general) — do not attain what they want, but are merged into an aggregate mean, a common resultant, it must not be concluded that they are equal to zero. On the contrary, each contributes to the resultant and is to this extent included in it.

I would furthermore ask you to study this theory from its original sources and not at second-hand; it is really much easier. Marx hardly wrote anything in which it did not play a part. But especially The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte is a most excellent example of its application. There are also many allusions to it in Capital. Then may I also direct you to my writings: Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science and Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy, in which I have given the most detailed account of historical materialism which, as far as I know, exists. [The German Ideology was not published in Marx or Engels lifetime] 
 
Marx and I are ourselves partly to blame for the fact that the younger people sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is due to it. We had to emphasise the main principle vis-à-vis our adversaries, who denied it, and we had not always the time, the place or the opportunity to give their due to the other elements involved in the interaction. But when it came to presenting a section of history, that is, to making a practical application, it was a different matter and there no error was permissible. Unfortunately, however, it happens only too often that people think they have fully understood a new theory and can apply it without more ado from the moment they have assimilated its main principles, and even those not always correctly. And I cannot exempt many of the more recent "Marxists" from this reproach, for the most amazing rubbish has been produced in this quarter, too....


[....]
 

 


1890 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to C. Schmidt, October 27, 1890 










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890
Engels to Conrad Schmidt
In Berlin
Abstract


Source: Marx and Engels Correspondence;
Publisher: International Publishers (1968);
First Published: Gestamtausgabe;
Translated: Donna Torr;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan in 2000;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

London,  October 27, 1890

I think you would do very well to take the post in Zürich. [Editor of the Zürich Post.]  You could always learn a good deal about economics there, especially if you bear in mind that Zürich is still only a third-rate money and speculation market, so that the impressions which make themselves felt there are weakened or deliberately
distorted by twofold or threefold reflection. But you will get a practical knowledge of the mechanism and be obliged to follow the stock exchange reports from London, New York, Paris, Berlin and Vienna at first hand, and in this way the world market, in its reflex as money and stock market, will reveal itself to you.  Economic, political and other reflections are just like those in the human eye, they pass through a condensing lens and therefore appear upside down, standing on their heads. Only the nervous system which would put them on their feet again for representation is lacking.  The money market man only sees the movement of industry and of the world market in the inverted reflection of the money and stock market and so effect becomes cause to him. I noticed that in the 'forties already in Manchester: the London Stock Exchange reports were utterly useless for the course of industry and its periodical maxima and minima because these gentry tried to explain everything from crises on the money market, which were generally only symptoms. At that time the object was to explain away the origin of industrial crises as temporary overproduction, so that the thing had in addition its tendentious side, provocative of distortion.  This point has now gone (for us, at any rate, for good and all), added to which it is indeed a fact that the money market can also have its own crises, in which direct disturbances of industry only play a subordinate part or no part at all – here there is still much, especially in the history of the last twenty years, to be examined and established.
Where there is division of labour on a social scale there is also mutual independence among the different sections of work. In the last instance production is the decisive factor. But when the trade in products becomes independent of production itself, it follows a movement of its own, which, while it is governed as a whole by production, still in particular cases and within this general dependence follows particular laws contained in the nature of this new factor; this movement has phases of its own and in its turn reacts on the movement of production. The discovery of America was due to the thirst for gold which had previously driven the Portuguese to Africa (compare Soetbeer's Production of Precious Metals), because the enormously extended European industry of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries and the trade corresponding to it demanded more means of exchange than Germany, the great silver country from 1450 to 1550, could provide. The conquest of India by the Portuguese, Dutch and English between 1500 and 1800 had imports from India as its object – nobody dreamt of exporting anything there. And yet what a colossal reaction these discoveries and conquests, solely conditioned by the interests of trade, had upon industry:  they first created the need for exports to these countries and developed large-scale industry.
So it is too with the money market. As soon as trading in money becomes separate from trade in commodities it has (under certain conditions imposed by production and commodity trade and within these limits) a development of its own, special laws and separate phases determined by its own nature. If,  in this further development,  trade in  money  extends in addition to trade in securities and these securities are not only government securities but also industrial and transport stocks and shares, so that money trade conquers the direct control over a portion of the production by which, taken as a whole, it is  itself controlled,  then  the  reaction  of money  trading  on production becomes still stronger and more complicated. The money traders have become the owners of railways, mines, iron works, etc. These means of production take on a double aspect if their working has to be directed sometimes in the immediate interests of production but sometimes also according to the requirements of the shareholders, in so far as they are money traders. The most striking example of this is the American railways, whose working is entirely dependent on the stock exchange operations of a Jay Gould or a Vanderbilt, etc., these having nothing whatever to do with the particular railway concerned and its interests as a means of communication. And even here in England we have seen struggles lasting for tens of years between different railway companies over the boundaries of their respective territories – struggles in which an enormous amount of money was thrown away, not in the interests of production and communications but simply because of a rivalry which usually only had the object of facilitating the stock exchange dealings of the shareholding money traders.
With these few indications of my conception of the relation of production to commodity trade and of both to money trading, I have already also answered, in essence, your questions about "historical materialism" generally.  The thing is easiest to grasp from the point of view of the division of labour. Society
gives rise to certain common functions which it cannot dispense with.  The persons selected for these functions form a new branch of the division of labour within society. This gives them particular interests, distinct too from the interests of those who gave them their office; they make themselves independent of the latter and – the state is in being. And now the development is the same as  it was with  commodity trade and later with money trade; the new independent power, while having in the main to follow the movement of production, also, owing to its inward independence (the relative independence originally transferred to it and gradually further developed) reacts in its turn upon the conditions and course of production. It is the interaction of two unequal forces: on one hand the economic movement, on the other the new political power, which strives for as much independence as possible, and which, having once been established, is also endowed with a movement of its own. On the whole, the economic movement gets its way, but it has also to suffer reactions from the political movement which it established and endowed with relative independence itself, from the movement of the state power on the one hand and of the opposition simultaneously engendered on the other. Just as the movement of the industrial market is, in the main and with the reservations already indicated, reflected in the money market and, of course, in inverted form, so the struggle between the classes already existing and already in conflict with one another is reflected in the struggle between government and opposition, but also in inverted form, no longer directly but indirectly, not as a class struggle but as a fight for political principles, and so distorted that it has taken us thousands of years to get behind it again.
The reaction of the state power upon economic development can be one of three kinds: it can run in the same direction, and then development is more rapid; it can oppose the line of development, in which case nowadays state power in every great nation will go to pieces in the long run; or it can cut off the economic development from certain paths, and impose on it certain others. This case ultimately reduces itself to one of the two previous ones.  But it is obvious that in cases two and three the political power can do great damage to the economic development and result in the squandering of great masses of energy and material.
Then there is also the case of the conquest and brutal destruction of economic resources, by which, in certain circumstances, a whole local or national economic development could formerly be ruined. Nowadays such a case usually has the opposite effect, at least among great nations: in the long run the defeated power often gains more economically, politically and morally than the victor.
It is similar with law. As soon as the new division of labour which creates professional lawyers becomes necessary, another new and independent sphere is opened up which, for all its general dependence on production and trade, still has its own capacity for reacting upon these spheres as well. In a modern state, law must not only correspond to the general economic position and be its expression, but must also be an expression which is consistent in itself, and which does not, owing to inner contradictions, look glaringly inconsistent.  And in order to achieve this, the faithful reflection of economic conditions is more and more infringed upon. All the more so the more rarely it happens that a code of law is the blunt, unmitigated, unadulterated expression of the domination of a class – this in itself would already offend the “conception of justice.” Even in the Code Napoleon the pure logical conception of justice held by the revolutionary bourgeoisie of 1792-96 is already adulterated in many ways, and in so far as it is embodied there has daily to undergo all sorts of attenuation owing to the rising power of the proletariat. Which does not prevent the Code Napoleon from being the statute book which serves as a basis for every new code of law in every part of the world. Thus to a great extent the course of the “development of law” only consists: first in the attempt to do away with the contradictions arising from the direct translation of economic relations into legal principles, and to establish a harmonious system of law, and then in the repeated breaches made in this system by the influence and
pressure of further economic development, which involves it in further contradictions (I am only speaking here of civil law for the moment).
The reflection of economic relations as legal principles is necessarily also a topsy turvy one:  it happens without the person who is acting being conscious of it; the jurist imagines he is operating with a priori principles, whereas they are really only economic reflexes; so everything is upside down. And it seems to me obvious that this inversion, which, so long as it remains unrecognised, forms what we call ideological conception, reacts in its turn upon the economic basis and may, within certain limits, modify it.   The basis of the law of inheritance – assuming that the stages reached in the development of the family are equal – is an economic one. But it would be difficult to prove, for instance, that the absolute liberty of the testator in England and the severe restrictions imposed upon him in France are only due in every detail to economic causes. Both react back, however, on the economic sphere to a very considerable extent, because they influence the division of property.
As to the realms of ideology which soar still higher in the air, religion, philosophy, etc., these have a prehistoric stock, found already in existence and taken over in the historic period, of what we should to-day call bunk. These various false conceptions of nature, of man's own being, of spirits, magic forces, etc., have for the most part only a negative economic basis; but the low economic development of the prehistoric period is supplemented and also partially conditioned and even caused by the false conceptions of nature. And even though economic necessity was the main driving force of the progressive knowledge of nature and becomes ever more so, it would surely be pedantic to try and find economic causes for all this primitive nonsense.  The history of science is the history of the gradual clearing away of this nonsense or of its replacement by fresh but already less absurd nonsense. The people who deal with this belong in their turn to special spheres in the division of labour and appear to themselves to be working in an independent field. And in so far as they form an independent group within the social division of labour, in so far do their productions, including their errors, react back as an influence upon the whole development of society, even on its economic development. But all the same they themselves remain under the dominating influence of economic development. In philosophy, for instance, this can be most readily proved in the bourgeois period.  Hobbes was the first modern materialist (in the eighteenth century sense) but he was an absolutist in a period when absolute monarchy was at its height throughout the whole of Europe and when the fight of absolute monarchy versus the people was beginning in England. Locke, both in religion and politics, was the child of the class compromise of 1688. The English deists and their more consistent successors, the French materialists, were the true philosophers of the bourgeoisie, the French even of the bourgeois revolution.  The German petty bourgeois runs through German philosophy from Kant to Hegel, sometimes positively and sometimes negatively. But the philosophy of every epoch, since it is a definite sphere in the division of labour, has as its presupposition certain definite intellectual material handed down to it by its predecessors, from which it takes its start. And that is why economically backward countries can still play first fiddle in philosophy: France in the eighteenth century compared with England, on whose philosophy the French based themselves, and later Germany in comparison with both. But the philosophy both of France and Germany and the general blossoming of literature at that time were also the result of a rising economic development. I consider the ultimate supremacy of economic development established in these spheres too, but it comes to pass within conditions imposed by the particular sphere itself: in philosophy, for instance, through the operation of economic influences  (which again generally only act under political, etc., disguises) upon the existing philosophic material handed down by predecessors. Here economy creates nothing absolutely new (a novo), but it determines the way in which the existing material of thought is altered and further developed, and that too for the most part indirectly, for it is the political, legal and moral reflexes which exercise the greatest direct influence upon philosophy.
About religion I have said the most necessary things in the last section on Feuerbach.
If therefore Barth supposes that we deny any and every reaction of the political, etc., reflexes of the economic movement upon the movement itself, he is simply tilting at windmills. He has only got to look at Marx's Eighteenth Brumaire, which deals almost exclusively with the particular part played by political struggles and events; of course, within their general dependence upon economic conditions. Or Capital, the section on the working day, for instance, where legislation, which is surely a political act, has such a trenchant effect. Or the section on the history of the bourgeoisie. (Chapter XXIV.) Or why do we fight for the political dictatorship of the proletariat if political power is economically impotent? Force (that is state power) is also an economic power.
But I have no time to criticise the book now. I must first get Vol. III out and besides I think too that Bernstein, for instance, could deal with it quite effectively.
What these gentlemen all lack is dialectic. They never see anything but here cause and there effect. That this is a hollow abstraction, that such metaphysical polar opposites only exist in the real world during crises, while the whole vast process proceeds in the form of interaction (though of very unequal forces, the economic movement being by far the strongest, most elemental and most decisive) and that here everything is relative and nothing is absolute – this they never begin to see. Hegel has never existed for them.
 


1890 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to F. Mehring, July 14, 1893 










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1893



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1893
Engels to Franz Mehring
Abstract


Source: Marx and Engels Correspondence;
Publisher: International Publishers (1968);
First Published: Gestamtausgabe;
 Translated: Donna Torr;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan in 2000;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

London, July 14, 1893

Today is my first opportunity to thank you for the Lessing Legend you were kind enough to send me.  I did not want to reply with a bare formal acknowledgment of receipt of the book but intended at the same time to tell you something about it, about its contents.  Hence the delay.

I shall begin at the end — the appendix on historical materialism, in which you have described the main things excellently and for any unprejudiced person convincingly. If I find anything to object to it is that you attribute more credit to me than I deserve, even if I count in everything which I might possibly have found out for myself – in time – but which Marx with his more rapid coup d’oeil (grasp) and wider vision discovered much more quickly. When one has the good fortune to work for forty years with a man like Marx, one does not usually get the recognition one thinks one deserves during his lifetime. Then if the greater man dies, the lesser easily gets overrated, and this seems to me to be just my case at present; history will set all this right in the end and by that time one will be safely round the corner and know nothing more about anything.
Otherwise there is only one other point lacking, which, however, Marx and I always failed to stress enough in our writings and in regard to which we are all equally guilty. That is to say, we all laid, and were bound to lay, the main emphasis, in the first place, on the derivation of political, juridical and other ideological notions, and of actions arising through the medium of these notions, from basic economic facts. But in so doing we neglected the formal side — the ways and means by which these notions, etc., come about — for the sake of the content. This has given our adversaries a welcome opportunity for misunderstandings, of which Paul Barth is a striking example.
Ideology is a process accomplished by the so-called thinker consciously, indeed, but with a false consciousness. The real motives impelling him remain unknown to him, otherwise it would not be an ideological process at all. Hence he imagines  false or apparent motives. Because it is a process of thought he derives both its form and its content from pure thought, either his own or that of his predecessors. He works with mere thought material which he accepts without examination as the product of thought, he does not investigate further for a more remote process independent of thought;  indeed its origin seems obvious to him, because as all action is produced through the medium of thought it also appears to him to be ultimately based upon thought. The ideologist who deals with history (history is here simply meant to comprise all the spheres – political, juridical, philosophical, theological – belonging to society and not only to nature), the ideologist dealing with history then, possesses in every sphere of science material which has formed itself independently out of the thought of previous generations and has gone through an independent series of developments in the brains of these successive generations. True, external facts belonging to its own or other spheres may have exercised a co-determining influence on this development, but the tacit pre-supposition is that these facts themselves are also only the fruits of a process of thought, and so we still remain within that realm of pure thought which has successfully digested the hardest facts.
It is above all this appearance of an independent history of state constitutions, of systems of law, of ideological conceptions in every separate domain, which dazzles most people.  If Luther and Calvin “overcome” the official Catholic religion, or Hegel “overcomes” Fichte and Kant, or if the constitutional Montesquieu is indirectly “overcome” by Rousseau with his “Social Contract,” each of these events remains within the sphere of theology, philosophy or political science,
represents a stage in the history of these particular spheres of thought and never passes outside the sphere of thought. And  since the bourgeois illusion of the eternity and the finality of capitalist production has been added as well, even the victory of the physiocrats and Adam Smith over the mercantilists is accounted as a sheer victory of thought; not as the reflection in thought of changed economic facts but as the finally achieved correct understanding of actual conditions subsisting always and everywhere – in fact if Richard Coeur-de-Lion and Philip Augustus had introduced free trade instead of getting mixed up in the crusades we should have been spared five hundred years of misery and stupidity.
This side of the matter, which I can only indicate here, we have all, I think, neglected more than it deserves. It is the old story: form is always neglected at first for content. As I say, I have done that too, and the mistake has always only struck me later. So I am not only far from reproaching you with this in any way, but as the older of the guilty parties I have no right to do so, on the contrary; but I would like all the same to draw your attention to this point for the future. Hanging together with this too is the fatuous notion of the ideologists that because we deny an independent historical development to the various ideological spheres which play a part in history we also deny them any effect upon history. The basis of this is the common undialectical conception of cause and effect as rigidly opposite poles, the total disregarding of interaction;  these gentlemen often almost deliberately forget that once an historic element has been brought into the world by other elements, ultimately by economic facts, it also reacts in its turn and may react on its environment and even on its own causes. For instance, Barth on the priesthood and religion on your page 475. I was very glad to see how you settled this fellow, whose banality exceeds all expectations; and him they make a professor of history in Leipzig!  I must say that old man Wachsmuth — also rather a bonehead but greatly appreciative of facts — was quite a different chap.
As for the rest, I can only repeat about the book what I repeatedly said about the articles when they appeared in the Neue Zeit; it is by far the best presentation in existence of the genesis of the Prussian state. Indeed, I may well say that it is the only good presentation, correctly developing in most matters their interconnections down to the very details. One regrets only that you were unable to include the entire further development down to Bismarck and one cannot help hoping that you will do this another time and present a complete coherent picture, from the Elector Frederick William down to old William. For you have already made the preliminary investigations and, in the main at least, they are as good as finished. The thing has to be done sometime anyhow before the shaky old shanty comes tumbling down. The dissipation of the monarchical-patriotic legends, although not really a necessary precondition for the abolition of the monarchy which screens class domination (for a pure, bourgeois republic in Germany has been made obsolete by events before it has come into existence) is nevertheless one of the most effective levers for that purpose.
Then you will also have more space and opportunity to depict the local history of Prussia as part of Germany’s general misery. This is the point where I occasionally depart somewhat from your view, especially in the conception of the preliminary conditions for the dismemberment of Germany and of the failure of the bourgeois revolution in Germany during the sixteenth century. If I get down to reworking the historical introduction to my Peasant War, which I hope I shall do next winter, I shall be able to develop there the points in question. Not that I consider those you indicated incorrect, but I put others alongside them and group them somewhat differently.
In studying German history — the story of a continuous state of wretchedness — I have always found that only a comparison with the corresponding French periods produces a correct idea of proportions, because what happens there is the direct opposite of what happens in our country. There, the establishment of a national state from the scattered parts of the feudal state, just when we pass through the period of our greatest decline. There, a rare objective logic, during the whole course of the process; with us, increasingly dreary desultoriness. There, during the Middle Ages, the English conqueror, who intervenes in favour of the Provencal nationality against the Northern French nationality, represents foreign intervention, and the wars with England represent, in a way, the Thirty Years’ War, which there, however, ends in the ejection of the foreign invaders and the subjugation of the South by the North. Then comes the struggle between the central power and Burgundy, the vassal, which relies on its foreign possessions, and plays the part of Brandenburg-Prussia, a struggle which ends, however, in the victory of the central power and conclusively establishes the national state. And precisely at that moment the national state completely collapses in our country (in so far as the “German kingdom” within the Holy Roman Empire can be called a national state) and the plundering of German territory on a large scale sets in. This comparison is most humiliating for Germans but for that very reason the more instructive; and since our workers have put Germany back again in the forefront of the historical movement it has become somewhat easier for us to swallow the ignominy of the past.
Another especially significant feature of the development of Germany is the fact that not one of the two member states which in the end partitioned Germany between them was purely German — both were colonies on conquered Slav territory: Austria a Bavarian and Brandenburg a Saxon colony — and that they acquired power within Germany only by relying upon the support of foreign, non-German possessions: Austria upon that of Hungary (not to mention Bohemia) and Brandenburg upon that of Prussia. On the Western border, the one in greatest jeopardy, nothing of the kind took place; on the Northern border it was left to the Danes to protect Germany against the Danes; and in the South there was so little to protect that the frontier guard, the Swiss, even succeeded in tearing themselves loose from Germany!
But I am speaking of all kinds of extraneous matter, let this palaver at least serve you as proof of how stimulating an effect your work has upon me.
Once more cordial thanks and greetings from
Yours,
F. Engels
 


1893 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to W. Borgius, January 25, 1894










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1894



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1894
Engels to Borgius[1]

Abstract


Source: Marx and Engels Correspondence;
Publisher: International Publishers (1968);
First Published: Gestamtausgabe;
Translated: Donna Torr;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan in 2000;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

London, January 25, 1894

Here is the answer to your questions!
(1) What we understand by the economic conditions, which we regard as the determining basis of the history of society, are the methods by which human beings in a given society produce their means of subsistence and exchange the products among themselves (in so far as division of labour exists). Thus the entire technique of production and transport is here included. According to our conception this technique also determines the method of exchange and, further, the division of products, and with it, after the dissolution of tribal society, the division into classes also and hence the relations of lordship and servitude and with them the state, politics, law, etc.  Under economic conditions are further included the geographical basis on which they operate and those remnants of earlier stages of economic development which have actually been
transmitted and have survived – often only through tradition or the force of inertia; also of course the external milieu which surrounds this form of society.
If, as you say, technique largely depends on the state of science, science depends far more still on the state and the requirements of technique. If society has a technical need, that helps science forward more than ten universities. The whole of hydrostatics (Torricelli, etc.) was called forth by the necessity for regulating the mountain streams of Italy in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. We have only known anything reasonable about electricity since its technical applicability was discovered.  But unfortunately it has become the custom in Germany to write the history of the sciences as if they had fallen from the skies.
(2) We regard economic conditions as the factor which ultimately determines historical development. But race is itself an economic factor. Here, however, two points must not be overlooked:
(a) Political, juridical, philosophical, religious, literary, artistic, etc., development is based on economic development. But all these react upon one another and also upon the economic base. It is not that the economic position is the cause and alone active, while everything else only has a passive effect.  There is, rather, interaction on the basis of the economic necessity, which ultimately always asserts itself. The state, for instance, exercises an influence by tariffs, free trade, good or bad fiscal system; and even the deadly inanition and impotence of the German petty bourgeois, arising from the miserable economic position of Germany from 1640 to 1830 and expressing itself at first in pietism, then in sentimentality and cringing servility to princes and nobles, was not without economic effect. It was one of the
greatest hindrances to recovery and was not shaken until the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars made the chronic misery an acute one. So it is not, as people try here and there conveniently to imagine, that the economic position produces an automatic effect. Men make their history themselves, only in given surroundings which condition it and on the basis of actual relations already existing, among which the economic relations, however much they may be influenced by the other political and ideological ones, are still ultimately the decisive ones, forming the red thread which runs through them and alone leads to understanding.
(b) Men make their history themselves, but not as yet with a collective will or according to a collective plan or even in a definitely defined, given society.  Their efforts clash, and for that very reason all such societies are governed by necessity, which is supplemented by and appears under the forms of accident.  The necessity which here asserts itself amidst all accident is again ultimately economic necessity. This is where the so-called great men come in for treatment. That such and such a man and precisely that man arises at that particular time in that given country is of course pure accident. But cut him out and there will be a demand for a substitute, and this substitute will be found, good or bad, but in the long run he will be found. That Napoleon, just that particular Corsican, should have been the military dictator whom the French Republic, exhausted by its own war, had rendered necessary, was an accident; but that, if a Napoleon had been lacking, another would have filled the place, is proved by the fact that the man has always been found as soon as he became necessary: Caesar, Augustus, Cromwell, etc. While Marx discovered the materialist conception of history, Thierry, Mignet, Guizot, and all the English historians up to 1850 are the proof that it was being striven for, and the discovery of the  same  conception  by Morgan proves that the time was ripe for it and that indeed it had to be discovered.
So with all the other accidents, and apparent accidents, of history.  The further the particular sphere which we are investigating is removed from the economic sphere and approaches that of pure abstract ideology, the more shall we find it exhibiting accidents in its development, the more will its curve run in a zig-zag. So also you will find that the axis of this curve will approach more and more nearly parallel to the axis of the curve of economic development the longer the period considered and the wider the field dealt with.
In Germany the greatest hindrance to correct understanding is the irresponsible neglect by literature of economic history. It is so hard, not only to disaccustom oneself of the ideas of history drilled into one at school, but still more to rake up the necessary material for doing so. Who, for instance, has read old G. von Gülich, whose dry collection of material nevertheless contains so much stuff for the clarification of innumerable political facts!
For the rest, the fine example which Marx has given in the Eighteenth Brumaire should already, I think, provide you fairly well with information on your questions, just because it is a practical example. I have also, I believe, already touched on most of the points in Anti-Dühring I, Chapters 9-11, and II, 2-4, as well as in III, I, or Introduction, and then in the last section of Feuerbach.
Please do not weigh each word in the above too carefully, but keep the connection in mind; I regret that I have not the time to work out what I am writing to you so exactly as I should be obliged to do for publication.


1. This letter was first published without any mention of the addressee in the journal Der socialistische Akademiker No 20, 1895, by its 
contributor H. Starkenburg.  As a result Starkenburg was wrongly 
identified as the addressee in all previous editions.— from Progress Publishers, 1968
 


1894 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive


