# Volume 1

==========

## Table of contents








Marx & Engels Selected Works (Vol. 1)




MIA: M.I.A. Library: Marx & Engels: Selected Works (Vol. 1)


 

Marx Engels Selected Works Volume 1 




Theses on Feuerbach 1845, by Marx
13

A Critique of the German Ideology 1845-46, by Marx & Engels
16

The Principles of Communism 1847, by Engels
81

Manifesto of the Communist Party 1848, by Marx & Engels
98

The Bourgeoisie and the Counter-revolution: Part 2 1848, by Marx
138

Wage Labour and Capital 1847, by Marx
142

Address to the Communist League 1850, by Marx & Engels
175


The Class Struggle in France, 1848 to 1850 1850, by Marx
186

Revolution and Counter-Revolution 1852, by Engels
300

The Late Trial at Cologne 1852, by Engels
388


The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte 1852, by Marx
394

The British Rule in India 1853, by Marx & Engels
488

The Future Results of British Rule in India 1853, by Marx & Engels
494

Speech at anniversary of the People's Paper 1856, by Marx
500

Abstract of Preface from A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy 1859, by Marx
502

Appendix to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy 1859, by Engels
507

Letters:
517

Marx to Pavel Vasilyevich Annenkov, December 28, 1846
517

Marx to J. Weydemeyer in New York, March 5, 1852
528

Marx to Engels in Manchester, April 16, 1856
528

Marx to Engels in Ryde, September 25, 1857
529





Selected Works Index
Marx & Engels Internet Archive | MIA

 






==========

## Theses on Feuerbach









Theses on Feuerbach



Marx/Engels Internet Archive


Theses On Feuerbach
Download PDF


Written: by Marx in the Spring of 1845, but slightly edited by Engels;
First Published: As an appendix to Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy in 1888;
Source: Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume One, p. 13 – 15.
Note that this version differs from the version of Engels’ edition published in MECW Volume 5, pp. 6-8;
Publisher: Progress Publishers, Moscow, USSR, 1969;
Translated: W. Lough from the German;
Transcription/Markup: Zodiac/Brian Baggins;
Copyleft: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 1995, 1999, 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the Creative Commons ShareAlike License;
Proofread: by Andy Blunden February 2005.

 
I

The chief defect of all hitherto existing materialism – that of Feuerbach included – is that the thing, reality, sensuousness, is conceived only in the form of the object or of contemplation, but not as sensuous human activity, practice, not subjectively.
Hence, in contradistinction to materialism, the active side was developed abstractly by idealism – which, of course, does not know real, sensuous activity as such.


Feuerbach wants sensuous objects, really distinct from the
thought objects, but he does not conceive human activity itself as objective
activity. Hence, in The Essence of Christianity, he regards the theoretical
attitude as the only genuinely human attitude, while practice is conceived
and fixed only in its dirty-judaical manifestation. Hence he does not grasp
the significance of “revolutionary”, of “practical-critical”, activity.


 
II

The question whether objective truth can be attributed to human thinking is not a question of theory but is a practical question. Man must prove the truth — i.e. the reality and power, the this-sidedness of his thinking in practice. The dispute over the reality or non-reality
of thinking that is isolated from practice is a purely scholastic question.

 
III

The materialist doctrine concerning the changing of circumstances and upbringing forgets that circumstances are changed by men and that it is essential to educate the educator himself. This doctrine must, therefore, divide society into two parts, one of which is superior to society.
 

The coincidence of the changing of circumstances and of human activity or self-changing can be conceived and rationally understood only as revolutionary practice.

 
IV

Feuerbach starts out from the fact of religious self-alienation, of the duplication of the world into a religious world and a secular one. His work consists in resolving the religious world into its secular basis. 

But that the secular basis detaches itself from itself and establishes itself as an independent realm in the clouds can only be explained by the cleavages and self-contradictions within this secular basis. The latter must, therefore, in itself be both understood in its contradiction
and revolutionized in practice. Thus, for instance, after the earthly family is discovered to be the secret of the holy family, the former must then itself be destroyed in theory and in practice.

 
V

Feuerbach, not satisfied with abstract thinking, wants contemplation; but he does not conceive sensuousness as practical, human-sensuous activity.

 
VI

Feuerbach resolves the religious essence into the human essence. But the human essence is no abstraction inherent in each single individual. 

In its reality it is the ensemble of the social relations.
 

Feuerbach, who does not enter upon a criticism of this real essence, is consequently compelled:
 

To abstract from the historical process and to fix the religious sentiment as something by itself and to presuppose an abstract – isolated – human individual. 

Essence, therefore, can be comprehended only as “genus”, as an internal, dumb generality which naturally unites the many individuals. 


 
VII

Feuerbach, consequently, does not see that the “religious sentiment” is itself a social product, and that the abstract individual whom he analyses belongs to a particular form of society.

 
VIII

All social life is essentially practical. All mysteries which lead theory to mysticism find their rational solution in human practice and in the comprehension of this practice.

 
IX

The highest point reached by contemplative materialism, that is, materialism which does not comprehend sensuousness as practical activity, is contemplation of single individuals and of civil society.

 
X

The standpoint of the old materialism is civil society; the standpoint of the new is human society, or social humanity. 

 
XI

The philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways; the point is to change it.

 


Deutsch |
1938 translation of Marx’s original | 
2002 translation of Marx’s original | 
MECW translation of Engels’ 1888 version

Marx/Engels Works Archive |
Study Guide |
Engels on Feuerbach |
Image of Thesis 11 |
Works Index






==========

## A Critique of the German Ideology









The German Ideology



Works of Marx and Engels 1845


The German Ideology
Critique of Modern German Philosophy According to Its Representatives Feuerbach, B. Bauer and Stirner, and of German Socialism According to Its Various
Prophets[7]


Written: Fall 1845 to mid-1846;
First Published: 1932 (in full);
Preface: from Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 5.

 
Volume I
Critique of Modern German Philosophy According to Its Representatives
Feuerbach, B. Bauer and Stirner[8]

Preface


I. Feuerbach: Opposition of the Materialist and Idealist Outlooks


II. The Leipzig Council: Saint Bruno


III. The Leipzig Council: Saint Max [45]
(Abstract of Chapter III)

Volume II
Critique of German Socialism According to Its Various Prophets

True Socialism

 

‘Highlights’ of The German Ideology



Image of page from the chapter "Saint Max"
1840s Index |
Works |
Famous Quotes |
Feuerbach
Marx-Engels Archive

 






==========

## The Principles of Communism









The Principles of Communism



Frederick Engels 1847
The Principles of Communism



Written: October-November 1847;
Source: Selected Works, Volume One, p. 81-97, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1969;
First Published: 1914, Eduard Bernstein in the German Social Democratic Party’s Vorwärts!;
Translated: Paul Sweezy;
Transcribed: Zodiac, MEA 1993; marxists.org 1999;
HTML Markup: Brian Baggins;
Proofed: and corrected by Andy Blunden, February 2005.

Document Introduction.



— 1 — 
What is Communism?

Communism is the doctrine of the conditions of the
liberation of the proletariat.






— 2 — 
What is the proletariat?

The proletariat is that class in society which lives
entirely from the sale of its labor and does not draw profit from any kind
of capital; whose weal and woe, whose life and death,
whose sole existence depends on the demand for labor – hence, on the changing
state of business, on the vagaries of unbridled competition. The proletariat,
or the class of proletarians, is, in a word, the working class of the 19th
century.[1]





— 3 — 
Proletarians, then, have not always existed?

No. There have always been poor and working classes;
and the working class have mostly been poor. But there have not always
been workers and poor people living under conditions as they are today;
in other words, there have not always been proletarians, any more than
there has always been free unbridled competitions.





— 4 — 
How did the proletariat originate?

The Proletariat originated in the industrial revolution,
which took place in England in the last half of the last (18th) century,
and which has since then been repeated in all the civilized countries of
the world.


This industrial revolution was precipitated by the discovery of
the steam engine, various spinning machines, the mechanical loom, and a
whole series of other mechanical devices. These machines, which were very
expensive and hence could be bought only by big capitalists, altered the
whole mode of production and displaced the former workers, because the
machines turned out cheaper and better commodities than the workers could
produce with their inefficient spinning wheels and handlooms. The machines
delivered industry wholly into the hands of the big capitalists and rendered
entirely worthless the meagre property of the workers (tools, looms, etc.).
The result was that the capitalists soon had everything in their hands
and nothing remained to the workers. This marked the introduction of the
factory system into the textile industry.

Once the impulse to the introduction of machinery and the factory
system had been given, this system spread quickly to all other branches
of industry, especially cloth- and book-printing, pottery, and the metal
industries.

Labor was more and more divided among the individual workers so
that the worker who previously had done a complete piece of work now did
only a part of that piece. This division of labor made it possible to produce
things faster and cheaper. It reduced the activity of the individual worker
to simple, endlessly repeated mechanical motions which could be performed
not only as well but much better by a machine. In this way, all these industries
fell, one after another, under the dominance of steam, machinery, and the
factory system, just as spinning and weaving had already done.

But at the same time, they also fell into the hands of big capitalists,
and their workers were deprived of whatever independence remained to them.
Gradually, not only genuine manufacture but also handicrafts came within
the province of the factory system as big capitalists increasingly displaced
the small master craftsmen by setting up huge workshops, which saved many
expenses and permitted an elaborate division of labor.

This is how it has come about that in civilized countries at the
present time nearly all kinds of labor are performed in factories – and,
in nearly all branches of work, handicrafts and manufacture have been superseded.
This process has, to an ever greater degree, ruined the old middle class,
especially the small handicraftsmen; it has entirely transformed the condition
of the workers; and two new classes have been created which are gradually
swallowing up all the others. These are:


(i) The class of big capitalists, who, in all civilized countries,
are already in almost exclusive possession of all the means of subsistance
and of the instruments (machines, factories) and materials necessary for
the production of the means of subsistence. This is the bourgeois class,
or the bourgeoisie.


(ii) The class of the wholly propertyless, who are obliged
to sell their labor to the bourgeoisie in order to get, in exchange, the
means of subsistence for their support. This is called the class of proletarians,
or the proletariat.





— 5 — 
Under what conditions does this sale of the
labor of the proletarians to the bourgeoisie take place?

Labor is a commodity, like any other, and its price
is therefore determined by exactly the same laws that apply to other commodities.
In a regime of big industry or of free competition – as we shall see,
the two come to the same thing – the price of a commodity is, on the average,
always equal to its cost of production. Hence, the price of labor is also
equal to the cost of production of labor.

But, the costs of production of labor consist of precisely the
quantity of means of subsistence necessary to enable the worker to continue
working, and to prevent the working class from dying out. The worker will
therefore get no more for his labor than is necessary for this purpose;
the price of labor, or the wage, will, in other words, be the lowest, the
minimum, required for the maintenance of life.

However, since business is sometimes better and sometimes worse,
it follows that the worker sometimes gets more and sometimes gets less
for his commodities. But, again, just as the industrialist, on the average
of good times and bad, gets no more and no less for his commodities than
what they cost, similarly on the average the worker gets no more and no
less than his minimum.

This economic law of wages operates the more strictly the greater
the degree to which big industry has taken possession of all branches of
production.





— 6 — 
What working classes were there before the industrial revolution?

The working classes have always, according to the
different stages of development of society, lived in different circumstances
and had different relations to the owning and ruling classes.

In antiquity, the workers were the slaves of the owners, just
as they still are in many backward countries and even in the southern part
of the United States.

In the Middle Ages, they were the serfs of the land-owning nobility,
as they still are in Hungary, Poland, and Russia. In the Middle Ages, and
indeed right up to the industrial revolution, there were also journeymen
in the cities who worked in the service of petty bourgeois masters. Gradually,
as manufacture developed, these journeymen became manufacturing workers
who were even then employed by larger capitalists.





— 7 — 
In what way do proletarians differ from slaves?

The slave is sold once and for all; the proletarian
must sell himself daily and hourly.

The individual slave, property of one master, is assured an existence,
however miserable it may be, because of the master’s interest. The individual
proletarian, property as it were of the entire bourgeois class which buys
his labor only when someone has need of it, has no secure existence. This
existence is assured only to the class as a whole.

The slave is outside competition; the proletarian is in it and
experiences all its vagaries.

The slave counts as a thing, not as a member of society. Thus,
the slave can have a better existence than the proletarian, while the proletarian
belongs to a higher stage of social development and, himself, stands on
a higher social level than the slave.

The slave frees himself when, of all the relations of private
property, he abolishes only the relation of slavery and thereby becomes
a proletarian; the proletarian can free himself only by abolishing private
property in general.





— 8 — 
In what way do proletarians differ from serfs?

The serf possesses and uses an instrument of production,
a piece of land, in exchange for which he gives up a part of his product
or part of the services of his labor.

The proletarian works with the instruments of production of another,
for the account of this other, in exchange for a part of the product.

The serf gives up, the proletarian receives. The serf has an assured
existence, the proletarian has not. The serf is outside competition, the
proletarian is in it.

The serf liberates himself in one of three ways: either he runs
away to the city and there becomes a handicraftsman; or, instead of products
and services, he gives money to his lord and thereby becomes a free
tenant; or he overthrows his feudal lord and himself becomes a property
owner. In short, by one route or another, he gets into the owning class
and enters into competition. The proletarian liberates himself by abolishing
competition, private property, and all class differences.






— 9 — 
In what way do proletarians differ from handicraftsmen?
In contrast to the proletarian, the so-called handicraftsman, as he
still existed almost everywhere in the past (eighteenth) century and still
exists here and there at present, is a proletarian at most temporarily.
His goal is to acquire capital himself wherewith to exploit other workers.
He can often achieve this goal where guilds still exist or where freedom
from guild restrictions has not yet led to the introduction of factory-style
methods into the crafts nor yet to fierce competition. But as soon as the
factory system has been introduced into the crafts and competition flourishes
fully, this perspective dwindles away and the handicraftsman becomes more
and more a proletarian. The handicraftsman therefore frees himself by becoming
either bourgeois or entering the middle class in general, or
becoming a proletarian because of competition (as is now more often the
case). In which case he can free himself by joining the proletarian movement,
i.e., the more or less communist movement.
[2] 





— 10 — 
In what way do proletarians differ from manufacturing workers?

The manufacturing worker of the 16th to the 18th centuries
still had, with but few exception, an instrument of production in his own
possession – his loom, the family spinning wheel, a little plot of land
which he cultivated in his spare time. The proletarian has none of these
things.

The manufacturing worker almost always lives in the countryside
and in a more or less patriarchal relation to his landlord or employer;
the proletarian lives, for the most part, in the city and his relation
to his employer is purely a cash relation.

The manufacturing worker is torn out of his patriarchal relation
by big industry, loses whatever property he still has, and in this way
becomes a proletarian.





— 11 — 
What were the immediate consequences of the industrial revolution and
of the division of society into bourgeoisie and proletariat?

First, the lower and lower prices of industrial products
brought about by machine labor totally destroyed, in all countries of the
world, the old system of manufacture or industry based upon hand labor.

In this way, all semi-barbarian countries, which had hitherto
been more or less strangers to historical development, and whose industry
had been based on manufacture, were violently forced out of their isolation.
They bought the cheaper commodities of the English and allowed their own
manufacturing workers to be ruined. Countries which had known no progress
for thousands of years – for example, India – were thoroughly revolutionized,
and even China is now on the way to a revolution.

We have come to the point where a new machine invented in England
deprives millions of Chinese workers of their livelihood within a year’s
time.
In this way, big industry has brought all the people of the Earth
into contact with each other, has merged all local markets into one world
market, has spread civilization and progress everywhere and has thus ensured
that whatever happens in civilized countries will have repercussions in
all other countries.

It follows that if the workers in England or France now liberate
themselves, this must set off revolution in all other countries – revolutions
which, sooner or later, must accomplish the liberation of their respective
working class.

Second, wherever big industries displaced manufacture,
the bourgeoisie developed in wealth and power to the utmost and made itself
the first class of the country. The result was that wherever this happened,
the bourgeoisie took political power into its own hands and displaced the
hitherto ruling classes, the aristocracy, the guildmasters, and their representative,
the absolute monarchy.

The bourgeoisie annihilated the power of the aristocracy, the nobility,
by abolishing the entailment of estates – in other words, by making landed
property subject to purchase and sale, and by doing away with the special
privileges of the nobility. It destroyed the power of the guildmasters
by abolishing guilds and handicraft privileges. In their place, it put
competition – that is, a state of society in which everyone has the right
to enter into any branch of industry, the only obstacle being a lack of
the necessary capital.

The introduction of free competition is thus public declaration
that from now on the members of society are unequal only to the extent
that their capitals are unequal, that capital is the decisive power, and
that therefore the capitalists, the bourgeoisie, have become the first
class in society.

Free competition is necessary for the establishment of big industry,
because it is the only condition of society in which big industry can make
its way.

Having destroyed the social power of the nobility and the guildmasters,
the bourgeois also destroyed their political power. Having raised itself
to the actual position of first class in society, it proclaims itself to
be also the dominant political class. This it does through the introduction
of the representative system which rests on bourgeois equality before the
law and the recognition of free competition, and in European countries
takes the form of constitutional monarchy. In these constitutional monarchies,
only those who possess a certain capital are voters – that is to say,
only members of the bourgeoisie. These bourgeois voters choose the deputies,
and these bourgeois deputies, by using their right to refuse to vote taxes,
choose a bourgeois government.

Third, everywhere the proletariat develops in step
with the bourgeoisie. In proportion, as the bourgeoisie grows in wealth,
the proletariat grows in numbers. For, since the proletarians can be employed
only by capital, and since capital extends only through employing labor,
it follows that the growth of the proletariat proceeds at precisely the
same pace as the growth of capital.

Simultaneously, this process draws members of the bourgeoisie
and proletarians together into the great cities where industry can be carried
on most profitably, and by thus throwing great masses in one spot it gives
to the proletarians a consciousness of their own strength.

Moreover, the further this process advances, the more new labor-saving
machines are invented, the greater is the pressure exercised by big industry
on wages, which, as we have seen, sink to their minimum and therewith render
the condition of the proletariat increasingly unbearable. The growing dissatisfaction
of the proletariat thus joins with its rising power to prepare a proletarian
social revolution.





— 12 — 
What were the further consequences of the industrial revolution?

Big industry created in the steam engine, and other
machines, the means of endlessly expanding industrial production, speeding
it up, and cutting its costs. With production thus facilitated, the free
competition, which is necessarily bound up with big industry, assumed the
most extreme forms; a multitude of capitalists invaded industry, and, in
a short while, more was produced than was needed.

As a consequence, finished commodities could not be sold, and a so-called
commercial crisis broke out. Factories had to be closed, their owners went
bankrupt, and the workers were without bread. Deepest misery reigned everywhere.

After a time, the superfluous products were sold, the factories
began to operate again, wages rose, and gradually business got better than
ever.

But it was not long before too many commodities were again produced
and a new crisis broke out, only to follow the same course as its predecessor.

Ever since the beginning of this (19th) century, the condition
of industry has constantly fluctuated between periods of prosperity and
periods of crisis; nearly every five to seven years, a fresh crisis has
intervened, always with the greatest hardship for workers, and always accompanied
by general revolutionary stirrings and the direct peril to the whole existing
order of things.





— 13 — 
What follows from these periodic commercial crises?

First:

That, though big industry in its earliest stage created free competition,
it has now outgrown free competition;

that, for big industry, competition and generally the individualistic organization of production have become a fetter which it must and will shatter;

that, so long as big industry remains on its present footing, it can be
maintained only at the cost of general chaos every seven years, each time
threatening the whole of civilization and not only plunging the proletarians
into misery but also ruining large sections of the bourgeoisie;

hence, either that big industry must itself be given up, which is an absolute
impossibility, or that it makes unavoidably necessary an entirely new organization
of society in which production is no longer directed by mutually competing
individual industrialists but rather by the whole society operating according
to a definite plan and taking account of the needs of all.


Second: That big industry, and the limitless expansion
of production which it makes possible, bring within the range of feasibility
a social order in which so much is produced that every member of society
will be in a position to exercise and develop all his powers and faculties
in complete freedom.

It thus appears that the very qualities of big industry which,
in our present-day society, produce misery and crises are those which,
in a different form of society, will abolish this misery and these catastrophic
depressions.

We see with the greatest clarity:

(i) That all these evils are from now on to be ascribed solely
to a social order which no longer corresponds to the requirements of the
real situation; and

(ii) That it is possible, through a new social order, to
do away with these evils altogether.





— 14 — 
What will this new social order have to be like?

Above all, it will have to take the control of industry
and of all branches of production out of the hands of mutually competing
individuals, and instead institute a system in which all these branches
of production are operated by society as a whole – that is, for the common
account, according to a common plan, and with the participation of all
members of society.

It will, in other words, abolish competition and replace it with
association.

Moreover, since the management of industry by individuals necessarily
implies private property, and since competition is in reality merely the
manner and form in which the control of industry by private property owners
expresses itself, it follows that private property cannot be separated
from competition and the individual management of industry. Private property
must, therefore, be abolished and in its place must come the common utilization
of all instruments of production and the distribution of all products according
to common agreement – in a word, what is called the communal ownership
of goods.

In fact, the abolition of private property is, doubtless, the
shortest and most significant way to characterize the revolution in the
whole social order which has been made necessary by the development of
industry – and for this reason it is rightly advanced by communists as
their main demand.





— 15 — 
Was not the abolition of private property possible at an earlier time?

No. Every change in the social order, every revolution
in property relations, is the necessary consequence of the creation of
new forces of production which no longer fit into the old property relations.

Private property has not always existed.

When, towards the end of the Middle Ages, there arose a new mode
of production which could not be carried on under the then existing feudal
and guild forms of property, this manufacture, which had outgrown the old
property relations, created a new property form, private property. And
for manufacture and the earliest stage of development of big industry,
private property was the only possible property form; the social order
based on it was the only possible social order.

So long as it is not possible to produce so much that there is
enough for all, with more left over for expanding the social capital and
extending the forces of production – so long as this is not possible,
there must always be a ruling class directing the use of society’s productive
forces, and a poor, oppressed class. How these classes are constituted
depends on the stage of development.

The agrarian Middle Ages give us the baron and the serf; the cities
of the later Middle Ages show us the guildmaster and the journeyman and
the day laborer; the 17th century has its manufacturing workers; the 19th
has big factory owners and proletarians.

It is clear that, up to now, the forces of production have never
been developed to the point where enough could be developed for all, and
that private property has become a fetter and a barrier in relation to
the further development of the forces of production.

Now, however, the development of big industry has ushered in a new period.
Capital and the forces of production have been expanded to an unprecedented
extent, and the means are at hand to multiply them without limit in the
near future. Moreover, the forces of production have been concentrated
in the hands of a few bourgeois, while the great mass of the people are
more and more falling into the proletariat, their situation becoming more
wretched and intolerable in proportion to the increase of wealth of the
bourgeoisie. And finally, these mighty and easily extended forces of production
have so far outgrown private property and the bourgeoisie, that they threaten
at any moment to unleash the most violent disturbances of the social order.
Now, under these conditions, the abolition of private property has become
not only possible but absolutely necessary.





— 16 — 
Will the peaceful abolition of private property be possible?

It would be desirable if this could happen, and the
communists would certainly be the last to oppose it. Communists know only
too well that all conspiracies are not only useless, but even harmful.
They know all too well that revolutions are not made intentionally and
arbitrarily, but that, everywhere and always, they have been the necessary
consequence of conditions which were wholly independent of the will and
direction of individual parties and entire classes.

But they also see that the development of the proletariat in nearly
all civilized countries has been violently suppressed, and that in this
way the opponents of communism have been working toward a revolution with
all their strength. If the oppressed proletariat is finally driven to revolution,
then we communists will defend the interests of the proletarians with deeds
as we now defend them with words.





— 17 — 
Will it be possible for private property to be abolished at one stroke?

No, no more than existing forces of production can
at one stroke be multiplied to the extent necessary for the creation of
a communal society.

In all probability, the proletarian revolution will transform
existing society gradually and will be able to abolish private property
only when the means of production are available in sufficient quantity.





— 18 — 
What will be the course of this revolution?

Above all, it will establish a democratic constitution,
and through this, the direct or indirect dominance of the proletariat.
Direct in England, where the proletarians are already a majority of the
people. Indirect in France and Germany, where the majority of the people
consists not only of proletarians, but also of small peasants and petty
bourgeois who are in the process of falling into the proletariat, who are
more and more dependent in all their political interests on the proletariat,
and who must, therefore, soon adapt to the demands of the proletariat.
Perhaps this will cost a second struggle, but the outcome can only be the
victory of the proletariat.

Democracy would be wholly valueless to the proletariat if it were
not immediately used as a means for putting through measures directed against
private property and ensuring the livelihood of the proletariat. The main
measures, emerging as the necessary result of existing relations, are the
following:

(i) Limitation of private property through progressive taxation,
heavy inheritance taxes, abolition of inheritance through collateral lines
(brothers, nephews, etc.) forced loans, etc.

(ii) Gradual expropriation of landowners, industrialists, railroad
magnates and shipowners, partly through competition by state industry,
partly directly through compensation in the form of bonds.

(iii) Confiscation of the possessions of all emigrants
and rebels against the majority of the people.

(iv) Organization of labor or employment of proletarians
on publicly owned land, in factories and workshops, with competition among
the workers being abolished and with the factory owners, in so far as they
still exist, being obliged to pay the same high wages as those paid by
the state.

(v) An equal obligation on all members of society to work
until such time as private property has been completely abolished. Formation
of industrial armies, especially for agriculture.

(vi) Centralization of money and credit in the hands of
the state through a national bank with state capital, and the suppression
of all private banks and bankers.

(vii) Increase in the number of national factories, workshops,
railroads, ships; bringing new lands into cultivation and improvement of
land already under cultivation – all in proportion to the growth of the
capital and labor force at the disposal of the nation.

(viii) Education of all children, from the moment they can leave
their mother’s care, in national establishments at national cost. Education
and production together.

(ix) Construction, on public lands, of great palaces as
communal dwellings for associated groups of citizens engaged in both industry
and agriculture and combining in their way of life the advantages of urban
and rural conditions while avoiding the one-sidedness and drawbacks of
each.

(x) Destruction of all unhealthy and jerry-built dwellings
in urban districts.

(xi) Equal inheritance rights for children born in and
out of wedlock.

(xii) Concentration of all means of transportation in the
hands of the nation.


It is impossible, of course, to carry out all these measures at once. But
one will always bring others in its wake. Once the first radical attack
on private property has been launched, the proletariat will find itself
forced to go ever further, to concentrate increasingly in the hands of
the state all capital, all agriculture, all transport, all trade. All the
foregoing measures are directed to this end; and they will become practicable
and feasible, capable of producing their centralizing effects to precisely
the degree that the proletariat, through its labor, multiplies the country’s
productive forces.

Finally, when all capital, all production, all exchange have been brought
together in the hands of the nation, private property will disappear of
its own accord, money will become superfluous, and production will so expand
and man so change that society will be able to slough off whatever of its
old economic habits may remain.





— 19 — 
Will it be possible for this revolution to take place in one country
alone?

No. By creating the world market, big industry has
already brought all the peoples of the Earth, and especially the civilized
peoples, into such close relation with one another that none is independent
of what happens to the others.

Further, it has co-ordinated the social development of the civilized
countries to such an extent that, in all of them, bourgeoisie and proletariat
have become the decisive classes, and the struggle between them the great
struggle of the day. It follows that the communist revolution will not
merely be a national phenomenon but must take place simultaneously in all
civilized countries – that is to say, at least in England, America, France,
and Germany.

It will develop in each of these countries more or less rapidly,
according as one country or the other has a more developed industry, greater
wealth, a more significant mass of productive forces. Hence, it will go
slowest and will meet most obstacles in Germany, most rapidly and with
the fewest difficulties in England. It will have a powerful impact on the
other countries of the world, and will radically alter the course of development
which they have followed up to now, while greatly stepping up its pace.

It is a universal revolution and will, accordingly, have a universal
range.





— 20 — 
What will be the consequences of the
ultimate disappearance of private property?

Society will take all forces of production and means
of commerce, as well as the exchange and distribution of products, out
of the hands of private capitalists and will manage them in accordance
with a plan based on the availability of resources and the needs of the
whole society. In this way, most important of all, the evil consequences
which are now associated with the conduct of big industry will be abolished.

There will be no more crises; the expanded production, which for
the present order of society is overproduction and hence a prevailing cause
of misery, will then be insufficient and in need of being expanded much
further. Instead of generating misery, overproduction will reach beyond
the elementary requirements of society to assure the satisfaction of the
needs of all; it will create new needs and, at the same time, the means
of satisfying them. It will become the condition of, and the stimulus to,
new progress, which will no longer throw the whole social order into confusion,
as progress has always done in the past. Big industry, freed from the pressure
of private property, will undergo such an expansion that what we now see
will seem as petty in comparison as manufacture seems when put beside the
big industry of our own day. This development of industry will make available
to society a sufficient mass of products to satisfy the needs of everyone.

The same will be true of agriculture, which also suffers from
the pressure of private property and is held back by the division of privately
owned land into small parcels. Here, existing improvements and scientific
procedures will be put into practice, with a resulting leap forward which
will assure to society all the products it needs.

In this way, such an abundance of goods will be able to satisfy
the needs of all its members.

The division of society into different, mutually hostile classes
will then become unnecessary. Indeed, it will be not only unnecessary but
intolerable in the new social order. The existence of classes originated
in the division of labor, and the division of labor, as it has been known
up to the present, will completely disappear. For mechanical and chemical
processes are not enough to bring industrial and agricultural production
up to the level we have described; the capacities of the men who make use
of these processes must undergo a corresponding development.

Just as the peasants and manufacturing workers of the last century
changed their whole way of life and became quite different people when
they were drawn into big industry, in the same way, communal control
over production by society as a whole, and the resulting new development,
will both require an entirely different kind of human material.

People will no longer be, as they are today, subordinated to a
single branch of production, bound to it, exploited by it; they will no
longer develop one of their faculties at the expense of all others; they
will no longer know only one branch, or one branch of a single branch,
of production as a whole. Even industry as it is today is finding such
people less and less useful.

Industry controlled by society as a whole, and operated according
to a plan, presupposes well-rounded human beings, their faculties developed
in balanced fashion, able to see the system of production in its entirety.

The form of the division of labor which makes one a peasant, another
a cobbler, a third a factory worker, a fourth a stock-market operator,
has already been undermined by machinery and will completely disappear.
Education will enable young people quickly to familiarize themselves with
the whole system of production and to pass from one branch of production
to another in response to the needs of society or their own inclinations.
It will, therefore, free them from the one-sided character which the present-day
division of labor impresses upon every individual. Communist society will,
in this way, make it possible for its members to put their comprehensively
developed faculties to full use. But, when this happens, classes will necessarily
disappear. It follows that society organized on a communist basis is incompatible
with the existence of classes on the one hand, and that the very building
of such a society provides the means of abolishing class differences on
the other.

A corollary of this is that the difference between city and country
is destined to disappear. The management of agriculture and industry by
the same people rather than by two different classes of people is, if only
for purely material reasons, a necessary condition of communist association.
The dispersal of the agricultural population on the land, alongside the
crowding of the industrial population into the great cities, is a condition
which corresponds to an undeveloped state of both agriculture and industry
and can already be felt as an obstacle to further development.

The general co-operation of all members of society for the purpose
of planned exploitation of the forces of production, the expansion of production
to the point where it will satisfy the needs of all, the abolition of a
situation in which the needs of some are satisfied at the expense of the
needs of others, the complete liquidation of classes and their conflicts,
the rounded development of the capacities of all members of society through
the elimination of the present division of labor, through industrial education,
through engaging in varying activities, through the participation by all
in the enjoyments produced by all, through the combination of city and
country – these are the main consequences of the abolition of private
property.





— 21 — 
What will be the influence of communist society on the family?

It will transform the relations between the sexes
into a purely private matter which concerns only the persons involved and
into which society has no occasion to intervene. It can do this since
it does away with private property and educates children on a communal
basis, and in this way removes the two bases of traditional marriage –
the dependence rooted in private property, of the women on the man, and
of the children on the parents.

And here is the answer to the outcry of the highly moral philistines
against the “community of women”. Community of women is a condition which
belongs entirely to bourgeois society and which today finds its complete
expression in prostitution. But prostitution is based on private property
and falls with it. Thus, communist society, instead of introducing community
of women, in fact abolishes it.






— 22 — 
What will be the attitude of communism to existing nationalities?
The nationalities of the peoples associating themselves in accordance
with the principle of community will be compelled to mingle with each other
as a result of this association and thereby to dissolve themselves, just
as the various estate and class distinctions must disappear through the
abolition of their basis, private property.[3] 






— 23 — 
What will be its attitude to existing religions?

All religions so far have been the expression of historical stages
of development of individual peoples or groups of peoples. But communism
is the stage of historical development which makes all existing religions
superfluous and brings about their disappearance[4] 





— 24 — 
How do communists differ from socialists?

The so-called socialists are divided into three categories.



[ Reactionary Socialists: ]

The first category consists of adherents of a feudal and patriarchal
society which has already been destroyed, and is still daily being destroyed,
by big industry and world trade and their creation, bourgeois society.
This category concludes, from the evils of existing society, that feudal
and patriarchal society must be restored because it was free of such evils.
In one way or another, all their proposals are directed to this end.

This category of reactionary socialists, for all their seeming
partisanship and their scalding tears for the misery of the proletariat,
is nevertheless energetically opposed by the communists for the following
reasons:

(i) It strives for something which is entirely impossible.

(ii) It seeks to establish the rule of the aristocracy,
the guildmasters, the small producers, and their retinue of absolute or
feudal monarchs, officials, soldiers, and priests – a society which was,
to be sure, free of the evils of present-day society but which brought
it at least as many evils without even offering to the oppressed workers
the prospect of liberation through a communist revolution.

(iii) As soon as the proletariat becomes revolutionary
and communist, these reactionary socialists show their true colors by immediately
making common cause with the bourgeoisie against the proletarians.



[ Bourgeois Socialists: ]

The second category consists of adherents of present-day society
who have been frightened for its future by the evils to which it necessarily
gives rise. What they want, therefore, is to maintain this society while
getting rid of the evils which are an inherent part of it.

To this end, some propose mere welfare measures – while others
come forward with grandiose systems of reform which, under the pretense
of re-organizing society, are in fact intended to preserve the foundations,
and hence the life, of existing society.

Communists must unremittingly struggle against these bourgeois
socialists because they work for the enemies of communists and protect
the society which communists aim to overthrow.



[ Democratic Socialists: ]

Finally, the third category consists of democratic socialists
who favor some of the same measures the communists advocate, as described
in Question 18, not as part of the transition to communism, however, but
as measures which they believe will be sufficient to abolish the misery
and evils of present-day society.

These democratic socialists are either proletarians who are not
yet sufficiently clear about the conditions of the liberation of their
class, or they are representatives of the petty bourgeoisie, a class which,
prior to the achievement of democracy and the socialist measures to which
it gives rise, has many interests in common with the proletariat.

It follows that, in moments of action, the communists will have
to come to an understanding with these democratic socialists, and in general
to follow as far as possible a common policy with them – provided that
these socialists do not enter into the service of the ruling bourgeoisie
and attack the communists.

It is clear that this form of co-operation in action does not
exclude the discussion of differences.





— 25 — 
What is the attitude of the communists to the
other political parties of our time?

This attitude is different in the different countries.


In England, France, and Belgium, where the bourgeoisie rules,
the communists still have a common interest with the various democratic
parties, an interest which is all the greater the more closely the socialistic
measures they champion approach the aims of the communists – that is,
the more clearly and definitely they represent the interests of the proletariat
and the more they depend on the proletariat for support. In England, for
example, the working-class Chartists are infinitely
closer to the communists than the democratic petty bourgeoisie or the so-called
Radicals.


In America, where a democratic constitution has already been established,
the communists must make the common cause with the party which will turn
this constitution against the bourgeoisie and use it in the interests of
the proletariat – that is, with the agrarian National Reformers.

In Switzerland, the Radicals, though a very mixed party, are the
only group with which the communists can co-operate, and, among these Radicals,
the Vaudois and Genevese are the most advanced.

In Germany, finally, the decisive struggle now on the order of the day
is that between the bourgeoisie and the absolute monarchy. Since the communists
cannot enter upon the decisive struggle between themselves and the bourgeoisie
until the bourgeoisie is in power, it follows that it is in the interest
of the communists to help the bourgeoisie to power as soon as possible
in order the sooner to be able to overthrow it. Against the governments,
therefore, the communists must continually support the radical liberal
party, taking care to avoid the self-deceptions of the bourgeoisie and
not fall for the enticing promises of benefits which a victory for the
bourgeoisie would allegedly bring to the proletariat. The sole advantages
which the proletariat would derive from a bourgeois victory would consist

(i) in various concessions which would facilitate the unification
of the proletariat into a closely knit, battle-worthy, and organized class;
and

(ii) in the certainly that, on the very day the absolute
monarchies fall, the struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat will
start. From that day on, the policy of the communists will be the same
as it now is in the countries where the bourgeoisie is already in power.


In the name and on the mandate of the Congress.




Footnotes


The following footnotes are from the Chinese Edition of Marx/Engels Selected Works, Peking, Foreign Languages Press, 1977, with editorial additions by marxists.org
 

Introduction 
 In 1847 Engels wrote two draft programmes
for the Communist League in the form of a catechism, one in June and the other in October. The latter, which is known as Principles of Communism,
was first published in 1914. The earlier document Draft of the Communist Confession of Faith, was only found in 1968. It was first published
in 1969 in Hamburg, together with four other documents pertaining to the
first congress of the Communist League, in a booklet entitled Gründungs
Dokumente des Bundes der Kommunisten (Juni bis September 1847) (Founding
Documents of the Communist League).

At the June 1847 Congress of the League of the Just, which was also the founding conference of the Communist League, it was decided to issue a draft “confession of faith” to be submitted for discussion to the sections of the League. The document which has now come to light is almost certainly this draft. Comparison of the two documents shows that Principles of Communism is a revised edition of this earlier draft. In Principles of Communism, Engels left three questions unanswered, in two cases with the notation “unchanged” (bleibt); this clearly refers to the answers provided in the earlier draft.

The new draft for the programme was worked out by Engels on the
instructions of the leading body of the Paris circle of the Communist League.
The instructions were decided on after Engles’ sharp criticism at the committee
meeting, on October 22, 1847, of the draft programme drawn up by the “true
socialist” Moses Hess, which was then rejected.

Still considering Principles of Communism as a preliminary draft, Engels expressed the view, in a letter to Marx dated November 23-24 1847, that it would be best to drop the old catechistic form and draw up a programme in the form of a manifesto. 

 “Think over the Confession of Faith a bit. I believe we had better drop the catechism form and call the thing: Communist Manifesto. As more or less history has got to be related in it, the form it has been in hitherto is quite unsuitable. I am bringing what I have done here with me; it is in simple narrative form, but miserably worded, in fearful haste. ...”  


At the second congress of the Communist
League (November 29-December 8, 1847) Marx and Engels defended the fundamental
scientific principles of communism and were trusted with drafting a programme
in the form of a manifesto of the Communist Party. In writing the manifesto
the founders of Marxism made use of the propositions enunciated in Principles
of Communism.

Engels uses the term Manufaktur, and its derivatives, which have been translated  “manufacture”, “manufacturing”, etc., Engels used this word literally, to indicate production by hand, not factory production for which Engels uses “big industry”. Manufaktur differs from handicraft (guild production in mediaeval towns), in that the latter was carried out by independent artisans. Manufacktur is carried out by homeworkers working for merchant capitalists, or by groups of craftspeople working together in large workshops owned by capitalists. It is therefore a transitional mode of production, between guild (handicraft) and modern (capitalist) forms of production.

(Last paragraph paraphrased from the
Introduction by Pluto Press, London, 1971)


1. In their works written in later periods,
Marx and Engels substituted the more accurate concepts of “sale of labour
power”, “value of labour power” and “price of labour power” (first introduced by Marx) for “sale of labour”, “value of labour” and “price of labour”, as used here.


2. Engels left half a page blank here
in the manuscript. The Draft of the Communist Confession of Faith, has the answer shown for the same question (Number 12).

3. Engels’ put “unchanged” here, referring to the answer in the June draft under No. 21 which is shown.


4. Similarly, this refers to the answer to Question 23 in the June draft: “All religions which have existed hitherto were expressions of historical stages of development of individual peoples or groups of peoples. But communism is that stage of historical development which makes all existing religions superfluous and supersedes them.”

5. The Chartists were the participants in the
political movement of the British workers which lasted from the 1830s to
the middle 1850s and had as its slogan the adoption of a People’s Charter,
demanding universal franchise and a series of conditions guaranteeing voting
rights for all workers. Lenin defined Chartism as the world’s “first broad,
truly mass and politically organized proletarian revolutionary movement” 
(Collected Works, Eng. ed., Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Vol.
29, p. 309.) The decline of the Chartist movement was due to the strengthening
of Britain’s industrial and commercial monopoly and the bribing of the
upper stratum of the working class (“the labour aristocracy”) by the British
bourgeoisie out of its super-profits. Both factors led to the strengthening
of opportunist tendencies in this stratum as expressed, in particular,
by the refusal of the trade union leaders to support Chartism.


6.
Probably a references to the National Reform Association, founded during the 1840s by George H. Evans, with headquarters in New York City, which had for its motto, “Vote Yourself a Farm”.




Study Guide |
Communist Manifesto
Communist League |
Rules of the Communist League |
Communist Confession of Faith
1847 Index |
1840s Index |
Marx-Engels Archive |
Vorwärts!




==========

## Manifesto of the Communist Party









Manifesto of the Communist Party





MIA: Marxists: Marx & Engels: Library: 1848: Manifesto of the Communist Party



Manifesto of the Communist Party


Written: Late 1847;
First Published: February 1848;
Source: Marx/Engels Selected Works, Vol. One, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1969, pp. 98-137;
Translated: Samuel Moore in cooperation with Frederick Engels, 1888;
Transcription/Markup: Zodiac and Brian Baggins; 
Proofed: and corrected against 1888 English Edition by Andy Blunden 2004;
Copyleft: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 1987, 2000. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License.

See Note in: Marx Engels Collected Works.

Contents

     Preface
     Preamble
I:   Bourgeois and Proletarians
II: Proletarians and Communists
III: Socialist and Communist Literature
IV: Position of the Communists in Relation to the Various Existing Opposition Parties

Appendix: Prefaces to Various Language Editions

Download: Audio, Word, epub, prc, PDF.



Communist Confession of Faith |
Principles of Communism |
Demands of Communist Party in Germany

The Manifesto of the Communist Party and its Genesis.
Study Guide |
Marx-Engels Archive

To volunteer for the MIA, Email our Admin Committee





==========

## The Bourgeoisie and the Counter-revolution: Part 2




Neue Rheinsiche Zeitung No. 169 December 1848





Marx in Neue Rheinische Zeitung December 1848

The Bourgeoisie and the Counter-Revolution
by Karl Marx
Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 169
Translated by the Marx-Engels Institute
Transcribed for the Internet by director@marx.org,
1994

Cologne, December 11. When the March flood – a flood in miniature
– subsided it left on the surface of Berlin no prodigies, no revolutionary
giants, but traditional creatures, thickset bourgeois figures-the liberals
of the United Provincial Diet, the representatives of the conscious Prussian
bourgeoisie. The main contingents for the new ministries were supplied
by the Rhineland and Silesia, the provinces with the most advanced bourgeoisie.
They were followed by a whole train of Rhenish lawyers. As the bourgeoisie
was pushed into the background by the feudal aristocracy, the Rhineland
and Silesia were replaced in the cabinets by the old Prussian provinces.
The only link of the Brandenburg cabinet with the Rhineland is through
a single Elberfeld Tory. Hansemann and von der Heydt! These two names exemplify
the whole difference between March and December 1848 for the Prussian bourgeoisie.

The Prussian bourgeoisie reached the political summit, not by
means of a peaceful deal with the Crown, as it had desired, but as the
result of a revolution. It was to defend, not its own interests, but those
of the people – for a popular movement had prepared the way for the bourgeoisie
– against the Crown, in other words, against itself. For the bourgeoisie
regarded the Crown simply as a cloak provided by the grace of God, a cloak
that was to conceal its own profane interests, The inviolability of its
own interests and of the political forms appropriate to these interests,
expressed in constitutional language, is inviolability of the Crown. Hence
the enthusiasm of the German bourgeoisie and in particular of the Prussian
bourgeoisie for the constitutional monarchy. Although the February revolution
together with its repercussions in Germany was welcomed by the Prussian
bourgeoisie, because the revolution had placed the helm of state into its
hands, it also upset the plans of the bourgeoisie, because its rule was
thus bound by conditions which it neither wanted nor was able to fulfill.

The bourgeoisie did not raise a finger; it simply allowed the
people to fight for it. Hence the rule it was called upon to exercise was
not the rule of a commander who has defeated his adversary, but the rule
of a committee of public safety which has been entrusted by the victorious
people with the protection of its interests.

Camphausen was still clearly aware of this embarrassing position,
and the weakness of his cabinet was entirely due to this feeling and the
circumstances that gave rise to it. Even the most shameless actions of
his government are therefore tinctured by a sort of shamefaced blush. Open
shamelessness and insolence were Hansemann's privileges. The red complexion
is all that distinguishes these two artists from one another.

The March revolution in Prussia should not be confused either
with the English revolution of 1648 or with the French one of 1789.

In 1648 the bourgeoisie was allied with the modern aristocracy
against the monarchy, the feudal aristocracy and the established church.

In 1789 the bourgeoisie was allied with the people against the
monarchy, the aristocracy and the established church.

The model for the revolution of 1789 (at least in Europe) was
only the revolution of 1648; that for the revolution of 1648 only the revolt
of the Netherlands against Spain. [128] Both revolutions were a century
ahead of their model not only in time but also in substance.

In both revolutions the bourgeoisie was the class that really
headed the movement. The proletariat and the non-bourgeois strata of the
middle class had either not yet evolved interests which were different
from those of the bourgeoisie or they did not yet constitute independent
classes or class divisions. Therefore, where they opposed the bourgeoisie,
as they did in France in 1793 and 1794, they fought only for the attainment
of the aims of the bourgeoisie, albeit in a non-bourgeois manner. The entire
French terrorism was just a plebeian way of dealing with the enemies of
the bourgeoisie, absolutism, feudalism and philistinism.

The revolutions of 1648 and 1789 were not English and French revolutions,
they were revolutions in the European fashion. They did not represent the
victory of a particular social class over the old political system; they
proclaimed the political system of the new European society. The bourgeoisie
was victorious in these revolutions, but the victory of the bourgeoisie
was at that time the victory of a new social order, the victory of bourgeois
ownership over feudal ownership, of nationality over provincialism, of
competition over the guild, of partitioning [of the land] over primogeniture,
of the rule of the landowner over the domination of the owner by the land,
of enlightenment over superstition, of the family over the family name,
of industry over heroic idleness, of bourgeois law over medieval privileges.
The revolution of 1648 was the victory of the seventeenth century over
the sixteenth century; the revolution of 1789 was the victory of the eighteenth
century over the seventeenth. These revolutions reflected the needs of
the world at that time rather than the needs of those parts of the world
where they occurred, that is, England and France.

There has been nothing of this in the Prussian March revolution.

The February revolution actually abolished the constitutional
monarchy and nominally abolished the rule of the bourgeoisie. The Prussian
March revolution ought to have nominally established a constitutional monarchy
and actually established the rule of the bourgeoisie. Far from being a
European revolution it was merely a weak repercussion of a European revolution
in a backward country. Instead of being ahead of its century, it was over
half a century behind its time. From the very outset it was a secondary
phenomenon, and it is well known that secondary diseases are harder to
cure and are liable to cause more harm than the primary diseases do. It
was not a question of establishing a new society, but of resurrecting in
Berlin a society that had expired in Paris. The Prussian March revolution
was not even a national, German revolution; from the very start it was
a Provincial Prussian revolution. In Vienna, Cassel, Munich and various
other towns provincial uprisings took place alongside it and competed with
it.

Whereas 1648 and 1789 gained boundless self-confidence from the
knowledge that they were leading the universe, it was the ambition of the
Berlin (revolution) of 1848 to constitute an anachronism. Its light is
like that of the stars which reaches us, the inhabitants of the Earth,
only after the bodies from which it had emanated have been extinct for
a hundred thousand years. The March revolution in Prussia was, on a small
scale – just as it did everything on a small scale – such a star for
Europe. Its light was that of a social body which had long since disintegrated.

The German bourgeoisie developed so sluggishly, timidly and slowly
that at the moment when it menacingly confronted feudalism and absolutism,
it saw menacingly pitted against itself the proletariat and all sections
of the middle class whose interests and ideas were related to those of
the proletariat. The German bourgeoisie found not just one class behind
it, but all Europe hostilely facing it. Unlike the French bourgeoisie of
1789, the Prussian bourgeoisie, when it confronted monarchy and aristocracy,
the representatives of the old society, was not a class speaking for the
whole of modern society. It had been reduced to a kind of estate as clearly
distinct from the Crown as it was from the people, with a strong bend to
oppose both adversaries and irresolute towards each of them individually
because it always saw both of them either in front of it or behind it.
From the first it was inclined to betray the people and to compromise with
the crowned representatives of the old society, for it already belonged
itself to the old society; it did not advance the interests of a new society
against an old one, but represented refurbished interests within an obsolete
society. It stood at the helm of the revolution not because it had the
people behind it but because the people drove it forward; it stood at the
head because it merely represented the spleen of an old social era and
not the initiatives of a new one. A stratum of the old state that had failed
to break through and was thrown up on the surface of the new state by the
force of an earthquake; without faith in itself, without faith in the people,
grumbling at those above, frightened of those below, egoistical towards
both and aware of its egoism; revolutionary with regard to the conservatives
and conservative with regard to the revolutionaries. It did not trust its
own slogans, used phrases instead of ideas, it was intimidated by the world
storm and exploited it for its own ends; it displayed no energy anywhere,
but resorted to plagiarism everywhere, it was vulgar because unoriginal,
and original in its vulgarity; haggling over its own demands, without initiative,
without faith in itself, without faith in the people, without a historic
mission, an abominable dotard finding himself condemned to lead and to
mislead the first youthful impulses of a virile people so as to make them
serve his own senile interests – sans eyes, sans ears, sans teeth, sans everything
– this was the Prussian bourgeoisie which found itself at the helm of
the Prussian state after the March revolution.


 


continued ... |
Neue Rheinische Zeitung Index |
Marx/Engels Archive





==========

## Wage Labour and Capital









Wage Labour and Capital



Works of Karl Marx 1847

Wage Labour and Capital




Delivered: December 1847;
Source: Wage Labour and Capital, the original 1891 pamphlet;
Edited/Translated: Frederick Engels;
First Published (in German): Neue Rheinische Zeitung, April 5-8 and 11, 1849;
Online Version: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 1993, 1999;
Transcription/Markup: Zodiac and Brian Baggins;
Proofed: and corrected by Alek Blain, 2006.


Table of Contents:


Introduction

Preliminary

What are wages?

By what is the price of a commodity determined?

By what are wages determined?

The nature and growth of capital

Relation of wage-labor to capital

The general law that determines the rise and fall of wages and profit

The interests of capital and wage-labor are diametrically opposed

Effect of capitalist competition on the capitalist class, middle class and working class





Study Guide
1847 Index |
1840s Index |
Marx-Engels Archive




==========

## Address to the Communist League




Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League by Marx and Engels





Karl Marx and Frederick Engels
Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League
London, March 1850


Transcribed: by gearhart@ccsn.edu;
Proofed: and corrected by Alek Blain 2006;


Brothers!
In the two revolutionary years of 1848-49 the League proved itself
in two ways.  First, its members everywhere involved themselves
energetically in the movement and stood in the front ranks of the only
decisively revolutionary class, the proletariat, in the press, on the
barricades and on the battlefields.  The League further proved itself in
that its understanding of the movement, as expressed in the circulars
issued by the Congresses and the Central Committee of 1847 and in the
Manifesto of the Communist Party, has been shown to be the only correct one, and the expectations expressed in these
documents have been completely fulfilled.  This previously only propagated by
the League in secret, is now on everyone’s lips and is preached openly in the
market place.  At the same time, however, the formerly strong organization of
the League has been considerably weakened.  A large number of members
who were directly involved in the movement thought that the time for
secret societies was over and that public action alone was sufficient.
The individual districts and communes allowed their connections with the
Central Committee to weaken and gradually become dormant.  So, while the
democratic party, the party of the petty bourgeoisie, has become more
and more organized in Germany, the workers’ party has lost its only firm
foothold, remaining organized at best in individual localities for local
purposes; within the general movement it has consequently come under the
complete domination and leadership of the petty-bourgeois democrats.
This situation cannot be allowed to continue; the independence of the
workers must be restored.  The Central Committee recognized this
necessity and it therefore sent an emissary, Joseph Moll, to Germany in
the winter of 1848-9 to reorganize the League.  Moll’s mission, however,
failed to produce any lasting effect, partly because the German workers
at that time had not enough experience and partly because it was
interrupted by the insurrection last May.  Moll himself took up arms,
joined the Baden-Palatinate army and fell on 29 June in the battle of
the River Murg.  The League lost in him one of the oldest, most active
and most reliable members, who had been involved in all the Congresses
and Central Committees and had earlier conducted a series of missions
with great success.  Since the defeat of the German and French
revolutionary parties in July 1849, almost all the members of the
Central Committee have reassembled in London: they have replenished
their numbers with new revolutionary forces and set about reorganizing
the League with renewed zeal.
This reorganization can only be achieved by an emissary, and the
Central Committee considers it most important to dispatch the emissary
at this very moment, when a new revolution is imminent, that is, when
the workers’ party must go into battle with the maximum degree of
organization, unity and independence, so that it is not exploited and
taken in tow by the bourgeoisie as in 1848.
We told you already in 1848, brothers, that the German liberal
bourgeoisie would soon come to power and would immediately turn its
newly won power against the workers.  You have seen how this forecast
came true.  It was indeed the bourgeoisie which took possession of the
state authority in the wake of the March movement of 1848 and used this
power to drive the workers, its allies in the struggle, back into their
former oppressed position.  Although the bourgeoisie could accomplish
this only by entering into an alliance with the feudal party, which had
been defeated in March, and eventually even had to surrender power once
more to this feudal absolutist party, it has nevertheless secured
favourable conditions for itself.  In view of the government’s financial
difficulties, these conditions would ensure that power would in the long
run fall into its hands again and that all its interests would be
secured, if it were possible for the revolutionary movement to assume
from now on a so-called peaceful course of development.  In order to
guarantee its power the bourgeoisie would not even need to arouse hatred
by taking violent measures against the people, as all of these violent
measures have already been carried out by the feudal counter-revolution.
But events will not take this peaceful course.  On the contrary, the
revolution which will accelerate the course of events, is imminent,
whether it is initiated by an independent rising of the French
proletariat or by an invasion of the revolutionary Babel by the Holy
Alliance.
The treacherous role that the German liberal bourgeoisie played
against the people in 1848 will be assumed in the coming revolution by
the democratic petty bourgeoisie, which now occupies the same position
in the opposition as the liberal bourgeoisie did before 1848.  This
democratic party, which is far more dangerous for the workers than were
the liberals earlier, is composed of three elements: 1) The most
progressive elements of the big bourgeoisie, who pursue the goal of the
immediate and complete overthrow of feudalism and absolutism.  This
fraction is represented by the former Berlin Vereinbarer, the tax
resisters; 2) The constitutional-democratic petty bourgeois, whose main
aim during the previous movement was the formation of a more or less
democratic federal state; this is what their representative, the Left in
the Frankfurt Assembly and later the Stuttgart parliament, worked for,
as they themselves did in the Reich Constitution Campaign; 3) The
republican petty bourgeois, whose ideal is a German federal republic
similar to that in Switzerland and who now call themselves ‘red’ and
’social-democratic’ because they cherish the pious wish to abolish the
pressure exerted by big capital on small capital, by the big bourgeoisie
on the petty bourgeoisie.  The representatives of this fraction were
the members of the democratic congresses and committees, the leaders of
the democratic associations and the editors of the democratic
newspapers.
After their defeat all these fractions claim to be ‘republicans’ or
’reds’, just as at the present time members of the republican petty
bourgeoisie in France call themselves ‘socialists’.  Where, as in
Wurtemberg, Bavaria, etc., they still find a chance to pursue their ends
by constitutional means, they seize the opportunity to retain their old
phrases and prove by their actions that they have not changed in the
least.  Furthermore, it goes without saying that the changed name of
this party does not alter in the least its relationship to the workers
but merely proves that it is now obliged to form a front against the
bourgeoisie, which has united with absolutism, and to seek the support
of the proletariat.
The petty-bourgeois democratic party in Germany is very powerful.
It not only embraces the great majority of the urban middle class, the
small industrial merchants and master craftsmen; it also includes among
its followers the peasants and rural proletariat in so far as the latter
has not yet found support among the independent proletariat of the
towns.

The relationship of the revolutionary workers’ party to the
petty-bourgeois democrats is this: it cooperates with them against the
party which they aim to overthrow; it opposes them wherever they wish to
secure their own position.

The democratic petty bourgeois, far from wanting to transform the
whole society in the interests of the revolutionary proletarians, only
aspire to a change in social conditions which will make the existing
society as tolerable and comfortable for themselves as possible.  They
therefore demand above all else a reduction in government spending
through a restriction of the bureaucracy and the transference of the
major tax burden into the large landowners and bourgeoisie.  They
further demand the removal of the pressure exerted by big capital on
small capital through the establishment of public credit institutions
and the passing of laws against usury, whereby it would be possible for
themselves and the peasants to receive advances on favourable terms from
the state instead of from capitalists; also, the introduction of
bourgeois property relationships on land through the complete abolition
of feudalism.  In order to achieve all this they require a democratic
form of government, either constitutional or republican, which would
give them and their peasant allies the majority; they also require a
democratic system of local government to give them direct control over
municipal property and over a series of political offices at present in
the hands of the bureaucrats.

The rule of capital and its rapid accumulation is to be further
counteracted, partly by a curtailment of the right of inheritance, and
partly by the transference of as much employment as possible to the
state.  As far as the workers are concerned one thing, above all, is
definite: they are to remain wage labourers as before.  However, the
democratic petty bourgeois want better wages and security for the
workers, and hope to achieve this by an extension of state employment
and by welfare measures; in short, they hope to bribe the workers with a
more or less disguised form of alms and to break their revolutionary
strength by temporarily rendering their situation tolerable.  The
demands of petty-bourgeois democracy summarized here are not expressed
by all sections of it at once, and in their totality they are the
explicit goal of only a very few of its followers.  The further
particular individuals or fractions of the petty bourgeoisie advance,
the more of these demands they will explicitly adopt, and the few who
recognize their own programme in what has been mentioned above might
well believe they have put forward the maximum that can be demanded from
the revolution.  But these demands can in no way satisfy the party of
the proletariat.  While the democratic petty bourgeois want to bring the
revolution to an end as quickly as possible, achieving at most the aims
already mentioned, it is our interest and our task to make the
revolution permanent until all the more or less propertied classes have
been driven from their ruling positions, until the proletariat has
conquered state power and until the association of the proletarians has
progressed sufficiently far – not only in one country but in all the
leading countries of the world – that competition between the
proletarians of these countries ceases and at least the decisive forces
of production are concentrated in the hands of the workers.  Our concern
cannot simply be to modify private property, but to abolish it, not to
hush up class antagonisms but to abolish classes, not to improve the
existing society but to found a new one.  There is no doubt that during
the further course of the revolution in Germany, the petty-bourgeois
democrats will for the moment acquire a predominant influence.  The
question is, therefore, what is to be the attitude of the proletariat,
and in particular of the League towards them:

1) While present conditions continue, in which the petty-bourgeois democrats are also oppressed;
2) In the coming revolutionary struggle, which will put them in a dominant position;
3) After this struggle, during the period of petty-bourgeois predominance over the classes
which have been overthrown and over the proletariat.

1.  At the moment, while the democratic petty bourgeois are
everywhere oppressed, they preach to the proletariat general unity and
reconciliation; they extend the hand of friendship, and seek to found a
great opposition party which will embrace all shades of democratic
opinion; that is, they seek to ensnare the workers in a party
organization in which general social-democratic phrases prevail while
their particular interests are kept hidden behind, and in which, for the
sake of preserving the peace, the specific demands of the proletariat
may not be presented.  Such a unity would be to their advantage alone
and to the complete disadvantage of the proletariat.  The proletariat
would lose all its hard-won independent position and be reduced once
more to a mere appendage of official bourgeois democracy.  This unity
must therefore be resisted in the most decisive manner.  Instead of
lowering themselves to the level of an applauding chorus, the workers,
and above all the League, must work for the creation of an independent
organization of the workers’ party, both secret and open, and alongside
the official democrats, and the League must aim to make every one of its
communes a center and nucleus of workers’ associations in which the
position and interests of the proletariat can be discussed free from
bourgeois influence.  How serious the bourgeois democrats are about an
alliance in which the proletariat has equal power and equal rights is
demonstrated by the Breslau democrats, who are conducting a furious campaign
in their organ, the Neue Oder Zeitung, against independently organized
workers, whom they call ‘socialists’.  In the event of a struggle against
a common enemy a special alliance is unnecessary.  As soon as such an
enemy has to be fought directly, the interests of both parties will coincide
for the moment and an association of momentary expedience will arise
spontaneously in the future, as it has in the past.  It goes without saying
that in the bloody conflicts to come, as in all others, it will be the
workers, with their courage, resolution and self-sacrifice, who will be
chiefly responsible for achieving victory.  As in the past, so in the
coming struggle also, the petty bourgeoisie, to a man, will hesitate as long
as possible and remain fearful, irresolute and inactive; but when victory is
certain it will claim it for itself and will call upon the workers to behave
in an orderly fashion, to return to work and to prevent so-called excesses,
and it will exclude the proletariat from the fruits of victory.  It does not
lie within the power of the workers to prevent the petty-bourgeois democrats
from doing this; but it does lie within their power to make it as difficult
as possible for the petty bourgeoisie to use its power against the armed
proletariat, and to dictate such conditions to them that the rule of the
bourgeois democrats, from the very first, will carry within it the seeds
of its own destruction, and its subsequent displacement by the proletariat
will be made considerably easier.  Above all, during and immediately after
the struggle the workers, as far as it is at all possible, must oppose
bourgeois attempts at pacification and force the democrats to carry out
their terroristic phrases.  They must work to ensure that the immediate
revolutionary excitement is not suddenly suppressed after the victory.
On the contrary, it must be sustained as long as possible.  Far from opposing
the so-called excesses – instances of popular vengeance against hated
individuals or against public buildings with which hateful memories are
associated – the workers’ party must not only tolerate these actions but must
even give them direction.  During and after the struggle the workers must at
every opportunity put forward their own demands against those of the
bourgeois democrats.  They must demand guarantees for the workers as soon
as the democratic bourgeoisie sets about taking over the government.  They
must achieve these guarantees by force if necessary, and generally make sure
that the new rulers commit themselves to all possible concessions and
promises – the surest means of compromising them.  They must check in
every way and as far as is possible the victory euphoria and enthusiasm for
the new situation which follow every successful street battle, with a cool
and cold-blooded analysis of the situation and with undisguised mistrust of
the new government.  Alongside the new official governments they must
simultaneously establish their own revolutionary workers’ governments,
either in the form of local executive committees and councils or through
workers’ clubs or committees, so that the bourgeois-democratic governments
not only immediately lost the support of the workers but find themselves
from the very beginning supervised and threatened by authorities behind
which stand the whole mass of the workers.  In a word, from the very
moment of victory the workers’ suspicion must be directed no longer against
the defeated reactionary party but against their former ally, against the
party which intends to exploit the common victory for itself.

2.  To be able
forcefully and threateningly to oppose this party, whose betrayal of the
workers will begin with the very first hour of victory, the workers must be
armed and organized.  The whole proletariat must be armed at once with
muskets, rifles, cannon and ammunition, and the revival of the old-style
citizens’ militia, directed against the workers, must be opposed.  Where the
formation of this militia cannot be prevented, the workers must try to
organize themselves independently as a proletarian guard, with elected
leaders and with their own elected general staff; they must try to place
themselves not under the orders of the state authority but of the
revolutionary local councils set up by the workers. Where the workers are
employed by the state, they must arm and organize themselves into special
corps with elected leaders, or as a part of the proletarian guard.  Under no
pretext should arms and ammunition be surrendered; any attempt to disarm the
workers must be frustrated, by force if necessary.  The destruction of the
bourgeois democrats’ influence over the workers, and the enforcement of
conditions which will compromise the rule of bourgeois democracy, which is
for the moment inevitable, and make it as difficult as possible – these are
the main points which the proletariat and therefore the League must keep in
mind during and after the approaching uprising.

3.  As soon as the new governments have established themselves, their
struggle against the workers will begin.  If the workers are to be able to
forcibly oppose the democratic petty bourgeois it is essential above all for
them to be independently organized and centralized in clubs.  At the soonest
possible moment after the overthrow of the present governments, the Central
Committee will come to Germany and will immediately convene a Congress,
submitting to it the necessary proposals for the centralization of the
workers’ clubs under a directorate established at the movement’s center of
operations.  The speedy organization of at least provincial connections
between the workers’ clubs is one of the prime requirements for the
strengthening and development of the workers’ party; the immediate result of
the overthrow of the existing governments will be the election of a national
representative body.  Here the proletariat must take care: 1) that by sharp
practices local authorities and government commissioners do not, under any
pretext whatsoever, exclude any section of workers; 2) that workers’
candidates are nominated everywhere in opposition to bourgeois-democratic
candidates.  As far as possible they should be League members and their
election should be pursued by all possible means.  Even where there is no
prospect of achieving their election the workers must put up their own
candidates to preserve their independence, to gauge their own strength and
to bring their revolutionary position and party standpoint to public
attention.  They must not be led astray by the empty phrases of the
democrats, who will maintain that the workers’ candidates will split the
democratic party and offer the forces of reaction the chance of victory.
All such talk means, in the final analysis, that the proletariat is to be
swindled.  The progress which the proletarian party will make by operating
independently in this way is infinitely more important than the disadvantages
resulting from the presence of a few reactionaries in the representative
body.  If the forces of democracy take decisive, terroristic action against
the reaction from the very beginning, the reactionary influence in the
election will already have been destroyed.
The first point over which the bourgeois democrats will come into
conflict with the workers will be the abolition of feudalism as in the
first French revolution, the petty bourgeoisie will want to give the
feudal lands to the peasants as free property; that is, they will try
to perpetrate the existence of the rural proletariat, and to form a
petty-bourgeois peasant class which will be subject to the same cycle
of impoverishment and debt which still afflicts the French peasant.
The workers must oppose this plan both in the interest of the rural
proletariat and in their own interest.  They must demand that the
confiscated feudal property remain state property and be used for
workers’ colonies, cultivated collectively by the rural proletariat with
all the advantages of large-scale farming and where the principle of common
property will immediately achieve a sound basis in the midst of the shaky
system of bourgeois property relations.  Just as the democrats ally
themselves with the peasants, the workers must ally themselves with the
rural proletariat.
The democrats will either work directly towards a federated republic, or
at least, if they cannot avoid the one and indivisible republic they will
attempt to paralyze the central government by granting the municipalities
and provinces the greatest possible autonomy and independence.  In opposition
to this plan the workers must not only strive for one and indivisible German
republic, but also, within this republic, for the most decisive
centralization of power in the hands of the state authority.  They should not
let themselves be led astray by empty democratic talk about the freedom of
the municipalities, self-government, etc.  In a country like Germany, where
so many remnants of the Middle Ages are still to be abolished, where so much
local and provincial obstinacy has to be broken down, it cannot under any
circumstances be tolerated that each village, each town and each province
may put up new obstacles in the way of revolutionary activity, which can
only be developed with full efficiency from a central point.  A renewal of
the present situation, in which the Germans have to wage a separate struggle
in each town and province for the same degree of progress, can also not be
tolerated.  Least of all can a so-called free system of local government be
allowed to perpetuate a form of property which is more backward than modern
private property and which is everywhere and inevitably being transformed
into private property; namely communal property, with its consequent disputes
between poor and rich communities.  Nor can this so-called free system of
local government be allowed to perpetuate, side by side with the state civil
law, the existence of communal civil law with its sharp practices directed
against the workers.  As in France in 1793, it is the task of the genuinely
revolutionary party in Germany to carry through the strictest centralization. [It must be recalled today that this passage is based on a misunderstanding. At that time – thanks to the Bonapartist and liberal falsifiers of history – it was considered as established that the French centralised machine of administration had been introduced by the Great Revolution and in particular that it had been used by the Convention as an indispensable and decisive weapon for defeating the royalist and federalist reaction and the external enemy. It is now, however, a well-known fact that throughout the revolution up to the eighteenth Brumaire c the whole administration of the départements, arrondissements and communes consisted of authorities elected by, the respective constituents themselves, and that these authorities acted with complete freedom within the general state laws; that precisely this provincial and local self-government, similar to the American, became the most powerful lever of the revolution and indeed to such an extent that Napoleon, immediately after his coup d’état of the eighteenth Brumaire, hastened to replace it by the still existing administration by prefects, which, therefore, was a pure instrument of reaction from the beginning. But no more than local and provincial self-government is in contradiction to political, national centralisation, is it necessarily bound up with that narrow-minded cantonal or communal self-seeking which strikes us as so repulsive in Switzerland, and which all the South German federal republicans wanted to make the rule in Germany in 1849. – Note by Engels to the 1885 edition.]
We have seen how the next upsurge
will bring the democrats to power and how they will be forced to propose
more or less socialistic measures.  it will be asked what measures the
workers are to propose in reply.  At the beginning, of course, the workers
cannot propose any directly communist measures.  But the following courses
of action are possible:
1.  They can force the democrats
to make inroads into as many areas of the existing social order as possible,
so as to disturb its regular functioning and so that the petty-bourgeois
democrats compromise themselves; furthermore, the workers can force the
concentration of as many productive forces as possible – means of transport,
factories, railways, etc.  – in the hands of the state.
2.  They must drive the proposals
of the democrats to their logical extreme (the democrats will in any case
act in a reformist and not a revolutionary manner) and transform these
proposals into direct attacks on private property.  If, for instance, the
petty bourgeoisie propose the purchase of the railways and factories, the
workers must demand that these railways and factories simply be confiscated
by the state without compensation as the property of reactionaries.  If the
democrats propose a proportional tax, then the workers must demand a
progressive tax; if the democrats themselves propose a moderate progressive
tax, then the workers must insist on a tax whose rates rise so steeply that
big capital is ruined by it; if the democrats demand the regulation of the
state debt, then the workers must demand national bankruptcy.  The demands
of the workers will thus have to be adjusted according to the measures and
concessions of the democrats.
Although the German workers cannot come to power and achieve the realization of their class interests without
passing through a protracted revolutionary development, this time they can
at least be certain that the first act of the approaching revolutionary
drama will coincide with the direct victory of their own class in France
and will thereby be accelerated. But they themselves must contribute most
to their final victory, by informing themselves of their own class interests,
by taking up their independent political position as soon as possible, by not allowing
themselves to be misled by the hypocritical phrases of the democratic petty
bourgeoisie into doubting for one minute the necessity of an independently
organized party of the proletariat.  Their battle-cry must be: The
Permanent Revolution.
 


Communist League Index |
1847 Index |
Marx/Engels Archive





==========

## The Class Struggle in France, 1848 to 1850






The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850





Works of Karl Marx 1850


The Class Struggles in France,
1848 to 1850

 

Written: by Marx, January -
October 1850 for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung Revue;
Published: as a booklet by Engels in 1895;
Source: Selected Works, Volume 1, Progress
Publishers, Moscow 1969;
Proofed: and corrected by Matthew Carmody, 2009, Mark
Harris 2010;
Transcribed: by Louis Proyect.

“Great importance must be attached to one of the
historical documents of the German labour movement: the Preface written by
Fredrick Engels for the 1895 re-issue of Marx's Class Struggles in France ...
looking back upon the year 1848, he showed that the belief that the socialist
revolution was imminent had become obsolete ... Engels demonstrated, as an
expert in military science, that it was a pure illusion to believe that the
workers could, in the existing state of military technique and of industry, and
in view of the characteristics of the great towns of today, successfully bring
about a revolution by street fighting.” Rosa Luxemburg, 1918.
Introduction to the 1895 Edition, Engels, Alternate translation.

With the exception of only a few chapters, every important part
of the revolutionary annals from 1848 to 1849 bear the heading: Defeat of
the revolution!
What succumbed in these defeats was not the revolution. It was the
pre-revolutionary traditional appendages, results of social relationships which
had not yet come to the point of sharp class antagonisms — persons,
illusions, conceptions, projects from which the revolutionary party before the
February Revolution was not free, from which it could be freed not by the
victory of February, but only by a series of defeats.
In a word: The revolution made progress, forged ahead, not by its immediate
tragicomic achievements but, on the contrary, by the creation of a powerful,
united counterrevolution, by the creation of an opponent in combat with whom
the party of overthrow ripened into a really revolutionary party.
To prove this is the task of the following pages.
Contents
Part I: The Defeat of June, 1848
Part II: From June 1848 to June 13,
1849
Part III: Consequences of June 13,
1849
Part IV: The Abolition of Universal
Suffrage in 1850 
 

Marx’s The Class Struggles in France,
1848 to 1850 consists of a series of articles written between
January and October 1850 specially for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.
Politisch-ökonomische Revue and published in it under the general title
“1848-1849.” This is a most important work summing up the results
of the 1848-49 revolution. In preparation for this work, Marx used French
newspaper reports, reports published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung,
and accounts given by witnesses – French and German revolutionary
refugees, among them Ferdinand Wolff, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung
Paris correspondent, and another Communist League member, Sebastian
Seiler, who was a stenographer to the French National Assembly in 1848 and 1849
and wrote a pamphlet on the events of June 13, 1849, which he presented to
Marx. Marx was also probably familiar with Ledru-Rollin’s pamphlet on the
same subject.
According to the original plan the work was to consist
of four articles: “The Defeat of June 1848,” “June 13,
1849,” “Repercussions of June 13 on the Continent” and
“Current Situation; England.” However, in Nos. 1, 2 and 3 of the
journal only three articles were published: “The Defeat of June
1848,” “June 13, 1849” and “Consequences of June 13,
1849.” The influence of the June 1849 events on the Continent and the
situation in England were treated in other items of the journal. particularly
in the international reviews written jointly by Marx and Engels.
The work was not reprinted in full during Marx’s
lifetime. In 1895 it came out in book form in Berlin, with an Introduction by
Engels. The title The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 was
given by Engels and the work has since appeared under this title in various
languages. In the 1895 edition, Engels added the fourth chapter, which included
the sections of the third international review dealing with events in France.
Engels entitled this chapter “The Abolition of Universal Suffrage in
1850.” Engels wrote to Richard Fischer on February 13, 1895, that the
fourth chapter “will serve as a factual conclusion to the work as a
whole, without which it would have remained a fragment.” At the same
time, the headings of the first three chapters were changed: I. “From
February to June 1848,” II. “From June 1848 to June 13,
1849,” III. “From June 13, 1849, to March 10, 1850.” In the
present edition, the headings of the first three chapters are given according
to the journal, while the heading of the fourth chapter is given as in the 1895
edition.
The publication of the series of Marx’s articles
drew the attention of the press. A short announcement of No. 1 of the Neue
Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue and quotations from
Marx’s work were published in the Freischütz. Hamburg, No. 40,
April 2, 1850; a review in the Wochenblatt der Hornisse, Cassel, No.
3, April 15, 1850~ The preface and the first article were reprinted in the
Deutsche Londoner Zeitung Nos. 262, 263 and 264, April 5, 12 arid 19,
1850. On January 1, 1852, the Turn-Zeitung, published by German
socialist emigrants in the USA, carried an article by Joseph Weydemeyer
“On the Dictatorship of the Proletariat,” written under the direct
influence of Marx’s work, the first work by Marx and Engels in which the
term “the dictatorship of the proletariat” was used. On the other
hand, the idea of the dictatorship of the proletariat brought criticism of the
author from the petty-bourgeois democrats. The Neue Deutsche Zeitung,
whose editor was a former “true socialist,” Otto Luning,
published a review (Nos. 148-51, June 22-23, 25 and 26. 1850) of the four
numbers of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue
with unfavourable comments on this proposition and an incorrect
interpretation of it. Marx was obliged to write Lüning a special letter
rebuffing attempts to distort and dispute the idea of the dictatorship of the
proletariat.
Marx and Engels attached great importance to the
popularisation of the ideas contained in The Class Struggles in France
among the English workers. Engels used this work in his Letters from
France published in The Democratic Review and, on the basis of
the first article in the series, wrote Two Years of a Revolution,
which was published in the same journal. Excerpts from Marx’s work
were cited by his contemporaries (Hermann Becker, Proudhon).
Excerpts from The Class Struggles in France
were first published in English in the journal The Marxian, New
York, 1921, Vol. 1, No. 2, and it appeared in full as a separate edition by
Labour News Company, New York, 1924.
In this volume, the work is published after the Neue
Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue text, checked with that of
the 1895 edition prepared by Engels. The Revue published it from the
manuscript and since Marx’s handwriting was difficult to decipher,
mistakes cropped up. In the present edition, all changes in style, spelling,
punctuation and other corrections made by Engels have been taken into account,
as well as errata printed in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.
Politisch-ökonomische Revue (to the first number in the second, and to the
second and third in the fourth).
Account has also been taken of the analysis, carried out
by the editorial commission working on the Marx/EngeIs, Gesamtausgabe
(MEGA), erste Abteilung, 10. Bd. and kindly made available to us, of the marks
and corrections made by Marx and Engels in their copies of the journal.
Engels’ corrections apparently date f torn 1895 when he republished
The Class Struggles (in the 1895 edition, however, they were only
partly taken into account). It is also probable that Engels intended to
republish the Revue in full. Some corrections by Marx and Engels
coinciding with the errata printed in the Revue have been silently
inserted in the text of the present edition. Changes in meaning are indicated
in footnotes.
Besides this, obviously inaccurate dates and factual
data, including those in the 1850 and 1895 editions, have also been silently
corrected. Comments are not usually made on Marx’s free translation of
quotations, except when the words Marx puts in quotation marks are not true
quotations but convey the general meaning of the cited passages. 
 

Footnotes | The June Revolution (Marx's in Neue
Rheinische Zeitung at the time)
18th Brumaire of Louis
Napoleon (same material written 2 years later) 
Selected Works | Marx/Engels Archive 




==========

## Revolution and Counter-Revolution










Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany



Works of Frederick Engels
Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany

Written: 1851-1852;
First Published: New York Tribune, 1851-1852, as
book, 1896;
Edited: Eleanor Marx Aveling;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan 1999;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan
1999;
Proofed and corrected: Mark Harris 2010. 

Marx was asked in the summer of 1851 by Charles Anderson
Dana, managing editor of the New York Tribune, to write a series of
articles on the German Revolution. Founded in 1842 by Horace Greeley, the
Tribune was the most influential paper in the United States at the
time. These articles were written by Engels at the request of Marx, who was
then busy with his economic studies and felt, besides, that he had not yet
attained fluency in English. Engels wrote the articles in Manchester, where he
was employed, and sent them on to Marx in London to be edited and dispatched to
New York. Thus, although Engels must be rightly considered their author, Marx
took a big part in the preparation, for in their almost daily correspondence
the chief points were discussed thoroughly between them. The articles appeared
under Marx's name, and it was not until much later, when the correspondence
between the two life-long collaborators became available, that the true
circumstances were revealed. The contributions to the Tribune thus
begun continued until 1862, and though Marx himself wrote most of the articles
after 1852, Engels continued to help his friend by writing for him important
articles on political and military affairs. When Marx's daughter, Eleanor,
wrote the preface to the 1896 edition she was still under the impression that
Marx had written the series.
[Publisher's Note to the 1969 edition published in London by Lawrence &
Wishart]

Contents
I. Germany at the Outbreak of the
Revolution 
II. The Prussian State 
III. The Other German States 
IV. Austria 
V. The Vienna Insurrection 
VI. The Berlin Insurrection 
VII. The Frankfort National Assembly 
VIII. Poles, Tschechs, and Germans 
IX. Panslavism; The Schleswig War 
X. The Paris Rising; The Frankfort Assembly
 
XI. The Vienna Insurrection 
XII. The Storming of Vienna: The Betrayal of
Vienna 
XIII. The Prussian Assembly: The National
Assembly 
XIV. The Restoration of Order: Diet and
Chamber 
XV. The Triumph of Prussia 
XVI. The Assembly and the Governments 
XVII. Insurrection 
XVIII. Petty Traders 
XIX. The Close of the Insurrection 
XX. The Late Trial at Cologne 
 

Note by Eleanor Marx | Preface to Volume 38 MECW | 1852 Letters
Works Index | Marx/Engels Archive




==========

## The Late Trial at Cologne









Revolution and Counter-Revolution-Ch 20 



Revolution and Counter-revolution in Germany

XX. 
The Late Trial at Cologne
DECEMBER 22, 1852.
You will have ere this received by the European papers numerous
reports of the Communist Monster Trial at Cologne, Prussia, and of its result.
But as none of the reports is anything like a faithful statement of the facts,
and as these facts throw a glaring light upon the political means by which the
continent of Europe is kept in bondage, I consider it necessary to revert to
this trial.
The Communist or Proletarian party, as well as other parties, had lost, by
suppression of the rights of association and meeting, the means of giving to
itself a legal organization on the Continent. Its leaders, besides, had been
exiled from their countries. But no political party can exist without an
organization; and that organization which both the liberal bourgeois and the
Democratic shopkeeping class were enabled more or less to supply by the social
station, advantages, and long-established, every-day intercourse of their
members, the proletarian class, without such social station and pecuniary
means, was necessarily compelled to seek in secret association. Hence, both in
France and Germany, sprung up those numerous secret Societies which have, ever
since 1819, one after another, been discovered by the police, and prosecuted as
conspiracies; but if many of them were really conspiracies, formed with the
actual intention of upsetting the Government for the time being,— and he
is a coward that under certain circumstances would not conspire, just as he is
a fool who, under other circumstances, would do so;—there were some other
Societies which were formed with a wider and more elevated purpose, which knew
that the upsetting of an existing Government was but a passing stage in the
great impending struggle, and which intended to keep together and to prepare
the party, whose nucleus they formed, for the last decisive combat which must,
one day or another, crush forever in Europe the domination, not of mere
"tyrants," "despots" and "usurpers," but of a power far superior, and far more
formidable than theirs; that of capital over labor.
The organization of the advanced Communist party in Germany was of this
kind. In accordance with the principles of the "Manifesto" [1] (published
in 1848), and with those explained in the series of articles on "Revolution and
Counter-Revolution in Germany," published in the New York Daily
Tribune, this party never imagined itself capable of producing, at any
time and at its pleasure, that revolution which was to carry its ideas into
practice. It studied the causes that hall produced the revolutionary movement
in 1848, and the causes that made them fail. Recognizing the social antagonism
of classes at the bottom of all political struggles, it applied itself to the
study of the conditions under which one class of society can and must be called
on to represent the whole of the interests of a nation, and thus politically to
rule over it. History showed to the Communist party how, after the landed
aristocracy of the Middle Ages, the monied power of the first capitalists arose
and seized the reins of government; how the social influence and political rule
of this financial section of capitalists was superseded by the rising strength
since the introduction of steam, of the manufacturing capitalists, and how at
the present moment two more classes claim their turn of domination, the petty
trading class and the industrial working class. The practical revolutionary
experience of 1848-1849 confirmed the reasonings of theory, which led to the
conclusion that the Democracy of the petty traders must first have its turn,
before the Communist working class could hope to permanently establish itself
in power and destroy that system of wage-slavery which keeps it under the yoke
of the bourgeoisie. Thus the secret organization of the Communists could not
have the direct purpose of upsetting the present Governments of Germany. Being
formed to upset not these, but the insurrectionary Government, which is sooner
or later to follow them, its members might, and certainly would, individually,
lend an active hand to a revolutionary movement against the present status
quo in its turn; but the preparation of such a movement, otherwise than by
spreading of Communist opinions by the masses, could not be an object of the
Association. So well was this foundation of the Society understood by the
majority of its members, that when the place-hunting ambition of some tried to
turn it into a conspiracy for making an extempore revolution, they were
speedily turned out.
Now, according to no law upon the face of the earth, could such an
Association be called a plot, a conspiracy for purposes of high treason. If it
was a conspiracy, it was one against, not the existing Government, but its
probable successor. And the Prussian Government was aware of it. That was the
cause why the eleven defendants were kept in solitary confinement during
eighteen months, spent, on the part of the authorities, in the strangest
judicial feats. Imagine, that after eight months' detention, the prisoners were
remanded for some months more, "there being no evidence of any crime against
them!" And when at last they were brought before a jury, there was not a single
overt act of a treasonable nature proved against them. And yet they were
convicted, and you will speedily see how.
One of the emissaries of the society was arrested in May, 1851, and from
documents found upon him, other arrests followed. A Prussian police officer, a
certain Stieber, was immediately ordered to trace the ramifications, in London,
of the pretended plot. He succeeded in obtaining some papers connected with the
above-mentioned seceders from the society, who had, after being turned out,
formed an actual conspiracy in Paris and London. These papers were obtained by
a double crime. A man named Reuter was bribed to break open the writing-desk of
the secretary of the Society, and steal the papers therefrom. But that was
nothing yet. This theft led to the discovery and conviction of the so-called
Franco-German plot, in Paris, but it gave no clue as to the great Communist
Association. The Paris plot, we may as well here observe, was under the
direction of a few ambitious imbeciles and political chevaliers
d'industrie in London, and of a formerly convicted forger, then acting as
a police spy in Paris; their dupes made up, by rabid declamations and
blood-thirsty rantings, for the utter insignificance of their political
existence.
The Prussian police, then, had to look out for fresh discoveries. They
established a regular office of secret police at the Prussian Embassy in
London. A police agent, Greif by name, held his odious vocation under the title
of an attache to the Embassy — a step which should suffice to put all
Prussian embassies out of the pale of international law, and which even the
Austrians have not yet dared to take. Under him worked a certain Fleury, a
merchant in the city of London, a man of some fortune and rather respectably
connected, one of those low creatures who do the basest actions from an innate
inclination to infamy. Another agent was a commercial clerk named Hirsch, who,
however, had already been denounced as a spy on his arrival. He introduced
himself into the society of some German Communist refugees in London, and they,
in order to obtain proofs of his real character, admitted him for a short time.
The proofs of his connection with the police were very soon obtained, and Herr
Hirsch, from that time, absented himself. Although, however, he thus resigned
all opportunities of gaining the information he was paid to procure, he was not
inactive. From his retreat in Kensington, where he never met one of the
Communists in question, he manufactured every week pretended reports of
pretended sittings of a pretended Central Committee of that very conspiracy
which the Prussian police could not get hold of. The contents of these reports
were of the most absurd nature; not a Christian name was correct, not a name
correctly spelt, not a single individual made to speak as he would be likely to
speak. His master, Fleury, assisted him in this forgery, and it is not yet
proved that "Attache" Greif can wash his hands of these infamous proceedings.
The Prussian Government, incredible to say, took these silly fabrications for
gospel truth, and you may imagine what a confusion such depositions created in
the evidence brought before the jury. When the trial came on, Herr Stieber, the
already mentioned police officer, got into the witness-box, swore to all these
absurdities, and, with no little self-complacency, maintained that he had a
secret agent in the very closest intimacy with those parties in London who were
considered the prime movers in this awful conspiracy. This secret agent was
very secret indeed, for he had hid his face for eight months in Kensington, for
fear he might actually see one of the parties whose most secret thoughts, words
and doings, he pretended to report week after week.
Messrs. Hirsch and Fleury, however, had another invention in store. They
worked up the whole of the reports they had made into an "original minute book"
of the sittings of the Secret Supreme Committee, whose existence was maintained
by the Prussian police; and Herr Stieber, finding that this book wondrously
agreed with the reports already received from the same parties, at once laid it
before the jury, declaring upon his oath that after serious examination, and
according to his fullest conviction, that book was genuine. It was then that
most of the absurdities reported by Hirsch were made public. You may imagine
the surprise of the pretended members of that Secret Committee when they found
things stated of them which they never knew before. Some who were baptized
William were here christened Louis or Charles; others, at the time they were at
the other end of England, were made to have pronounced speeches in London;
others were reported to have read letters they never had received; they were
made to have met regularly on a Thursday, when they used to have a convivial
reunion, once a week, on Wednesdays; a working man, who could hardly write,
figured as one of the takers of minutes, and signed as such; and they all of
them were made to speak in a language which, if it may be that of Prussian
police stations, was certainly not that of a reunion in which literary men,
favorably known in their country, formed the majority. And, to crown the whole,
a receipt was forged for a sum of money, pretended to have been paid by the
fabricators to the pretended secretary of the fictitious Central Committee for
this book; but the existence of this pretended secretary rested merely upon a
hoax that some malicious Communist had played upon the unfortunate Hirsch.
This clumsy fabrication was too scandalous an affair not to produce the
contrary of its intended effect. Although the London friends of the defendants
were deprived of all means to bring the facts of the case before the jury
— although the letters they sent to the counsel for the defence were
suppressed by the post — although the documents and affidavits they
succeeded in getting into the hands of these legal gentlemen were not admitted
in evidence, yet the general indignation was such that even the public
accusers, nay, even Herr Stieber — whose oath had been given as a
guarantee for the authenticity of that book—were compelled to recognize
it as a forgery.
This forgery, however, was not the only thing of the kind of which the
police was guilty. Two or three more cases of the sort came out during the
trial. The documents stolen by Reuter were interpolated by the police so as to
disfigure their meaning. A paper, containing some rabid nonsense, was written
in a handwriting imitating that of Dr. Marx, and for a time it was pretended
that it had been written by him, until at last the prosecution was obliged to
acknowledge the forgery. But for every police infamy that was proved as such,
there were five or six fresh ones brought forward, which could not, at the
moment, be unveiled, the defence being taken by surprise, the proofs having to
be got from London, and every correspondence of the counsel for the defence
with the London Communist refugees being in open court treated as complicity in
the alleged plot!
That Greif and Fleury are what they are here represented to be has been
stated by Herr Stieber himself, in his evidence; as to Hirsch, he has before a
London magistrate confessed that he forged the "minute book," by order and with
the assistance of Fluery, and then made his escape from this country in order
to evade a criminal prosecution.
The Government could stand few such branding disclosures as came to light
during the trial. It had a jury — six nobles, two Government officials.
These were not the men to look closely into the confused mass of evidence
heaped before them during six weeks, when they heard it continually dinned into
their ears that the defendants were the chiefs of a dreadful Communist
conspiracy, got up in order to subvert everything sacred—property,
family, religion, order, government and law! And yet, had not the Government,
at the same time, brought it to the knowledge of the privileged classes, that
an acquittal in this trial would be the signal for the suppression of the jury:
and that it would be taken as a direct political demonstration—as a proof
of the middle-class Liberal Opposition being ready to unite even with the most
extreme revolutionists—the verdict would have been an acquittal. As it
was, the retroactive application of the new Prussian code enabled the
Government to have seven prisoners convicted, while four merely were acquitted,
and those convicted were sentenced to imprisonment varying from three to six
years, as you have, doubtless, already stated at the time the news reached
you.
LONDON, December 1, 1852.

Footnotes
[1] "The
Manifesto." This is the celebrated "Communist Manifesto," which the Communist
Congress, held in London, November, 1847, delegated Marx and Engels to draw up.
It was published in 1848 (in London). The fundamental proposition of the
Manifesto, Engels writes in his introduction to the "Communist Manifesto,"
translated by S. Moore, and published by W. Reeves, "is that in every
historical epoch, the prevailing mode of economic production and exchange, and
the social organization necessarily following from it, form the basis upon
which is built up, and from which alone can be explained, the political and
intellectual history of that epoch; that consequently the whole history of
mankind has been a history of class struggles, contests between exploiting and
exploited, ruling and oppressed classes; that nowadays a stage has been reached
where the exploited and oppressed class—the proletariat—cannot
attain its emancipation without at the same time, and once and for all
emancipating society at large from all exploitation, oppression, class
distinctions, and class struggles." As to this fundamental propostion of the
Manifesto, it "belongs," says Engels, "wholly and solely to Marx." The
"Communist Manifesto" has been translated into well-nigh every language, and
is, again to quote Engels, "the most international production of all Socialist
literature."
 

Contents | Notes




==========

## The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte









18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. Marx 1852



Works of Marx & Engels 1852
The Eighteenth Brumaire
of Louis Bonaparte[64]
by Karl Marx



Written: December 1851 - March 1852;
Source: Chapters 1 & 7 are translated by Saul K. Padover from the German edition of 1869; Chapters 2 through 6 are based on the third edition, prepared by Engels (1885), as translated and published by Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1937;
First Published: First issue of Die Revolution, 1852, New York;
Online Version: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 1995, 1999;
Transcription/Markup: Zodiac and Brian Baggins
Proofed: and corrected by Alek Blain, 2006.
On December 2 1851, followers of President Louis Bonaparte (Napoleon's nephew) broke up the Legislative Assembly and established a dictatorship. A year later, Louis Bonaparte proclaimed himself Emperor Napoleon III.
Marx wrote The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon between December 1851 and March 1852. The "Eighteenth Brumaire" refers to November 9, 1799 in the French Revolutionary Calendar — the day the first Napoleon Bonaparte
had made himself dictator by a coup d'etat. 
In this work Marx traces how the conflict of different social interests manifest themselves in the complex web of political struggles, and in particular the contradictory relationships between the outer form of a struggle and its real social content. The proletariat of Paris was at this time too inexperienced to win power, but the experiences of 1848-51 would prove invaluable for the successful workers' revolution of 1871.

See Chapter 6 for a succinct time line of the period.


Table of Contents:

Preface:  Marx 1869
Preface: Engels 1885
Chapter I (Feb. 1848 to Dec. 1851)
Chapter II (Downfall of the Republicans)
Chapter III (Defeat of Petty-bourgeois democracy)
Chapter IV (Rise of Louis Bonaparte)
Chapter V (National Assembly vs. Bonaparte)
Chapter VI (Victory of Bonaparte)
Chapter VII (Summary)





“All revolutions perfected the state machine instead of breaking it.” (Ch. 7)


Notes |
Study Guide |
Marx/Engels Archive




==========

## The British Rule in India



The British Rule in India by Karl Marx







Karl Marx in the New-York Herald Tribune 1853
The British Rule in India


Written: June 10, 1853;
First published: in the New-York Daily Tribune, June 25, 1853;
Proofread: by Andy Blunden in February 2005.
In writing this article, Marx made use of some of Engels’ ideas as in his letter to Marx of June 6, 1853.

London, Friday, June 10, 1853
Telegraphic dispatches from Vienna announce that the pacific solution of the Turkish, Sardinian and Swiss questions, is regarded there as a certainty.
Last night the debate on India was continued in the House of Commons, in the usual dull manner. Mr. Blackett charged the statements of Sir Charles Wood and Sir J. Hogg with bearing the stamp of optimist falsehood. A lot of Ministerial and Directorial advocates rebuked the charge as well as they could, and the inevitable Mr. Hume summed up by calling on Ministers to withdraw their bill. Debate adjourned.
Hindostan is an Italy of Asiatic dimensions, the Himalayas for the Alps, the Plains of Bengal for the Plains of Lombardy, the Deccan for the Apennines, and the Isle of Ceylon for the Island of Sicily. The same rich variety in the products of the soil, and the same dismemberment in the political configuration. Just as Italy has, from time to time, been compressed by the conqueror’s sword into different national masses, so do we find Hindostan, when not under the pressure of the Mohammedan, or the Mogul[4], or the Briton, dissolved into as many independent and conflicting States as it numbered towns, or even villages. Yet, in a social point of view, Hindostan is not the Italy, but the Ireland of the East. And this strange combination of Italy and of Ireland, of a world of voluptuousness and of a world of woes, is anticipated in the ancient traditions of the religion of Hindostan. That religion is at once a religion of sensualist exuberance, and a religion of self-torturing asceticism; a religion of the Lingam and of the juggernaut; the religion of the Monk, and of the Bayadere.[5] 
I share not the opinion of those who believe in a golden age of Hindostan, without recurring, however, like Sir Charles Wood, for the confirmation of my view, to the authority of Khuli-Khan.  But take, for example, the times of Aurangzeb; or the epoch, when the Mogul appeared in the North, and the Portuguese in the South; or the age of Mohammedan invasion, and of the Heptarchy in Southern India[6]; or, if you will, go still more back to antiquity, take the mythological chronology of the Brahman himself, who places the commencement of Indian misery in an epoch even more remote than the Christian creation of the world.
There cannot, however, remain any doubt but that the misery inflicted by the British on Hindostan is of an essentially different and infinitely more intensive kind than all Hindostan had to suffer before. I do not allude to European despotism, planted upon Asiatic despotism, by the British East India Company, forming a more monstrous combination than any of the divine monsters startling us in the Temple of Salsette[7]. This is no distinctive feature of British Colonial rule, but only an imitation of the Dutch, and so much so that in order to characterise the working of the British East India Company, it is sufficient to literally repeat what Sir Stamford Raffles, the English Governor of Java, said of the old Dutch East India Company:
“The Dutch Company, actuated solely by the spirit of gain, and viewing their [Javan] subjects, with less regard or consideration than a West India planter formerly viewed a gang upon his estate, because the latter had paid the purchase money of human property, which the other had not, employed all the existing machinery of despotism to squeeze from the people their utmost mite of contribution, the last dregs of their labor, and thus aggravated the evils of a capricious and semi-barbarous Government, by working it with all the practised ingenuity of politicians, and all the monopolizing selfishness of traders.”
All the civil wars, invasions, revolutions, conquests, famines, strangely complex, rapid, and destructive as the successive action in Hindostan may appear, did not go deeper than its surface. England has broken down the entire framework of Indian society, without any symptoms of reconstitution yet appearing. This loss of his old world, with no gain of a new one, imparts a particular kind of melancholy to the present misery of the Hindoo, and separates Hindostan, ruled by Britain, from all its ancient traditions, and from the whole of its past history.
There have been in Asia, generally, from immemorial times, but three departments of Government; that of Finance, or the plunder of the interior; that of War, or the plunder of the exterior; and, finally, the department of Public Works. Climate and territorial conditions, especially the vast tracts of desert, extending from the Sahara, through Arabia, Persia, India, and Tartary, to the most elevated Asiatic highlands, constituted artificial irrigation by canals and water-works the basis of Oriental agriculture. As in Egypt and India, inundations are used for fertilizing the soil in Mesopotamia, Persia, &c.; advantage is taken of a high level for feeding irrigative canals. This prime necessity of an economical and common use of water, which, in the Occident, drove private enterprise to voluntary association, as in Flanders and Italy, necessitated, in the Orient where civilization was too low and the territorial extent too vast to call into life voluntary association, the interference of the centralizing power of Government. Hence an economical function devolved upon all Asiatic Governments, the function of providing public works. This artificial fertilization of the soil, dependent on a Central Government, and immediately decaying with the neglect of irrigation and drainage, explains the otherwise strange fact that we now find whole territories barren and desert that were once brilliantly cultivated, as Palmyra, Petra, the ruins in Yemen, and large provinces of Egypt, Persia, and Hindostan; it also explains how a single war of devastation has been able to depopulate a country for centuries, and to strip it of all its civilization.
Now, the British in East India accepted from their predecessors the department of finance and of war, but they have neglected entirely that of public works. Hence the deterioration of an agriculture which is not capable of being conducted on the British principle of free competition, of laissez-faire and laissez-aller. But in Asiatic empires we are quite accustomed to see agriculture deteriorating under one government and reviving again under some other government. There the harvests correspond to good or bad government, as they change in Europe with good or bad seasons. Thus the oppression and neglect of agriculture, bad as it is, could not be looked upon as the final blow dealt to Indian society by the British intruder, had it not been attended by a circumstance of quite different importance, a novelty in the annals of the whole Asiatic world. However changing the political aspect of India’s past must appear, its social condition has remained unaltered since its remotest antiquity, until the first decennium of the 19th century. The hand-loom and the spinning-wheel, producing their regular myriads of spinners and weavers, were the pivots of the structure of that society. From immemorial times, Europe received the admirable textures of Indian labor, sending in return for them her precious metals, and furnishing thereby his material to the goldsmith, that indispensable member of Indian society, whose love of finery is so great that even the lowest class, those who go about nearly naked, have commonly a pair of golden ear-rings and a gold ornament of some kind hung round their necks. Rings on the fingers and toes have also been common. Women as well as children frequently wore massive bracelets and anklets of gold or silver, and statuettes of divinities in gold and silver were met with in the households. It was the British intruder who broke up the Indian hand-loom and destroyed the spinning-wheel. England began with driving the Indian cottons from the European market; it then introduced twist into Hindostan, and in the end inundated the very mother country of cotton with cottons. From 1818 to 1836 the export of twist from Great Britain to India rose in the proportion of 1 to 5,200. In 1824 the export of British muslins to India hardly amounted to 1,000,000 yards, while in 1837 it surpassed 64,000,000 of yards. But at the same time the population of Dacca decreased from 150,000 inhabitants to 20,000. This decline of Indian towns celebrated for their fabrics was by no means the worst consequence. British steam and science uprooted, over the whole surface of Hindostan, the union between agriculture and manufacturing industry.
These two circumstances – the Hindoo, on the one hand, leaving, like all Oriental peoples, to the Central Government the care of the great public works, the prime condition of his agriculture and commerce, dispersed, on the other hand, over the surface of the country, and agglomerated in small centers by the domestic union of agricultural and manufacturing pursuits – these two circumstances had brought about, since the remotest times, a social system of particular features – the so-called village system, which gave to each of these small unions their independent organization and distinct life. The peculiar character of this system may be judged from the following description, contained in an old official report of the British House of Commons on Indian affairs:
“A village, geographically considered, is a tract of country comprising some hundred or thousand acres of arable and waste lands; politically viewed it resembles a corporation or township. Its proper establishment of officers and servants consists of the following descriptions: The potail, or head inhabitant, who has generally the superintendence of the affairs of the village, settles the disputes of the inhabitants attends to the police, and performs the duty of collecting the revenue within his village, a duty which his personal influence and minute acquaintance with the situation and concerns of the people render him the best qualified for this charge. The kurnum keeps the accounts of cultivation, and registers everything connected with it. The tallier and the totie, the duty of the former of which consists [...] in gaining information of crimes and offenses, and in escorting and protecting persons travelling from one village to another; the province of the latter appearing to be more immediately confined to the village, consisting, among other duties, in guarding the crops and assisting in measuring them. The boundary-man, who preserves the limits of the village, or gives evidence respecting them in cases of dispute. The Superintendent of Tanks and Watercourses distributes the water [...] for the purposes of agriculture. The Brahmin, who performs the village worship. The schoolmaster, who is seen teaching the children in a village to read and write in the sand. The calendar-brahmin, or astrologer, etc. These officers and servants generally constitute the establishment of a village; but in some parts of the country it is of less extent, some of the duties and functions above described being united in the same person; in others it exceeds the above-named number of individuals. [...] Under this simple form of municipal government, the inhabitants of the country have lived from time immemorial. The boundaries of the villages have been but seldom altered; and though the villages themselves have been sometimes injured, and even desolated by war, famine or disease, the same name, the same limits, the same interests, and even the same families have continued for ages. The inhabitants gave themselves no trouble about the breaking up and divisions of kingdoms; while the village remains entire, they care not to what power it is transferred, or to what sovereign it devolves; its internal economy remains unchanged. The potail is still the head inhabitant, and still acts as the petty judge or magistrate, and collector or renter of the village.”
These small stereotype forms of social organism have been to the greater part dissolved, and are disappearing, not so much through the brutal interference of the British tax-gatherer and the British soldier, as to the working of English steam and English free trade. Those family-communities were based on domestic industry, in that peculiar combination of hand-weaving, hands-spinning and hand-tilling agriculture which gave them self-supporting power. English interference having placed the spinner in Lancashire and the weaver in Bengal, or sweeping away both Hindoo spinner and weaver, dissolved these small semi-barbarian, semi-civilized communities, by blowing up their economical basis, and thus produced the greatest, and to speak the truth, the only social revolution ever heard of in Asia.
Now, sickening as it must be to human feeling to witness those myriads of industrious patriarchal and inoffensive social organizations disorganized and dissolved into their units, thrown into a sea of woes, and their individual members losing at the same time their ancient form of civilization, and their hereditary means of subsistence, we must not forget that these idyllic village-communities, inoffensive though they may appear, had always been the solid foundation of Oriental despotism, that they restrained the human mind within the smallest possible compass, making it the unresisting tool of superstition, enslaving it beneath traditional rules, depriving it of all grandeur and historical energies. We must not forget the barbarian egotism which, concentrating on some miserable patch of land, had quietly witnessed the ruin of empires, the perpetration of unspeakable cruelties, the massacre of the population of large towns, with no other consideration bestowed upon them than on natural events, itself the helpless prey of any aggressor who deigned to notice it at all. We must not forget that this undignified, stagnatory, and vegetative life, that this passive sort of existence evoked on the other part, in contradistinction, wild, aimless, unbounded forces of destruction and rendered murder itself a religious rite in Hindostan. We must not forget that these little communities were contaminated by distinctions of caste and by slavery, that they subjugated man to external circumstances instead of elevating man the sovereign of circumstances, that they transformed a self-developing social state into never changing natural destiny, and thus brought about a brutalizing worship of nature, exhibiting its degradation in the fact that man, the sovereign of nature, fell down on his knees in adoration of Kanuman, the monkey, and Sabbala, the cow.
England, it is true, in causing a social revolution in Hindostan, was actuated only by the vilest interests, and was stupid in her manner of enforcing them. But that is not the question. The question is, can mankind fulfil its destiny without a fundamental revolution in the social state of Asia? If not, whatever may have been the crimes of England she was the unconscious tool of history in bringing about that revolution.
Then, whatever bitterness the spectacle of the crumbling of an ancient world may have for our personal feelings, we have the right, in point of history, to exclaim with Goethe:
“Sollte these Qual uns quälen
Da sie unsre Lust vermehrt,
Hat nicht myriaden Seelen
Timur’s Herrschaft aufgezehrt?”
[“Should this torture then torment us
Since it brings us greater pleasure?
Were not through the rule of Timur
Souls devoured without measure?”]
[From Goethe’s “An Suleika”, Westöstlicher Diwan]
Karl Marx
Footnotes
4 A reference to the rule in India, mainly in the north, of the Mohammedan invaders who came from Central Asia, Afghanistan and Persia. Early in the thirteenth century the Delhi Sultanate became the bulwark of Moslem domination but at the end of the fourteenth century it declined and was subsequently conquered by the Moguls, new invaders of Turkish descent, who came to India from the east of Central Asia in the early sixteenth century and in 1526 founded the Empire of the Great Moguls (named after the ruling dynasty of the Empire) in Northern India. Contemporaries regarded them as the direct descendants of the Mongol warriors of Genghis Khan’s time, hence the name “Moguls”. In the mid-seventeenth century the Mogul Empire included the greater part of India and part of Afghanistan. Later on, however, the Empire began to decline due to peasant rebellions, the growing resistance of the Indian people to the Mohammedan conquerors and increasing separatist tendencies. In the early half of the eighteenth century the Empire of the Great Moguls practically ceased to exist. 
5 Religion of the Lingam – the cult of the God Shiva, particularly widespread among the southern Indian sect of the Lingayat (from the word “linga” - the emblem of Shiva), a Hindu sect which does not recognise distinctions of caste and rejects fasts, sacrifices and pilgrimages.
Juggernaut (jagannath) – a title of Krishna, the eighth avatar of Vishnu. The cult of juggernaut was marked by sumptuous ritual and extreme religious fanaticism which manifested itself in the self-torture and suicide of believers. On feast days some believers threw themselves under the wheels of the chariot bearing the idol of Vishnu-juggernaut. 
06 Heptarchy (government by seven rulers) – a term used by English historiographers to describe the political system in England from the sixth to eighth centuries, when the country was divided into seven highly unstable Anglo-Saxon kingdoms, which, in their turn, frequently split up and reunited. Marx uses this term by analogy to describe the disunity of the Deccan (Central and South India) before its conquest by the Mohammedans at the beginning of the fourteenth century. 
7 The island of Salsette, north of Bombay, was famous for its 109 Buddhist cave temples. 
 


The First Indian War of Independence |
East India Company |
Future of British Rule in India
1853 Works |
New York Herald-Tribune |
Marx/Engels Archive





==========

## The Future Results of British Rule in India





The Future Results of British Rule in India by Karl Marx






Works of Karl Marx 1853
The Future Results of British Rule in India

Written: on July 22, 1853
Source: New-York Daily Tribune, August 8, 1853, p. 5; reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 856, August 9, 1853.
Signed: Karl Marx.

London, Friday, July 22, 1853
I propose in this letter to conclude my observations on India.
How came it that English supremacy was established in India? The paramount power of the Great Mogul was broken by the Mogul Viceroys. The power of the Viceroys was broken by the Mahrattas. The power of the Mahrattas was broken by the Afghans, and while all were struggling against all, the Briton rushed in and was enabled to subdue them all. A country not only divided between Mahommedan and Hindoo, but between tribe and tribe, between caste and caste; a society whose framework was based on a sort of equilibrium, resulting from a. general repulsion and constitutional exclusiveness between all its members. Such a country and such a society, were they not the predestined prey of conquest? If we knew nothing of the past history of Hindostan, would there not be the one great and incontestable fact, that even at this moment India is held in English thraldom by an Indian army maintained at the cost of India? India, then, could not escape the fate of being conquered, and the whole of her past history, if it be anything, is the history of the successive conquests she has undergone. Indian society has no history at all, at least no known history. What we call its history, is but the history of the successive intruders who founded their empires on the passive basis of that unresisting and unchanging society. The question, therefore, is not whether the English had a right to conquer India, but whether we are to prefer India conquered by the Turk, by the Persian, by the Russian, to India conquered by the Briton.
England has to fulfill a double mission in India: one destructive, the other regenerating the annihilation of old Asiatic society, and the laying the material foundations of Western society in Asia.
Arabs, Turks, Tartars, Moguls, who had successively overrun India, soon became Hindooized, the barbarian conquerors being, by an eternal law of history, conquered themselves by the superior civilization of their subjects. The British were the first conquerors superior, and therefore, inaccessible to Hindoo civilization. They destroyed it by breaking up the native communities, by uprooting the native industry, and by levelling all that was great and elevated in the native society. The historic pages of their rule in India report hardly anything beyond that destruction. The work of regeneration hardly transpires through a heap of ruins. Nevertheless it has begun.
The political unity of India, more consolidated, and extending farther than it ever did under the Great Moguls, was the first condition of its regeneration. That unity, imposed by the British sword, will now be strengthened and perpetuated by the electric telegraph. The native army, organized and trained by the British drill-sergeant, was the sine qua non of Indian self-emancipation, and of India ceasing to be the prey of the first foreign intruder. The free press, introduced for the first time into Asiatic society, and managed principally by the common offspring of Hindoos and Europeans, is a new and powerful agent of reconstruction. The Zemindari and Ryotwar themselves, abominable as they are, involve two distinct forms of private property in land — the great desideratum of Asiatic society. From the Indian natives, reluctantly and sparingly educated at Calcutta, under English superintendence, a fresh class is springing up, endowed with the requirements for government and imbued with European science. Steam has brought India into regular and rapid communication with Europe, has connected its chief ports with those of the whole south-eastern ocean, and has revindicated it from the isolated position which was the prime law of its stagnation. The day is not far distant when, by a combination of railways and steam-vessels, the distance between England and India, measured by time, will be shortened to eight days, and when that once fabulous country will thus be actually annexed to the Western world.
The ruling classes of Great Britain have had, till now, but an accidental, transitory and exceptional interest in the progress of India. The aristocracy wanted to conquer it, the moneyocracy to plunder it, and the millocracy to undersell it. But now the tables are turned. The millocracy have discovered that the transformation of India into a reproductive country has become of vital importance to them, and that, to that end, it is necessary, above all, to gift her with means of irrigation and of internal communication. They intend now drawing a net of railroads over India. And they will do it. The results must be inappreciable.
It is notorious that the productive powers of India are paralysed by the utter want of means for conveying and exchanging its various produce. Nowhere, more than in India, do we meet with social destitution in the midst of natural plenty, for want of the means of exchange. It was proved before a Committee of the British House of Commons, which sat in 1848, that 
“when grain was selling from 6/- to 8/- a quarter at Khandesh, it was sold at 64/ to 70/- at Poona, where the people were dying in the streets of famine, without the possibility of gaining supplies from Khandesh, because the clay-roads were impracticable.”
The introduction of railroads may be easily made to subserve agricultural purposes by the formation of tanks, where ground is required for embankment, and by the conveyance of water along the different lines. Thus irrigation, the sine qua non of farming in the East, might be greatly extended, and the frequently recurring local famines, arising from the want of water, would be averted. The general importance of railways, viewed under this head, must become evident, when we remember that irrigated lands, even in the districts near Ghauts, pay three times as much in taxes, afford ten or twelve times as much employment, and yield twelve or fifteen times as much profit, as the same area without irrigation.
Railways will afford the means of diminishing the amount and the cost of the military establishments. Col. Warren, Town Major of the Fort St. William, stated before a Select Committee of the House of Commons:
“The practicability of receiving intelligence from distant parts of the country, in as many hours as at present it requires days and even weeks, and of sending instructions, with troops and stores, in the more brief period, are considerations which cannot be too highly estimated. Troops could be kept at more distant and healthier stations than at present, and much loss of life from sickness would by this means be spared. Stores could not to the same extent he required at the various depots, and. the loss by decay, and the destruction incidental to the climate, would also be avoided. The number of troops might be diminished in direct proportion to their effectiveness.”
We know that the municipal organization and the economical basis of the village communities has been broken up, but their worst feature, the dissolution of society into stereotype and disconnected atoms, has survived their vitality. The village isolation produced the absence of roads in India, and the absence of roads perpetuated the village isolation. On this plan a community existed with a given scale of low conveniences, almost without intercourse with other villages, without the desires and efforts indispensable to social advance. The British having broken up this self-sufficient inertia of the villages, railways will provide the new want of communication and intercourse. Besides,
“one of the effects of the railway system will he to bring into every village affected by it such knowledge of the contrivances and appliances of other countries, and such means of obtaining them, as will first put the hereditary and stipendiary village artisanship of India to full proof of its capabilities, and then supply its defects.” (Chapman, The Cotton and Commerce of India [pp. 95-97].)
I know that the English millocracy intend to endow India with railways with the exclusive view of extracting at diminished expenses the cotton and other raw materials for their manufactures. But when you have once introduced machinery into the locomotion of a country, which possesses iron and coals, you are unable to withhold it from its fabrication. You cannot maintain a net of railways over an immense country without introducing all those industrial processes necessary to meet the immediate and current wants of railway locomotion, and out of which there must grow the application of machinery to those branches of industry not immediately connected with railways. The railway-system will therefore become, in India, truly the forerunner of modern industry. This is the more certain as the Hindoos are allowed by British authorities themselves to possess particular aptitude. for accommodating themselves to entirely new labor, and acquiring the requisite knowledge of machinery. Ample proof of this fact is afforded by the capacities and expertness of the native engineers in the Calcutta mint, where they have been for years employed in working the steam machinery, by the natives attached to the several steam engines in the Burdwan coal districts, and by other instances. Mr. Campbell himself, greatly influenced as he is by the prejudices of the East India Company, is obliged to avow
“that the great mass of the Indian people possesses a great industrial energy, is well fitted to accumulate capital, and remarkable for a mathematical clearness of head and talent for figures and exact sciences.” “Their intellects,” he says, “are excellent.”
Modern industry, resulting from the railway system, will dissolve the hereditary divisions of labor, upon which rest the Indian castes, those decisive impediments to Indian progress and Indian power.
All the English bourgeoisie may be forced to do will neither emancipate nor materially mend the social condition of the mass of the people, depending not only on the development of the productive powers, but on their appropriation by the people. But what they will not fail to do is to lay down the material premises for both. Has the bourgeoisie ever done more? Has it ever effected a progress without dragging individuals and people through blood and dirt, through misery and degradation?
The Indians will not reap the fruits of the new elements of society scattered among them by the British bourgeoisie, till in Great Britain itself the now ruling classes shall have been supplanted by the industrial proletariat, or till the Hindoos themselves shall have grown strong enough to throw off the English yoke altogether. At all events, we may safely expect to see, at a more or less remote period, the regeneration of that great and interesting country, whose gentle natives are, to use the expression of Prince Soltykov, even in the most inferior classes, “plus fins et plus adroits que les Italiens” [more subtle and adroit than the Italians], a whose submission even is counterbalanced by a certain calm nobility, who, notwithstanding their natural langor, have astonished the British officers by their bravery, whose country has been the source of our languages, our religions, and who represent the type of the ancient German in the Jat, and the type of the ancient Greek in the Brahmin.
I cannot part with the subject of India without some concluding remarks.
The profound hypocrisy and inherent barbarism of bourgeois civilization lies unveiled before our eyes, turning from its home, where it assumes respectable forms, to the colonies, where it goes naked. They are the defenders of property, but did any revolutionary party ever originate agrarian revolutions like those in Bengal, in Madras, and in Bombay? Did they not, in India, to borrow an expression of. that great robber, Lord Clive himself, resort to atrocious extortion, when simple corruption could not keep pace with their rapacity? While they prated in Europe about the inviolable sanctity of the national debt, did they not confiscate in India the dividends of the rajahs, 171 who had invested their private savings in the Company’s own funds? While they combatted the French revolution under the pretext of defending “our holy religion,” did they not forbid, at the same time, Christianity to be propagated in India, and did they not, in order to make money out of the pilgrims streaming to the temples of Orissa and Bengal, take up the trade in the murder and prostitution perpetrated in the temple of juggernaut? These are the men of “Property, Order, Family, and Religion.”
The devastating effects of English industry, when contemplated with regard to India, a country as vast as Europe, and containing 150 millions of acres, are palpable and confounding. But we must not forget that they are only the organic results of the whole system of production as it is now constituted. That production rests on the supreme rule of capital. The centralization of capital is essential to the existence of capital as an independent power. The destructive influence of that centralization upon the markets of the world does but reveal, in the most gigantic dimensions, the inherent organic laws of political economy now at work in every civilized town. The bourgeois period of history has to create the material basis of the new world — on the one hand universal intercourse founded upon the mutual dependency of mankind, and the means of that intercourse; on the other hand the development of the productive powers of man and the transformation of material production into a scientific domination of natural agencies. Bourgeois industry and commerce create these material conditions of a new world in the same way as geological revolutions have created the surface of the earth. When a great social revolution shall have mastered the results of the bourgeois epoch, the market of the world and the modern powers of production, and subjected them to the common control of the most advanced peoples, then only will human progress cease to resemble that hideous, pagan idol, who would not drink the nectar but from the skulls of the slain.
 


The First Indian War of Independence, 1857-58
British Rule in India |
East India Company
1853 Works |
New York Tribune |
Marx/Engels Archive





==========

## Speech at anniversary of the People's Paper









Speech at anniversary of The People's Paper



Karl Marx. 1856
Speech at anniversary of thePeople’s Paper


Delivered: April 14, 1856; London;
Source: Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume One, p. 500;
Publisher: Progress Publishers, Moscow, USSR, 1969;
First Published: The People’s Paper, April 19, 1856;
Online Version: marx.org 1996; marxists.org 1999;
Transcribed: Zodiac;
HTML Markup: Brian Baggins.

See Background Notes



The so-called revolutions of 1848 were but poor
incidents — small fractures and fissures in the dry crust of European
society. However, they denounced the abyss. Beneath the apparently solid
surface, they betrayed oceans of liquid matter, only needing expansion
to rend into fragments continents of hard rock. Noisily and confusedly
they proclaimed the emancipation of the Proletarian, i.e. the secret of
the 19th century, and of the revolution of that century.
That social revolution, it is true, was no novelty invented in
1848. Steam, electricity, and the self-acting mule were revolutionists
of a rather more dangerous character than even citizens Barbés, Raspail
and Blanqui. But, although the atmosphere in which we live, weighs upon
every one with a 20,000 lb. force, do you feel it? No more than European
society before 1848 felt the revolutionary atmosphere enveloping and pressing
it from all sides. There is one great fact, characteristic of this our
19th century, a fact which no party dares deny.
On the one hand, there have started into life industrial and scientific
forces, which no epoch of the former human history had ever suspected.
On the other hand, there exist symptoms of decay, far surpassing the horrors
recorded of the latter times of the Roman Empire. In our days, everything
seems pregnant with its contrary: Machinery, gifted with the wonderful
power of shortening and fructifying human labour, we behold starving and
overworking it; The newfangled sources of wealth, by some strange weird
spell, are turned into sources of want; The victories of art seem bought
by the loss of character. 

At the same pace that mankind masters nature,
man seems to become enslaved to other men or to his own infamy. Even the
pure light of science seems unable to shine but on the dark background
of ignorance. All our invention and progress seem to result in endowing
material forces with intellectual life, and in stultifying human life into
a material force.
This antagonism between modern industry and science on the one
hand, modern misery and dissolution on the other hand; this antagonism
between the productive powers and the social relations of our epoch is
a fact, palpable, overwhelming, and not to be controverted. Some parties
may wail over it; others may wish to get rid of modern arts, in order to
get rid of modern conflicts. Or they may imagine that so signal a progress
in industry wants to be completed by as signal a regress in politics. On
our part, we do not mistake the shape of the shrewd spirit that continues
to mark all these contradictions. We know that to work well the newfangled
forces of society, they only want to be mastered by newfangled men — and
such are the working men. They are as much the invention of modern time
as machinery itself.

In the signs that bewilder the middle class, the aristocracy and
the poor prophets of regression, we do recognise our brave friend, Robin
Goodfellow, [1] the old mole that can work in the earth
so fast, that worthy pioneer — the Revolution. The English working men
are the firstborn sons of modern industry. They will then, certainly, not
be the last in aiding the social revolution produced by that industry,
a revolution, which means the emancipation of their own class all over
the world, which is as universal as capital-rule and wages-slavery. I know
the heroic struggles the English working class have gone through since
the middle of the last century — struggles less glorious, because they
are shrouded in obscurity, and burked by the middleclass historian. To
revenge the misdeeds of the ruling class, there existed in the middle ages,
in Germany, a secret tribunal, called the “Vehmgericht.” [2]
If a red cross was seen marked on a house, people knew that its owner was
doomed by the “Vehm.” All the houses of Europe are now marked with the
mysterious red cross.
History is the judge — its executioner, the proletarian.

 

Endnotes

Background
On April 14 1856, Marx was invited
as an official representative of the revolutionary refugees in London to
a banquet commemorating the fourth anniversary of the Chartist People’s
Paper. He used the occassion to demonstrate the internationalist solidarity
that united the proletarian revolutionaries, among whom he had established
himself as the outstanding leader, with the revolutionary wing of the Chartist
movement, and show that in contrast to the French and German petty-bourgeois
democrats, who were merely flirting with the Chartist leaders, the German
communists were true allies of the Chartists, sharing with them the aim
of achieving the rule of the working class in all countries (for more on
this, see Marx’s letter to Engels of April 16, 1856). In his address (he
was the first speaker) Marx concentrated on the historic role of the proletariat.
The banquet was also addressed by another representative of the German
communists, Wilhelm Pieper. The other speakers were mostly Chartists (James
Finlen, Ernest Jones and others).

Marx did not intend to publish his speech. It was, however, included
in the newspaper report under the heading: “Fourth Anniversary Banquet
of The People’s Paper.” The following text preceded the speech:

“On Monday last at the Bell Hotel, Strand, Ernest Jones entertained
the compositors of The People’s Paper and the other gentlemen connected
with its office, at a supper, which was joined by a large number of the
leading Democrats of England, France and Germany now in London. The entertainment
was of the choicest description, and reflected the greatest credit on the
enterprising proprietor of the Hotel, Mr. Hunter; the choicest viands and
condiments of the season being supplied in profusion. The tables were well
filled with a numerous company of both sexes, Ernest Jones occupying the
chair, and Mr. Fowley, manager of The People’s Paper office, the vice-chair.
The banquet commenced at seven, and at nine o’clock the cloth was cleared,
when a series of sentiments was given from the chair.

“The Chairman then proposed the toast: ‘The proletarians of Europe’,
which was responded to by Dr. Marx as follows:”

1.
A character in Shakespeare’s A Midsummer Night’s Dream.

2.
The Vehmgericht, derived from Vehme
(judgment, punishment) and Gericht (court), was a secret tribunal which
exercised great power in Westphalia from the end of the twelfth to the
middle of the sixteenth century.



People's Paper Archive
Marx/Engels Archive



==========

## Abstract of Preface from A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy









Economic Manuscripts: A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (Preface Abstract)



MIA: Marxists: Marx & Engels: Library: A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy: Preface (Abstract)





Abstract from the
Preface of A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy



[...]
  



The first work which I undertook to dispel the doubts assailing me was
a critical re-examination of the Hegelian philosophy of law; the
introduction to this work being published in the Deutsch-Franzosische
Jahrbucher
 issued in Paris in 1844.  My inquiry led me to the
conclusion that neither legal relations nor political forms could be
comprehended whether by themselves or on the basis of a so-called
general development of the human mind, but that on the contrary they
originate in the material conditions of life, the totality of which
Hegel, following the example of English and French thinkers of the
eighteenth century, embraces within the term "civil society"; that the
anatomy of this civil society, however, has to be sought in political
economy.  The study of this, which I began in Paris, I continued in
Brussels, where I moved owing to an expulsion order issued by M.
Guizot.  The general conclusion at which I arrived and which, once
reached, became the guiding principle of my studies, can be summarised
as follows. 


In the social production of their life, men enter into definite relations that are indispensable and independent of their will, relations of production which correspond to a definite stage of development of their material productive forces. The sum total of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real foundation, on which rises a legal and political superstructure and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness. 


The mode of production of material life conditions the social, political and intellectual life process in general. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their being, but, on the contrary, their social being that determines their consciousness.


 At a certain stage of their development, the material productive forces of society come in conflict with the existing relations of production, or — what is but a legal expression for the same thing — with the property relations within which they have been at work hitherto. From forms of development of the productive forces these relations turn into their fetters. 


Then begins an epoch of social revolution. With the change of the economic foundation the entire immense superstructure is more or less rapidly transformed. In considering such transformations a distinction should always be made between the material transformation of the economic conditions of production, which can be determined with the precision of natural science, and the legal, political, religious, aesthetic or philosophic — in short, ideological forms in which men become conscious of this conflict and fight it out. Just as our opinion of an individual is not based on what he thinks of himself, so can we not judge of such a period of transformation by its own consciousness; on the contrary, this consciousness must be explained rather from the contradictions of material life, from the existing conflict between the social productive forces and the relations of production.


No social order ever perishes before all the productive forces for which there is room in it have developed; and new, higher relations of production never appear before the material conditions of their existence have matured in the womb of the old society itself. Therefore mankind always sets itself only such tasks as it can solve; since, looking at the matter more closely, it will always be found that the tasks itself arises only when the material conditions of its solution already exist or are at least in the process of formation. 


 In broad outlines Asiatic[A], ancient, feudal, and modern bourgeois modes of production can be designated as progressive epochs in the economic formation of society. The bourgeois relations of production are the last antagonistic form of the social process of production — antagonistic not in the sense of individual antagonisms, but of one arising from the social conditions of life of the individuals; at the same time the productive forces developing in the womb of bourgeois society create the material conditions for the solution of that antagonism. This social formation brings, therefore, the prehistory of society to a close.



Frederick Engels, with whom I maintained a constant exchange of ideas
by correspondence since the publication of his brilliant essay on the
critique of economic categories (printed in the Deutsch-Franzosische
Jahrbucher,
 arrived by another road (compare his Lage der arbeitenden
Klasse in England
) at the same result as I, and when in the spring of
1845 he too came to live in Brussels, we decided to set forth together
our conception as opposed to the ideological one of German philosophy,
in fact to settle accounts with our former philosophical conscience. 
The intention was carried out in the form of a critique of
post-Hegelian philosophy. The manuscript [The German Ideology], two
large octavo volumes, had long ago reached the publishers in Westphalia
when we were informed that owing to changed circumstances it could not
be printed.  We abandoned the manuscript to the gnawing criticism of
the mice all the more willingly since we had achieved our main purpose
— self-clarification....


[...] 



A. As a second footnote to the Communist Manifesto, Engels wrote in 1888: 

In 1847, the pre-history of society, the social organization existing previous to recorded history, [was] all but unknown. Since then, August von Haxthausen (1792-1866) discovered common ownership of land in Russia, Georg Ludwig von Maurer proved it to be the social foundation from which all Teutonic races started in history, and, by and by, village communities were found to be, or to have been, the primitive form of society everywhere from India to Ireland. The inner organization of this primitive communistic society was laid bare, in its typical form, by Lewis Henry Morgan's (1818-1861) crowning discovery of the true nature of the gens and its relation to the tribe. With the dissolution of the primeval communities, society begins to be differentiated into separate and finally antagonistic classes. I have attempted to retrace this dissolution in The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State, second edition, Stuttgart, 1886. 

Thus, as the science of understanding pre-history progressed (pre-history being that time before written records of human civilization exist), Marx & Engels changed their understanding and descriptions accordingly. In the above text, Marx mentions “Asiatic” modes of production. At the time, they had thought Asian civilization was the first we could speak of humanity (an understanding based on Hegel, see: The Oriental Realm). After writing The Grundrisse, they dropped the idea of a distinct Asiatic mode of production, and kept four basic forms: tribal, ancient, feudal, and capitalist.


Transcription: Zodiac

Markup/Abstracted by: Brian Baggins

Full text: Preface

Copyleft: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 1993, 1999, 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.


The abstracted section in this document has been split from the lower portion of a larger paragraph in the original document, and converted into several paragraphs. This has been done with the aim of helping the reader to grasp the complexity contained in this passage more easily.



Marx/Engels Library






==========

## Appendix to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy










Economic Manuscripts: Engels' Review of Marx's Critique of Political Economy



Karl Marx: Critique of Political Economy
Review by Frederick Engels
Karl Marx, “A Contribution to the Critique of Political economy”
 


First Published: Das Volk, Nos. 14 & 16, August 6 & 20, 1859;
Written:  between August 3 and 15, 1859.

I
The Germans have long since shown that in all spheres of science they are equal, and in most of them superior, to other civilised nations. Only one branch of science, political economy, had no German name among its foremost scholars. The reason is obvious. Political economy is the theoretical analysis of modern bourgeois society and therefore presupposes developed bourgeois conditions, conditions which for centuries, following the wars in the wake of the Reformation and the peasant wars and especially the Thirty Years’ War, could not establish themselves in Germany. The separation of the Netherlands from the Empire removed Germany from the international trade routes and restricted her industrial development from the very beginning to the pettiest scale. While the Germans painfully and slowly recovered from the devastations of the civil wars, while they used up their store of civic energy, which had never been very large, in futile struggle against the customs barriers and absurd commercial regulations which every petty princeling and imperial baron inflicted upon the industry of his subjects, while the imperial cities with their craft-guild practices and patrician spirit went to ruin — Holland, England and France meanwhile conquered the leading positions in international trade, established one colony after another and brought manufactory production to the height of its development, until finally England, with the aid of steam power, which made her coal and iron deposits valuable, headed modern bourgeois development. But political economy could not arise in Germany so long as a struggle
 
had still to be waged against so preposterously antiquated remnants of the Middle Ages as those which hampered the bourgeois development of her material forces until 1830. Only the establishment of the Customs Union enabled the Germans to comprehend political economy at all. It was indeed at this time that English and French economic works began to be imported for the benefit of the German middle class. Men of learning and bureaucrats soon got hold of the imported material and treated it in a way which does little credit to the “German intellect.” The literary efforts of a hotchpotch of chevaliers d’industrie, traders, schoolmasters and bureaucrats produced a bunch of German economic publications which as regards triteness, banality, frivolity, verbosity and plagiarism are equalled only by the German novel. Among people pursuing practical objectives there arose first the protectionist school of the industrialists, whose chief spokesman, List, is still the best that German bourgeois political economy has produced although his celebrated work is entirely copied from the Frenchman Ferrier, the theoretical creator of the Continental System. In opposition to this trend the free-trade school was formed in the forties by merchants from the Baltic provinces, who fumblingly repeated the arguments of the English Free Traders with childlike, but not disinterested, faith. Finally, among the schoolmasters and bureaucrats who had to handle the theoretical aspects there were uncritical and desiccated collectors of herbaria, like Herr Rau, pseudo-clever speculators who translated foreign propositions into undigested Hegelian language like Herr Stein, or gleaners with literary pretensions in the field of so-called history of civilisation, like Herr Riehl. The upshot of all this was cameralistics, an eclectic economic sauce covering a hotchpotch of sundry trivialities, of the sort a junior civil servant might find useful to remember during his final examination.

While in this way in Germany the bourgeoisie, the schoolmasters and the bureaucrats were still making great exertions to learn by rote, and in some measure to understand, the first elements of Anglo-French political economy, which they regarded as incontestable dogmas, the German proletarian party appeared on the scene. Its theoretical aspect was wholly based on a study of political economy, and German political economy as an independent science dates also from the emergence of this party. The essential foundation
 
 of this German political economy is the materialist conception of history whose principal features are briefly outlined in the “Preface” to the above-named work. Since the “Preface” has in the main already been published in Das Volk, we refer to it. The proposition that “the process of social, political and intellectual life is altogether necessitated by the mode of production of material life"; that all social and political relations, all religious and legal systems, all theoretical conceptions which arise in the course of history can only be understood if the material conditions of life obtaining during the relevant epoch have been understood and the former are traced back to these material conditions, was a revolutionary discovery not only for economics but also for all historical sciences — and all branches of science which are not natural sciences are historical. “It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but their social existence that determines their consciousness.” This proposition is so simple that it should be self-evident to anyone not bogged down in idealist humbug. But it leads to highly revolutionary consequences not only in the theoretical sphere but also in the practical sphere. “At a certain stage of development, the material productive forces of society come into conflict with the existing relations of production or — this merely expresses the same thing in legal terms — with the property relations within the framework of which they have operated hitherto. From forms of development of the productive forces these relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an era of social revolution. The changes in the economic foundation lead sooner or later to the transformation of the whole immense superstructure.... The bourgeois mode of production is the last antagonistic form of the social process of production — antagonistic not in the sense of individual antagonism but of an antagonism that emanates from the individuals’ social conditions of existence — but the productive forces developing within bourgeois society create also the material conditions for a solution of this antagonism.” The prospect of a gigantic revolution, the most gigantic revolution that has ever taken place, accordingly presents itself to us as soon as we pursue our materialist thesis further and apply it to the present time.


Closer consideration shows immediately that already the
 
first consequences of the apparently simple proposition, that the consciousness of men is determined by their existence and not the other way round, spurn all forms of idealism, even the most concealed ones, rejecting all conventional and customary views of historical matters. The entire traditional manner of political reasoning is upset; patriotic magnanimity indignantly objects to such an unprincipled interpretation. It was thus inevitable that the new point of view should shock not only the exponents of the bourgeoisie but also the mass of French socialists who intended to revolutionise the world by virtue of the magic words, liberté, égalité, fraternite. But it utterly enraged the vociferous German vulgar democrats. They nevertheless have a partiality for attempting to plagiarise the new ideas in their own interest, although with an exceptional lack of understanding.

The demonstration of the materialist conception even upon a single historical example was a scientific task requiring years of quiet research, for it is evident that mere empty talk can achieve nothing in this context and that only an abundance of critically examined historical material which has been completely mastered can make it possible to solve such a problem. Our party was propelled on to the political stage by the February Revolution and thus prevented from pursuing purely scientific aims. The fundamental conception, nevertheless, runs like an unbroken thread through all literary productions of the party. Every one of them shows that the actions in each particular case were invariably initiated by material causes and not by the accompanying phrases, that on the contrary the political and legal phrases, like the political actions and their results, originated in material causes.

After the defeat of the Revolution of 1848-49, at a time when it became increasingly impossible to exert any influence on Germany from abroad, our party relinquished the field of emigrant squabbles — for that was the only feasible action left — to the vulgar democrats. While these were chasing about to their heart’s content, scuffling today, fraternising tomorrow and the day after once more washing their dirty linen in public, while they went begging throughout America and immediately afterwards started another row over the division of the few coins they had collected — our party was glad to find once more some quiet time for research work. It had the great advantage that its theoretical foundation was
 
a new scientific conception the elaboration of which provided adequate work; even for this reason alone it could never become so demoralised as the “great men” of the emigration.

The book under consideration is the first result of these studies.

II

[Das Volk, No. 16, August 20,1859]

The purpose of a work like the one under review cannot simply be desultory criticism of separate sections of political economy or the discussion of one or another economic issue in isolation. On the contrary, it is from the beginning designed to give a systematic résumé of the whole complex of political economy and a coherent elaboration of the laws governing bourgeois production and bourgeois exchange. This elaboration is at the same time a comprehensive critique of economic literature, for economists are nothing but interpreters of and apologists for these laws.

Hardly any attempt has been made since Hegel’s death to set forth any branch of science in its specific inner coherence. The official Hegelian school had assimilated only the most simple devices of the master’s dialectics and applied them to everything and anything, often moreover with ridiculous incompetence. Hegel’s whole heritage was, so far as they were concerned, confined exclusively to a template, by means of which any subject could be knocked into shape, and a set of words and phrases whose only remaining purpose was to turn up conveniently whenever they experienced a lack of ideas and of concrete knowledge. Thus it happened, as a professor at Bonn has said, that these Hegelians knew nothing but could write about everything. The results were, of course, accordingly. For all their conceit these gentlemen were, however, sufficiently conscious of their failings to avoid major problems as far as possible. The superannuated fossilised type of learning held its ground because of its superior factual knowledge, and after Feuerbach’s renunciation of the speculative method, Hegelianism gradually died away, and it seemed that science was once more dominated by antiquated metaphysics with its rigid categories.

For this there were quite natural reasons. The rule of the Hegelian Diadochi, which ended in empty phrases, was
 
naturally followed by a period in which the concrete content of science predominated once more over the formal aspect. Moreover, Germany at the same time applied itself with quite extraordinary energy to the natural sciences, in accordance with the immense bourgeois development setting in after 1848; with the coming into fashion of these sciences, in which the speculative trend had never achieved any real importance, the old metaphysical mode of thinking, even down to the extreme triviality of Wolff, gained ground rapidly. Hegel was forgotten and a new materialism arose in the natural sciences; it differed in principle very little from the materialism of the eighteenth century and its main advantage was merely a greater stock of data relating to the natural sciences, especially chemistry and physiology. The narrow-minded mode of thinking of the pre-Kantian period in its most banal form is reproduced by Büchner and Vogt, and even Moleschott, who swears by Feuerbach, frequently flounders in a highly diverting manner through the most simple categories. The jaded cart-horse of the commonplace bourgeois mind falters of course in confusion in front of the ditch separating substance from appearance, and cause from effect; but one should not ride carthorses if one intends to go coursing over the very rough ground of abstract reasoning.

 
In this context, therefore, a question had to be solved which was not connected with political economy as such. Which scientific method should be used? There was, on the one hand, the Hegelian dialectics in the quite abstract “speculative” form in which Hegel had left it, and on the other hand the ordinary, mainly Wolffian, metaphysical method, which had come again into vogue, and which was also employed by the bourgeois economists to write their bulky rambling volumes. The second method had been theoretically demolished by Kant and particularly by Hegel so that its continued use in practice could only be rendered possible by inertia and the absence of an alternative simple method. The Hegelian method, on the other hand, was in its existing form quite inapplicable. It was essentially idealist and the main point in this case was the elaboration of a world outlook that was more materialist than any previous one. Hegel’s method took as its point of departure pure thought, whereas here the starting point was to be inexorable facts. A method which, according to its own avowal, “came
 
from nothing through nothing to nothing” was in this shape by no means suitable. It was, nevertheless, the only element in the entire available logical material which could at least serve as a point of origin. It had not been subjected to criticism, not been overthrown; none of the opponents of the great dialectician had been able to make a breach in the proud edifice. It had been forgotten because the Hegelian school did not know how to apply it. Hence, it was first of all essential to carry through a thorough critique of the Hegelian method.

It was the exceptional historical sense underlying Hegel’s manner of reasoning which distinguished it from that of all other philosophers. However abstract and idealist the form employed, yet his evolution of ideas runs always parallel with the evolution of universal history, and the latter was indeed supposed to be only the proof of the former. Although this reversed the actual relation and stood it on its head, yet the real content was invariably incorporated in his philosophy, especially since Hegel — unlike his followers — did not rely on ignorance, but was one of the most erudite thinkers of all time. He was the first to try to demonstrate that there is an evolution, an intrinsic coherence in history, and however strange some things in his philosophy of history may seem to us now, the grandeur of the basic conception is still admirable today, compared both with his predecessors and with those who following him ventured to advance general historical observations. This monumental conception of history pervades the Phänomenologies, Asthetik and Geschichte der Philosophie, and the material is everywhere set forth historically, in a definite historical context, even if in an abstract distorted manner.


This epoch-making conception of history was a direct theoretical pre-condition of the new materialist outlook, and already this constituted a connecting link with the logical method as well. Since, even from the standpoint of “pure reasoning,” this forgotten dialectics had led to such results, and had moreover with the greatest ease coped with the whole of the former logic and metaphysics, it must at all events comprise more than sophistry and hairsplitting. But the critique of this method, which the entire official philosophy had evaded and still evades, was no small matter.


Marx was and is the only one who could undertake the work of extracting from the Hegelian logic the nucleus
 
containing Hegel’s real discoveries in this field, and of establishing the dialectical method, divested of its idealist wrappings, in the simple form in which it becomes the only correct mode of conceptual evolution. The working out of the method which underlies Marx’s critique of political economy is, we think, a result hardly less significant than the basic materialist conception.


Even after the determination of the method, the critique of economics could still be arranged in two ways — historically or logically. Since in the course of history, as in its literary reflection, the evolution proceeds by and large from the simplest to the more complex relations, the historical development of political economy constituted a natural clue, which the critique could take as a point of departure, and then the economic categories would appear on the whole in the same order as in the logical exposition. This form seems to have the advantage of greater lucidity, for it traces the actual development, but in fact it would thus become, at most, more popular. History moves often in leaps and bounds and in a zigzag line, and as this would have to be followed throughout, it would mean not only that a considerable amount of material of slight importance would have to be included, but also that the train of thought would frequently have to be interrupted; it would, moreover, be impossible to write the history of economy without that of bourgeois society, and the task would thus become immense, because of the absence of all preliminary studies. The logical method of approach was therefore the only suitable one. This, however, is indeed nothing but the historical method, only stripped of the historical form and diverting chance occurrences. The point where this history begins must also be the starting point of the train of thought, and its further progress will be simply the reflection, in abstract and theoretically consistent form, of the historical course. Though the reflection is corrected, it is corrected in accordance with laws provided by the actual historical course, since each factor can be examined at the stage of development where it reaches its full maturity, its classical form.


With this method we begin with the first and simplest relation which is historically, actually available, thus in this context with the first economic relation to be found. We analyse this relation. The fact that it is a relation already implies that it has two aspects which are related to each
 
other. Each of these aspects is examined separately; this reveals the nature of their mutual behaviour, their reciprocal action. Contradictions will emerge demanding a solution. But since we are not examining an abstract mental process that takes place solely in our mind, but an actual event which really took place at some time or other, or which is still taking place, these contradictions will have arisen in practice and have probably been solved. We shall trace the mode of this solution and find that it has been effected by establishing a new relation, whose two contradictory aspects we shall then have to set forth, and so on.


Political economy begins with commodities, with the moment when products are exchanged, either by individuals or by primitive communities. The product being exchanged is a commodity. But it is a commodity merely by virtue of the thing, the product being linked with a relation between two persons or communities, the relation between producer and consumer, who at this stage are no longer united in the same person. Here is at once an example of a peculiar fact, which pervades the whole economy and has produced serious confusion in the minds of bourgeois economists — economics is not concerned with things but with relations between persons, and in the final analysis between classes; these relations however are always bound to things and appear as things. Although a few economists had an inkling of this connection in isolated instances, Marx was the first to reveal its significance for the entire economy thus making the most difficult problems so simple and clear that even bourgeois economists will now be able to grasp them.

If we examine the various aspects of the commodity, that is of the fully evolved commodity and not as it at first slowly emerges in the spontaneous barter of two primitive communities, it presents itself to us from two angles, that of use-value and of exchange-value, and thus we come immediately to the province of economic debate. Anyone wishing to find a striking instance of the fact that the German dialectic method at its present stage of development is at least as superior to the old superficially glib metaphysical method as railways are to the mediaeval means of transport, should look up Adam Smith or any other authoritative economist of repute to see how much distress exchange-value and use-value caused these gentlemen, the difficulty they had in distinguishing the two properly and in expressing the
 
determinate form peculiar to each, and then compare the clear, simple exposition given by Marx.

After use-value and exchange-value have been expounded, the commodity as a direct unity of the two is described as it enters the exchange process. The contradictions arising here may be found on pp. 20 and 21. We merely note that these contradictions are not only of interest for theoretical, abstract reasons, but that they also reflect the difficulties originating from the nature of direct interchange, i.e., simple barter, and the impossibilities inevitably confronting this first crude form of exchange. The solution of these impossibilities is achieved by investing a specific commodity — money — with the attribute of representing the exchange-value of all other commodities. Money or simple circulation is then analysed in the second chapter, namely (1) money as a measure of value, and, at the same time, value measured in terms of money, i.e., price, is more closely defined; (2) money as means of circulation and (3) the unity of the two aspects, real money which represents bourgeois material wealth as a whole. This concludes the first part, the conversion of money into capital is left for the second part.


One can see that with this method, the logical exposition need by no means be confined to the purely abstract sphere. On the contrary, it requires historical illustration and continuous contact with reality. A great variety of such evidence is therefore inserted, comprising references both to different stages in the actual historical course of social development and to economic works, in which the working out of lucid definitions of economic relations is traced from the outset. The critique of particular, more or less one-sided or confused interpretations is thus substantially given already in the logical exposition and can be kept quite short.


The economic content of the book will be discussed in a third article.

 


Table of Contents |
 Marx Engels Archive




==========

## Marx to Pavel Vasilyevich Annenkov









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## Marx to J. Weydemeyer in New York









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## Marx to Engels in Manchester









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## Marx to Engels in Ryde

