# Volume 3

==========

## Table of contents








Marx & Engels Selected Works (Vol. 3)




MIA: M.I.A. Library: Marx & Engels: Selected Works (Vol. 3)


 

Marx Engels Selected Works Volume 3 



Critique of the Gotha Programme. (M) 9
Foreword (E) 9
Letter to W. Bracke. May 5, 1875. (M) 11
Marginal Notes to the Programme of the German Workers’ Party. (M) 13
I 13
II 22
III 24
IV 25
Letter from Engels to A. Bebel, March 18-28, 1875. 31
Letter from Engels to Karl Kautsky, February 23, 1891. 38
Introduction to Dialectics of Nature. (E) 41
Old Preface to [Anti]-Dühring. On Dialectics. (E) 58
The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man. (E) 66
Marx. (E) 78
Marx and Engels to A. Bebel, W. Liebknecht, W. Bracke and Others (“Circular Letter”). Extract III. The Manifesto of the Three Zurichers 88
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific. (E) 95
Special Introduction to the English Edition of 1892 95
I115
II126
III133
First Draft of the Reply to Vera Zasulich’s Letter. (M) 152
Speech at the Graveside of Marx. (E) 162
Marx and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848-1849), (E) 164
On the History of the Communist League. (E) 173
The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State. (E) 191
Preface to the First Edition 1884191
Preface to the Fourth German Edition 1891. On the History of the Primitive Family (Bachofen, McLennan, Morgan) 193
I. Prehistoric Stages of Culture204
   1. Savagery 204
   2. Barbarism 206
II. The Family209
III. The Iroquois Gens255
IV. The Grecian Gens268
V. The Rise of the Athenian State275
VI. The Gens and the State in Rome285
VII. The Gens among the Celts and Germans293
VIII. The Formation of the State among the Germans306
IX. Barbarism and Civilisation316
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy. (E) 335
Foreword to the 1888 Edition335
I337
II345
III353
IV360
The Role of Force in History. (E) 377
A Critique of the Draft Social-Democratic Programme of 1891. (E) 429
I. Preamble in Ten Paragraphs429
II Political Demands433
III. Economic Demands438
Appendix to Section I438
Preface to Condition of the Working Class in England. (E) 440
The Future Italian Revolution and the Socialist Party. (E) 453
The Peasant Question in France and Germany. (E) 457
I458
II468
Letters. 477
Engels to P. L. Lavrov, November 12-17, 1875477
Engels to W. Blos, November 10, 1877480
Engels to K. Kautsky, September 12, 1882 480
Engels to Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky, December 28, 1886 481
Engels to C. Schmidt, August 5, 1890 483
Engels to Otto von Boenigk, August 21, 1890 485
Engels to J. Bloch, September 21[-22], 1890 487
Engels to C. Schmidt, October 27, 1890 489
Engels to F. Mehring, July 14, 1893 495
Engels to N. F. Danielson, October 17, 1893 499
Engels to W. Borgius, January 25, 1894 502
Engels to W. Sombart, March 11, 1895 504



Selected Works Index
Marx & Engels Internet Archive | MIA

 






==========

## Critique of the Gotha Programme









Critique of the Gotha Programme



Karl Marx 1875
Critique of the Gotha Programme


Written: April or early May, 1875;
Source: Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume Three, p. 13-30;
Publisher: Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1970;
First Published: Abridged in the journal Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 1, No. 18, 1890-91;
Online Version: mea; marxists.org 1999;
Transcribed: Zodiac and Brian Baggins;
HTML Markup: Brian Baggins.


Table of Contents:


Foreword
Marx to Bracke
Engels to Bebel
Part I
Part II
Part III
Part IV
Appendix


 

Background

Critique of the Gotha Programme is a critique of the draft programme of the United Workers' Party of Germany. In this document Marx address the dictatorship of the proletariat, the period of transition from capitalism to communism, the two phases of communist society, the production and distribution of the social goods, proletarian internationalism, and the party of the working class.

Lenin later wrote:

The great significance of Marx's explanation is, that here too, he consistently applies materialist dialectics, the theory of development, and regards communism as something which develops out of capitalism. Instead of scholastically invented, 'concocted' definitions and fruitless disputes over words (What is socialism? What is communism?), Marx gives analysis of what might be called the stages of the economic maturity of communism.

(Lenin Collected Works, Volume 25, p. 471)

Engels wrote a foreword when the document was first published in 1891. Together with the Critique of the Gotha Programme Engels published Marx's letter to Bracke, directly bound up with the work. 




Marx/Engels Archive



==========

## Foreword









Critique of the Gotha Programme - Foreword



Karl Marx

Critique of the Gotha Programme

Foreword


 


The manuscript published here -- the covering letter to Bracke
as well as the critique of the draft programme -- was sent in
1875, shortly before the Gotha Unity Congress, to Bracke for communication to Geib, Auer, Bebel [1], and Liebknecht and subsequent return to Marx. Since the Halle Party Congress has put the discussion of the Gotha Programme on the agenda of the Party, I think I would be guilty of suppression if I any longer withheld from publicity this important -- perhaps the most important -- document relevant to this discussion.

But the manuscript has yet another and more far-reaching
significance. Here for the first time Marx's attitude to the
line adopted by Lassalle in his agitation from the very
beginning is clearly and firmly set forth, both as regards
Lassalle's economic principles and his tactics.

The ruthless severity with which the draft programme is
dissected here, the mercilessness with which the results
obtained are enunciated and the shortcomings of the draft laid
bare -- all this today, after fifteen years, can no longer give
offence. Specific Lassalleans now exist only abroad as isolated
ruins, and in Halle the Gotha Programme was given up even by its
creators as altogether inadequate.

Nevertheless, I have omitted a few sharp personal expressions
and judgments where these were immaterial, and replaced them by
dots. Marx himself would have done so if he had published the
manuscript today. The violence of the language in some passages
was provoked by two circumstances. In the first place, Marx and
I had been more intimately connected with the German movement
than with any other; we were, therefore, bound to be
particularly perturbed by the decidedly retrograde step
manifested by this draft programme. And secondly, we were at
that time, hardly two years after the Hague Congress of the International, engaged in the most violent struggle against Bakunin and his anarchists, who made us responsible for everything that happened in the labour movement in Germany; hence we had to expect that we would also be addled with the secret paternity of this programme. These considerations do not now exist and so there is no necessity for the passages in question.


For reasons arising form the Press Law, also, a few sentences
have been indicated only by dots. Where I have had to choose a
milder expression this has been enclosed in square
brackets. Otherwise the text has been reproduced word for word.

London, January 6, 1891


Footnotes

[1]
Before the Critique of the Gotha Programme was written, Engels wrote a letter to August Bebel expressing Marx and Engels' surprise at the programme, and going on to criticise it.
 


Next: Part I

Critique of the Gotha Programme Index




==========

## Letter to W. Bracke. May 5, 1875









Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1875



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1875
Marx to W. Bracke
In Brunswick
Abstract


Written: May 5, 1875;
Source: Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume Three, p. 11 - 12;
Publisher: Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1970;
First Published: Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 1, No. 18, 1890-91;
Online Version: marxists.org 1999;
Transcription/Markup: Brian Baggins.

London, 5 May 1875

Dear Bracke, 

When you have read the following critical marginal notes on the Unity Programme, would you be so good as to send them on to Geib and Auer, Bebel and Liebknecht for examination. I am exceedingly busy and have to overstep by far the limit of work allowed me by the doctors. Hence it was anything but a “pleasure” to write such a lengthy screed. It was, however, necessary so that the steps to be taken by me later on would not be misinterpreted by our friends in the Party for whom this communication is intended.

After the Unity Congress has been held, Engels and I will publish a short statement to the effect that our position is altogether remote from the said programme of principle and that we have nothing to do with it.


This is indispensable because the opinion – the entirely erroneous opinion – is held abroad and assiduously nurtured by enemies of the Party that we secretly guide from here the movement of the so-called Eisenach Party. In a Russian book [Statism and Anarchy] that has recently appeared, Bakunin still makes me responsible, for example, not only for all the programmes, etc., of that party but even for every step taken by Liebknecht from the day of his cooperation with the People's Party.

Apart from this, it is my duty not to give recognition, even by diplomatic silence, to what in my opinion is a thoroughly objectionable programme that demoralises the Party.

Every step of real movement is more important than a dozen programmes. If, therefore, it was not possible – and the conditions of the item did not permit it – to go beyond the Eisenach programme, one should simply have concluded an agreement for action against the common enemy. But by drawing up a programme of principles (instead of postponing this until it has been prepared for by a considerable period of common activity) one sets up before the whole world landmarks by which it measures the level of the Party movement.

The Lassallean leaders came because circumstances forced them to. If they had been told in advance that there would be haggling about principles, they would have had to be content with a programme of action or a plan of organisation for common action. Instead of this, one permits them to arrive armed with mandates, recognises these mandates on one's part as binding, and thus surrenders unconditionally to those who are themselves in need of help. To crown the whole business, they are holding a congress before the Congress of Compromise, while one's own party is holding its congress post festum. One had obviously had a desire to stifle all criticism and to give one's own party no opportunity for reflection. One knows that the mere fact of unification is satisfying to the workers, but it is a mistake to believe that this momentary success is not bought too dearly.

For the rest, the programme is no good, even apart from its sanctification of the Lassallean articles of faith.

I shall be sending you in the near future the last parts of the French edition of Capital. The printing was held up for a considerable time by a ban of the French Government. The thing will be ready this week or the beginning of next week. Have you received the previous six parts? Please let me have the address of Bernhard Becker, to whom I must also send the final parts.

The bookshop of the Volksstaat has peculiar ways of doing things. Up to this moment, for example, I have not been sent a single copy of the Cologne Communist Trial.

With best regards,
Yours,

Karl Marx
 


Critique of the Gotha Programme
1873 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## I









Critique of the Gotha Programme-- I




Karl Marx

Critique of the Gotha Programme



I


 

1. "Labor is the source of wealth and all culture, and since useful
labor is possible only in society and through society, the proceeds of
labor belong undiminished with equal right to all members of society."


First part of the paragraph: "Labor is the source of all wealth and all
culture."
Labor is not the source of all wealth. Nature is
just as much the source of use values (and it is surely of such that material
wealth consists!) as labor, which itself is only the manifestation of a
force of nature, human labor power. The above phrase is to be found in
all children's primers and is correct insofar as it is implied that labor
is performed with the appurtenant subjects and instruments. But a socialist
program cannot allow such bourgeois phrases to pass over in silence the
conditions that lone give them meaning. And insofar as man from
the beginning behaves toward nature, the primary source of all instruments
and subjects of labor, as an owner, treats her as belonging to him, his
labor becomes the source of use values, therefore also of wealth. The bourgeois
have very good grounds for falsely ascribing supernatural creative power
to labor; since precisely from the fact that labor depends on nature it
follows that the man who possesses no other property than his labor power
must, in all conditions of society and culture, be the slave of other men
who have made themselves the owners of the material conditions of labor.
He can only work with their permission, hence live only with their permission.
Let us now leave the sentence as it stands, or rather limps. What
could one have expected in conclusion? Obviously this:
"Since labor is the source of all wealth, no one in society can
appropriate wealth except as the product of labor. Therefore, if he himself
does not work, he lives by the labor of others and also acquires his culture
at the expense of the labor of others."

Instead of this, by means of the verbal river "and since", a proposition
is added in order to draw a conclusion from this and not from the first
one.


Second part of the paragraph: "Useful labor is possible only in
society and through society."
According to the first proposition, labor was the source of all
wealth and all culture; therefore no society is possible without labor.
Now we learn, conversely, that no "useful" labor is possible without society.
One could just as well have said that only in society can useless
and even socially harmful labor become a branch of gainful occupation,
that only in society can one live by being idle, etc., etc. – in short,
once could just as well have copied the whole of Rousseau.
And what is "useful" labor? Surely only labor which produces the
intended useful result. A savage – and man was a savage after he had ceased
to be an ape – who kills an animal with a stone, who collects fruit, etc.,
performs "useful" labor.


Thirdly, the conclusion: "Useful labor is possible only in society
and through society, the proceeds of labor belong undiminished with equal
right to all members of society."
A fine conclusion! If useful labor is possible only in society
and through society, the proceeds of labor belong to society – and only
so much therefrom accrues to the individual worker as is not required to
maintain the "condition" of labor, society.
In fact, this proposition has at all times been made use of by
the champions of the state of society prevailing at any given time.
First comes the claims of the government and everything that sticks to
it, since it is the social organ for the maintenance of the social order;
then comes the claims of the various kinds of private property, for the
various kinds of private property are the foundations of society, etc.
One sees that such hollow phrases are the foundations of society, etc.
One sees that such hollow phrases can be twisted and turned as desired.
The first and second parts of the paragraph have some intelligible
connection only in the following wording:
"Labor becomes the source of wealth and culture only as social labor",
or, what is the same thing, "in and through society".

This proposition is incontestably correct, for although isolated labor
(its material conditions presupposed) can create use value, it can create
neither wealth nor culture.
But equally incontestable is this other proposition:
"In proportion as labor develops socially, and becomes thereby a
source of wealth and culture, poverty and destitution develop among the
workers, and wealth and culture among the nonworkers."

This is the law of all history hitherto. What, therefore, had to be done
here, instead of setting down general phrases about "labor" and "society",
was to prove concretely how in present capitalist society the material,
etc., conditions have at last been created which enable and compel the
workers to lift this social curse.
In fact, however, the whole paragraph, bungled in style and content,
is only there in order to inscribe the Lassallean catchword of the "undiminished
proceeds of labor" as a slogan at the top of the party banner. I shall
return later to the "proceeds of labor", "equal right", etc., since the
same thing recurs in a somewhat different form further on.


2. "In present-day society, the instruments of labor are the monopoly
of the capitalist class; the resulting dependence of the working class
is the cause of misery and servitude in all forms."

This sentence, borrowed from the Rules of the International, is incorrect
in this "improved" edition.
In present-day society, the instruments of labor are the monopoly
of the landowners (the monopoly of property in land is even the basis of
the monopoly of capital) and the capitalists. In the passage in
question, the Rules of the International do not mention either one or the
other class of monopolists. They speak of the "monopolizer of the means
of labor, that is, the sources of life." The addition, "sources
of life", makes it sufficiently clear that land is included in the instruments
of labor.
The correction was introduced because Lassalle, for reasons now
generally known, attacked only the capitalist class and not the
landowners. In England, the capitalist class is usually not even the owner
of the land on which his factory stands.


3. "The emancipation of labor demands the promotion of the instruments
of labor to the common property of society and the co-operative regulation
of the total labor, with a fair distribution of the proceeds of labor.

"Promotion of the instruments of labor to the common property" ought obviously
to read their "conversion into the common property"; but this is only passing.
What are the "proceeds of labor"? The product of labor, or its
value? And in the latter case, is it the total value of the product, or
only that part of the value which labor has newly added to the value of
the means of production consumed?
"Proceeds of labor" is a loose notion which Lassalle has put in
the place of definite economic conceptions.
What is "a fair distribution"?
Do not the bourgeois assert that the present-day distribution
is "fair"? And is it not, in fact, the only "fair" distribution on the
basis of the present-day mode of production? Are economic relations regulated
by legal conceptions, or do not, on the contrary, legal relations arise
out of economic ones? Have not also the socialist sectarians the most varied
notions about "fair" distribution?
To understand what is implied in this connection by the phrase
"fair distribution", we must take the first paragraph and this one together.
The latter presupposes a society wherein the instruments of labor are common
property and the total labor is co-operatively regulated, and from the
first paragraph we learn that "the proceeds of labor belong undiminished
with equal right to all members of society."
"To all members of society"? To those who do not work as well?
What remains then of the "undiminished" proceeds of labor? Only to those
members of society who work? What remains then of the "equal right" of
all members of society?
But "all members of society" and "equal right" are obviously mere
phrases. The kernel consists in this, that in this communist society every
worker must receive the "undiminished" Lassallean "proceeds of labor".
Let us take, first of all, the words "proceeds of labor" in the
sense of the product of labor; then the co-operative proceeds of labor
are the total social product.
From this must now be deducted: First, cover for replacement
of the means of production used up. Second, additional portion for
expansion of production. Third, reserve or insurance funds to provide
against accidents, dislocations caused by natural calamities, etc.
These deductions from the "undiminished" proceeds of labor are
an economic necessity, and their magnitude is to be determined according
to available means and forces, and partly by computation of probabilities,
but they are in no way calculable by equity.
There remains the other part of the total product, intended to
serve as means of consumption.
Before this is divided among the individuals, there has to be
deducted again, from it: First, the general costs of administration
not belonging to production. This part will, from the outset, be very considerably
restricted in comparison with present-day society, and it diminishes in
proportion as the new society develops. Second, that which is intended
for the common satisfaction of needs, such as schools, health services,
etc. From the outset, this part grows considerably in comparison with present-day
society, and it grows in proportion as the new society develops. Third,
funds for those unable to work, etc., in short, for what is included under
so-called official poor relief today.
Only now do we come to the "distribution" which the program, under
Lassallean influence, alone has in view in its narrow fashion – namely,
to that part of the means of consumption which is divided among the individual
producers of the co-operative society.
The "undiminished" proceeds of labor have already unnoticeably
become converted into the "diminished" proceeds, although what the producer
is deprived of in his capacity as a private individual benefits him directly
or indirectly in his capacity as a member of society.
Just as the phrase of the "undiminished" proceeds of labor has
disappeared, so now does the phrase of the "proceeds of labor" disappear
altogether.
Within the co-operative society based on common ownership of the
means of production, the producers do not exchange their products; just
as little does the labor employed on the products appear here as the value
of these products, as a material quality possessed by them, since now,
in contrast to capitalist society, individual labor no longer exists in
an indirect fashion but directly as a component part of total labor. The
phrase "proceeds of labor", objectionable also today on account of its
ambiguity, thus loses all meaning.
What we have to deal with here is a communist society, not as
it has developed on its own foundations, but, on the contrary, just
as it emerges from capitalist society; which is thus in every respect,
economically, morally, and intellectually, still stamped with the birthmarks
of the old society from whose womb it emerges. Accordingly, the individual
producer receives back from society – after the deductions have been made
– exactly what he gives to it. What he has given to it is his individual
quantum of labor. For example, the social working day consists of the sum
of the individual hours of work; the individual labor time of the individual
producer is the part of the social working day contributed by him, his
share in it. He receives a certificate from society that he has furnished
such-and-such an amount of labor (after deducting his labor for the common
funds); and with this certificate, he draws from the social stock of means
of consumption as much as the same amount of labor cost. The same amount
of labor which he has given to society in one form, he receives back in
another.
Here, obviously, the same principle prevails as that which regulates
the exchange of commodities, as far as this is exchange of equal values.
Content and form are changed, because under the altered circumstances no
one can give anything except his labor, and because, on the other hand,
nothing can pass to the ownership of individuals, except individual means
of consumption. But as far as the distribution of the latter among the
individual producers is concerned, the same principle prevails as in the
exchange of commodity equivalents: a given amount of labor in one form
is exchanged for an equal amount of labor in another form.
Hence, equal right here is still in principle – bourgeois
right, although principle and practice are no longer at loggerheads,
while the exchange of equivalents in commodity exchange exists only on
the average and not in the individual case.
In spite of this advance, this equal right is still constantly
stigmatized by a bourgeois limitation. The right of the producers is proportional
to the labor they supply; the equality consists in the fact that measurement
is made with an equal standard, labor.
But one man is superior to another physically, or mentally, and
supplies more labor in the same time, or can labor for a longer time; and
labor, to serve as a measure, must be defined by its duration or intensity,
otherwise it ceases to be a standard of measurement. This equal
right is an unequal right for unequal labor. It recognizes no class differences,
because everyone is only a worker like everyone else; but it tacitly recognizes
unequal individual endowment, and thus productive capacity, as a natural
privilege. It is, therefore, a right of inequality, in its content, like
every right. Right, by its very nature, can consist only in the application
of an equal standard; but unequal individuals (and they would not be different
individuals if they were not unequal) are measurable only by an equal standard
insofar as they are brought under an equal point of view, are taken from
one definite side only – for instance, in the present case, are regarded
only as workers and nothing more is seen in them, everything else
being ignored. Further, one worker is married, another is not; one has
more children than another, and so on and so forth. Thus, with an equal
performance of labor, and hence an equal in the social consumption fund,
one will in fact receive more than another, one will be richer than another,
and so on. To avoid all these defects, right, instead of being equal, would
have to be unequal.
But these defects are inevitable in the first phase of communist
society as it is when it has just emerged after prolonged birth pangs from
capitalist society. Right can never be higher than the economic structure
of society and its cultural development conditioned thereby.
In a higher phase of communist society, after the enslaving subordination
of the individual to the division of labor, and therewith also the antithesis
between mental and physical labor, has vanished; after labor has become
not only a means of life but life's prime want; after the productive forces
have also increased with the all-around development of the individual,
and all the springs of co-operative wealth flow more abundantly – only
then can the narrow horizon of bourgeois right be crossed in its entirety
and society inscribe on its banners: From each according to his ability,
to each according to his needs!
I have dealt more at length with the "undiminished" proceeds of
labor, on the one hand, and with "equal right" and "fair distribution",
on the other, in order to show what a crime it is to attempt, on the one
hand, to force on our Party again, as dogmas, ideas which in a certain
period had some meaning but have now become obsolete verbal rubbish, while
again perverting, on the other, the realistic outlook, which it cost so
much effort to instill into the Party but which has now taken root in it,
by means of ideological nonsense about right and other trash so common
among the democrats and French socialists.
Quite apart from the analysis so far given, it was in general
a mistake to make a fuss about so-called distribution and put the principal
stress on it.
Any distribution whatever of the means of consumption is only
a consequence of the distribution of the conditions of production themselves.
The latter distribution, however, is a feature of the mode of production
itself. The capitalist mode of production, for example, rests on the fact
that the material conditions of production are in the hands of nonworkers
in the form of property in capital and land, while the masses are only
owners of the personal condition of production, of labor power. If the
elements of production are so distributed, then the present-day distribution
of the means of consumption results automatically. If the material conditions
of production are the co-operative property of the workers themselves,
then there likewise results a distribution of the means of consumption
different from the present one. Vulgar socialism (and from it in turn a
section of the democrats) has taken over from the bourgeois economists
the consideration and treatment of distribution as independent of the mode
of production and hence the presentation of socialism as turning principally
on distribution. After the real relation has long been made clear, why
retrogress again?


4. "The emancipation of labor must be the work of the working class,
relative to which all other classes are only one reactionary mass."

The first strophe is taken from the introductory words of the Rules of
the International, but "improved". There it is said: "The emancipation
of the working class must be the act of the workers themselves"; here,
on the contrary, the "working class" has to emancipate – what? "Labor."
Let him understand who can.
In compensation, the antistrophe, on the other hand, is a Lassallean
quotation of the first water: "relative to which" (the working class) "all
other classes are only one reactionary mass."
In the Communist Manifesto it is said:
"Of all the classes that stand face-to-face with the bourgeoisie
today, the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The other
classes decay and finally disappear in the face of modern industry; the
proletariat is its special and essential product."

The bourgeoisie is here conceived as a revolutionary class – as the bearer
of large-scale industry – relative to the feudal lords and the lower middle
class, who desire to maintain all social positions that are the creation
of obsolete modes of production. thus, they do not form together with the
bourgeoisie "only one reactionary mass".
On the other hand, the proletariat is revolutionary relative to
the bourgeoisie because, having itself grown up on the basis of large-scale
industry, it strives to strip off from production the capitalist character
that the bourgeoisie seeks to perpetuate. But the Manifesto adds
that the "lower middle class" is becoming revolutionary "in view of [its]
impending transfer to the proletariat".
From this point of view, therefore, it is again nonsense to say
that it, together with the bourgeoisie, and with the feudal lords into
the bargain, "form only one reactionary mass" relative to the working class.
Has one proclaimed to the artisan, small manufacturers, etc.,
and peasants during the last elections: Relative to us, you, together with
the bourgeoisie and feudal lords, form one reactionary mass?
Lassalle knew the Communist Manifesto by heart, as his
faithful followers know the gospels written by him. If, therefore, he has
falsified it so grossly, this has occurred only to put a good color on
his alliance with absolutist and feudal opponents against the bourgeoisie.
In the above paragraph, moreover, his oracular saying is dragged
in by main force without any connection with the botched quotation from
the Rules of the International. Thus, it is simply an impertinence, and
indeed not at all displeasing to Herr Bismarck, one of those cheap pieces
of insolence in which the Marat of Berlin deals. [ Marat of Berlin a reference to Hasselmann, cheif editor of the Neuer Social-Demokrat]


5. "The working class strives for its emancipation first of all
within the framework of the present-day national states, conscious that
the necessary result of its efforts, which are common to the workers of
all civilized countries, will be the international brotherhood of peoples."

Lassalle, in opposition to the Communist Manifesto and to all earlier
socialism, conceived the workers' movement from the narrowest national
standpoint. He is being followed in this – and that after the work of
the International!
It is altogether self-evident that, to be able to fight at all,
the working class must organize itself at home as a class and that
its own country is the immediate arena of its struggle – insofar as its
class struggle is national, not in substance, but, as the Communist
Manifesto says, "in form". But the "framework of the present-day national
state", for instance, the German Empire, is itself, in its turn, economically
"within the framework" of the world market, politically "within the framework"
of the system of states. Every businessman knows that German trade is at
the same time foreign trade, and the greatness of Herr Bismarck consists,
to be sure, precisely in his pursuing a kind of international policy.
And to what does the German Workers' party reduce its internationalism?
To the consciousness that the result of its efforts will be "the international
brotherhood of peoples" – a phrase borrowed from the bourgeois League
of Peace and Freedom, which is intended to pass as equivalent to the international
brotherhood of working classes in the joint struggle against the ruling
classes and their governments. Not a word, therefore, about the international
functions of the German working class! And it is thus that it is to challenge
its own bourgeoisie – which is already linked up in brotherhood against
it with the bourgeois of all other countries – and Herr Bismarck's international
policy of conspiracy.
In fact, the internationalism of the program stands even infinitely
below that of the Free Trade party. The latter also asserts that
the result of its efforts will be "the international brotherhood of peoples".
But it also does something to make trade international and by no
means contents itself with the consciousness that all people are carrying
on trade at home.
The international activity of the working classes does not in
any way depend on the existence of the International Working Men's Association.
This was only the first attempt to create a central organ for the activity;
an attempt which was a lasting success on account of the impulse which
it gave but which was no longer realizable in its historical form after
the fall of the Paris Commune.
Bismarck's Norddeutsche was absolutely right when it announced,
to the satisfaction of its master, that the German Workers' party had sworn
off internationalism in the new program.

 


Next: Section II


Critique of the Gotha Programme




==========

## II

  
     Critique of the Gotha Programme-- II    
Karl Marx

Critique of the Gotha Programme
  
II
   "Starting from these basic principles, the German workers' party
strives by all legal means for the free state—and—socialist society:
that abolition of the wage system together with the iron law of wages --
and—exploitation in every form; the elimination of all social and political
inequality."  
I shall return to the "free" state later. So, in future, the German Workers' party has got to believe in
Lassalle's "iron law of wages"! That this may not be lost, the nonsense
is perpetrated of speaking of the "abolition of the wage system" (it should
read: system of wage labor), "together with the iron law of wages". If
I abolish wage labor, then naturally I abolish its laws also, whether they
are of "iron" or sponge. But Lassalle's attack on wage labor turns almost
solely on this so-called law. In order, therefore, to prove that Lassalle's
sect has conquered, the "wage system" must be abolished "together with
the iron law of wages" and not without it. It is well known that nothing of the "iron law of wages" is Lassalle's
except the word "iron" borrowed from Goethe's "great, eternal iron laws". [1]
The word "iron" is a label by which the true believers recognize one another.
But if I take the law with Lassalle's stamp on it, and consequently in
his sense, then I must also take it with his substantiation for it. And
what is that? As Lange already showed, shortly after Lassalle's death,
it is the Malthusian theory of population (preached by Lange himself).
But if this theory is correct, then again I cannot abolish the law even
if I abolish wage labor a hundred times over, because the law then governs
not only the system of wage labor but every social system. Basing
themselves directly on this, the economists have been proving for 50 years
and more that socialism cannot abolish poverty, which has its basis in
nature, but can only make it general, distribute it simultaneously
over the whole surface of society! But all this is not the main thing. Quite apart from the false
Lassallean formulation of the law, the truly outrageous retrogression consists
in the following: Since Lassalle's death, there has asserted itself in our party
the scientific understanding that wages are not what they appear to be
-- namely, the value, or price, of labor—but only
a masked form for the value, or price, of labor power.
Thereby, the whole bourgeois conception of wages hitherto, as well as all
the criticism hitherto directed against this conception, was thrown overboard
once and for all. It was made clear that the wage worker has permission
to work for his own subsistence—that is, to live, only insofar
as he works for a certain time gratis for the capitalist (and hence also
for the latter's co-consumers of surplus value); that the whole capitalist
system of production turns on the increase of this gratis labor by extending
the working day, or by developing the productivity—that is, increasing
the intensity or labor power, etc.; that, consequently, the system of wage
labor is a system of slavery, and indeed of a slavery which becomes more
severe in proportion as the social productive forces of labor develop,
whether the worker receives better or worse payment. And after this understanding
has gained more and more ground in our party, some return to Lassalle's
dogma although they must have known that Lassalle did not know what
wages were, but, following in the wake of the bourgeois economists, took
the appearance for the essence of the matter. It is as if, among slaves who have at last got behind the secret
of slavery and broken out in rebellion, a slave still in thrall to obsolete
notions were to inscribe on the program of the rebellion: Slavery must
be abolished because the feeding of slaves in the system of slavery cannot
exceed a certain low maximum! Does not the mere fact that the representatives of our party were
capable of perpetrating such a monstrous attack on the understanding that
has spread among the mass of our party prove, by itself, with what criminal
levity and with what lack of conscience they set to work in drawing up
this compromise program! Instead of the indefinite concluding phrase of the paragraph,
"the elimination of all social and political inequality", it ought to have
been said that with the abolition of class distinctions all social and
political inequality arising from them would disappear of itself.
    
Footnotes
  [1]
Quoted from Goethe's Das Göttliche      Next: Part III   Critique of the Gotha Programme    

==========

## III









Critique of the Gotha Programme-- III




Karl Marx

Critique of the Gotha Programme



III


 
"The German Workers' party, in order to pave the way to the solution
of the social question, demands the establishment of producers' co-operative
societies with state aid under the democratic control of the toiling people.
The producers' co-operative societies are to be called into being for industry
and agriculture on such a scale that the socialist organization of the
total labor will arise from them."

After the Lassallean "iron law of wages", the physic
of the prophet. The way to it is "paved" in worthy fashion. In place of
the existing class struggle appears a newspaper scribbler's phrase: "the
social question", to the "solution" of which one "paves the way".
Instead of arising from the revolutionary process of transformation
of society, the "socialist organization of the total labor" "arises" from
the "state aid" that the state gives to the producers' co-operative societies
and which the state, not the workers, "calls into being". It is
worthy of Lassalle's imagination that with state loans one can build a
new society just as well as a new railway!
From the remnants of a sense of shame, "state aid" has been put
-- under the democratic control of the "toiling people".
In the first place, the majority of the "toiling people" in Germany
consists of peasants, not proletarians.
Second, "democratic" means in German "Volksherrschaftlich" [by
the rule of the people]. But what does "control by the rule of the people
of the toiling people" mean? And particularly in the case of a toiling
people which, through these demands that it puts to the state, expresses
its full consciousness that it neither rules nor is ripe for ruling!
It would be superfluous to deal here with the criticism of the
recipe prescribed by Buchez in the reign of Louis Philippe, in opposition
to the French socialists and accepted by the reactionary workers, of the
Atelier. The chief offense does not lie in having inscribed this specific
nostrum in the program, but in taking, in general, a retrograde step from
the standpoint of a class movement to that of a sectarian movement.
That the workers desire to establish the conditions for co-operative
production on a social scale, and first of all on a national scale, in
their own country, only means that they are working to revolutionize the
present conditions of production, and it has nothing in common with the
foundation of co-operative societies with state aid. But as far as the
present co-operative societies are concerned, they are of value only
insofar as they are the independent creations of the workers and not protégés
either of the governments or of the bourgeois.
 


Next: Section IV


Critique of the Gotha Programme




==========

## IV










Critique of the Gotha Programme-- IV




Karl Marx

Critique of the Gotha Programme



IV


 
I come now to the democratic section.



A. "The free basis of the state."



First of all, according to II, the German Workers' party strives for "the
free state".
Free state — what is this?
It is by no means the aim of the workers, who have got rid of
the narrow mentality of humble subjects, to set the state free. In the
German Empire, the "state" is almost as "free" as in Russia. Freedom consists
in converting the state from an organ superimposed upon society into one
completely subordinate to it; and today, too, the forms of state are more
free or less free to the extent that they restrict the "freedom of the
state".
The German Workers' party — at least if it adopts the program
— shows that its socialist ideas are not even skin-deep; in that, instead
of treating existing society (and this holds good for any future one) as
the basis of the existing state (or of the future state in the case
of future society), it treats the state rather as an independent entity
that possesses its own intellectual, ethical, and libertarian bases.
And what of the riotous misuse which the program makes of the
words "present-day state", "present-day society", and of the still more
riotous misconception it creates in regard to the state to which it addresses
its demands?
"Present-day society" is capitalist society, which exists in all
civilized countries, more or less free from medieval admixture, more or
less modified by the particular historical development of each country,
more or less developed. On the other hand, the "present-day state" changes
with a country's frontier. It is different in the Prusso-German Empire
from what it is in Switzerland, and different in England from what it is
in the United States. The "present-day state" is therefore a fiction.
Nevertheless, the different states of the different civilized
countries, in spite or their motley diversity of form, all have this in
common: that they are based on modern bourgeois society, only one more
or less capitalistically developed. They have, therefore, also certain
essential characteristics in common. In this sense, it is possible to speak
of the "present-day state" in contrast with the future, in which its present
root, bourgeois society, will have died off.
The question then arises: What transformation will the state undergo
in communist society? In other words, what social functions will remain
in existence there that are analogous to present state functions? This
question can only be answered scientifically, and one does not get a flea-hop
nearer to the problem by a thousand-fold combination of the word 'people'
with the word 'state'.
Between capitalist and communist society there lies the period
of the revolutionary transformation of the one into the other. Corresponding
to this is also a political transition period in which the state can be
nothing but the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat.
Now the program does not deal with this nor with the future state
of communist society.
Its political demands contain nothing beyond the old democratic
litany familiar to all: universal suffrage, direct legislation, popular
rights, a people's militia, etc. They are a mere echo of the bourgeois
People's party, of the League of Peace and Freedom. They are all demands
which, insofar as they are not exaggerated in fantastic presentation, have
already been realized. Only the state to which they belong does
not lie within the borders of the German Empire, but in Switzerland, the
United States, etc. This sort of "state of the future" is a present-day
state, although existing outside the "framework" of the German Empire.
But one thing has been forgotten. Since the German Workers' party
expressly declares that it acts within "the present-day national state",
hence within its own state, the Prusso-German Empire — its demands would
indeed be otherwise largely meaningless, since one only demands what one
has not got — it should not have forgotten the chief thing, namely, that
all those pretty little gewgaws rest on the recognition of the so-called
sovereignty of the people and hence are appropriate only in a democratic
republic.


Since one has not the courage — and wisely so, for the circumstances
demand caution — to demand the democratic republic, as the French workers'
programs under Louis Philippe and under Louis Napoleon did, one should
not have resorted, either, to the subterfuge, neither "honest" [1] nor decent,
of demanding things which have meaning only in a democratic republic from
a state which is nothing but a police-guarded military despotism, embellished
with parliamentary forms, alloyed with a feudal admixture, already influenced
by the bourgeoisie, and bureaucratically carpentered, and then to assure
this state into the bargain that one imagines one will be able to force
such things upon it "by legal means".
Even vulgar democracy, which sees the millennium in the democratic
republic, and has no suspicion that it is precisely in this last form of
state of bourgeois society that the class struggle has to be fought out
to a conclusion — even it towers mountains above this kind of democratism,
which keeps within the limits of what is permitted by the police and not
permitted by logic.
That, in fact, by the word "state" is meant the government machine,
or the state insofar as it forms a special organism separated from society
through division of labor, is shown by the words "the German Workers' party
demands as the economic basis of the state: a single progressive income
tax", etc. Taxes are the economic basis of the government machinery and
of nothing else. In the state of the future, existing in Switzerland, this
demand has been pretty well fulfilled. Income tax presupposes various sources
of income of the various social classes, and hence capitalist society.
It is, therefore, nothing remarkable that the Liverpool financial reformers
— bourgeois headed by Gladstone's brother — are putting forward the same
demand as the program.



B. "The German Workers' party demands as the intellectual and ethical
basis of the state:

"1. Universal and equal elementary education by the state.
Universal compulsory school attendance. Free instruction."

"Equal elementary education"? What idea lies behind these words? Is it
believed that in present-day society (and it is only with this one has
to deal) education can be equal for all classes? Or is it demanded
that the upper classes also shall be compulsorily reduced to the modicum
of education — the elementary school — that alone is compatible with
the economic conditions not only of the wage-workers but of the peasants
as well?
"Universal compulsory school attendance. Free instruction." The
former exists even in Germany, the second in Switzerland and in the United
States in the case of elementary schools. If in some states of the latter
country higher education institutions are also "free", that only means
in fact defraying the cost of education of the upper classes from the general
tax receipts. Incidentally, the same holds good for "free administration
of justice" demanded under A, 5. The administration of criminal justice
is to be had free everywhere; that of civil justice is concerned almost
exclusively with conflicts over property and hence affects almost exclusively
the possessing classes. Are they to carry on their litigation at the expense
of the national coffers?
This paragraph on the schools should at least have demanded technical
schools (theoretical and practical) in combination with the elementary
school.
"Elementary education by the state" is altogether objectionable.
Defining by a general law the expenditures on the elementary schools, the
qualifications of the teaching staff, the branches of instruction, etc.,
and, as is done in the United States, supervising the fulfillment of these
legal specifications by state inspectors, is a very different thing from
appointing the state as the educator of the people! Government and church
should rather be equally excluded from any influence on the school. Particularly,
indeed, in the Prusso-German Empire (and one should not take refuge in
the rotten subterfuge that one is speaking of a "state of the future";
we have seen how matters stand in this respect) the state has need, on
the contrary, of a very stern education by the people.
But the whole program, for all its democratic clang, is tainted
through and through by the Lassallean sect's servile belief in the state,
or, what is no better, by a democratic belief in miracles; or rather it
is a compromise between these two kinds of belief in miracles, both equally
remote from socialism.
"Freedom of science" says paragraph of the Prussian Constitution.
Why, then, here?.
"Freedom of conscience"! If one desired, at this time of the Kulturkampf
to remind liberalism of its old catchwords,
it surely could have been done only in the following form: Everyone should
be able to attend his religious as well as his bodily needs without the
police sticking their noses in. But the Workers' party ought, at any rate
in this connection, to have expressed its awareness of the fact that bourgeois
"freedom of conscience" is nothing but the toleration of all possible kinds
of religious freedom of conscience, and that for its part it endeavours rather to liberate the conscience from the witchery of religion. But one
chooses not to transgress the "bourgeois" level.
I have now come to the end, for the appendix that now follows
in the program does not constitute a characteristic component part of it.
Hence, I can be very brief.

 


Footnotes


[1]
Epitaph used by the Eisenachers. Here a play on words in German.

 


Appendix


Critique of the Gotha Programme




==========

## Letter from Engels to A. Bebel










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1875



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1875
Engels to August Bebel
In Zwickau


Written: London, March 18-28, 1875;
First Published: A. Bebel, Aus meinem Leben, Part 2, Stuttgart, 1911;
Translated: Peter and Betty Ross;
Transcribed: Zodiac;
HTML Markup: S. Ryan and B. Baggins.

London, March 18-28, 1875
Dear Bebel,
I have received your letter of February 23
and am glad to hear that you are in such good bodily health.
You ask me what we think of the unification affair. We are, unfortunately,
in exactly the same boat as yourself. Neither Liebknecht nor anyone else
has let us have any kind of information, and hence we too know only what
is in the papers  —  not that there was anything in them until a week or
so ago, when the draft programme appeared. That astonished us not a little,
I must say.
Our party had so often held out a conciliatory hand to the Lassalleans,
or at least proffered co-operation, only to be rebuffed so often and so
contemptuously by the Hasenclevers, Hasselmanns and Tolckes as to lead
any child to the conclusion that, should these gentlemen now come and themselves
proffer conciliation, they must be in a hell of a dilemma. Knowing full
well what these people are like, however, it behoves us to make the most
of that dilemma and insist on every conceivable guarantee that might prevent
these people from restoring, at our party’s expense, their shattered reputation
in general working-class opinion. They should be given an exceedingly cool
and cautious reception, and union be made dependent on the degree of their
readiness to abandon their sectarian slogans and their state aid, [2]
and to accept in its essentials the Eisenach Programme of 1869 [3]
or an improved edition of it adapted to the present day. Our party has
absolutely nothing to learn from the Lassalleans in the theoretical
sphere, i.e. the crux of the matter where the programme is concerned, but
the Lassalleans doubtless have something to learn from the party; the first
prerequisite for union was that they cease to be sectarians, Lassalleans,
i.e. that, first and foremost, they should, if not wholly relinquish the
universal panacea of state aid, at least admit it to be a secondary provisional
measure alongside and amongst many others recognised as possible. The draft
programme shows that our people, while infinitely superior to the Lassallean
leaders in matters of theory, are far from being a match for them where
political guile is concerned; once again the “honest men” [4]
have been cruelly done in the eye by the dishonest.
To begin with, they adopt the high-sounding but historically false
Lassallean dictum: in relation to the working class all other classes are
only one reactionary mass. This proposition is true only in certain exceptional
instances, for example in the case of a revolution by the proletariat,
e.g. the Commune, or in a country in which not only has the bourgeoisie
constructed state and society after its own image but the democratic petty
bourgeoisie, in its wake, has already carried that reconstruction to its
logical conclusion. If, for instance, in Germany, the democratic petty
bourgeoisie were part of this reactionary mass, then how could the Social-Democratic
Workers’ Party have gone hand in hand with it, with the People’s Party,
[5] for years on end? How could the Volksstaat
derive virtually all its political content from the petty-bourgeois democratic
Frankfurter Zeitung? And how can one explain the adoption in this
same programme of no less than seven demands that coincide exactly and
word for word with the programme of the People’s Party and of petty-bourgeois
democracy? I mean the seven political demands, 1 to 5 and 1 to 2, of which
there is not one that is not bourgeois-democratic. [6]
Secondly, the principle that the workers’ movement is an international
one is, to all intents and purposes, utterly denied in respect of the present,
and this by men who, for the space of five years and under the most difficult
conditions, upheld that principle in the most laudable manner. The German
workers’ position in the van of the European movement rests essentially
on their genuinely international attitude during the war [7];
no other proletariat would have behaved so well. And now this principle
is to be denied by them at a moment when, everywhere abroad, workers are
stressing it all the more by reason of the efforts made by governments
to suppress every attempt at its practical application in an organisation!
And what is left of the internationalism of the workers’ movement? The
dim prospect  —  not even of subsequent co-operation among European workers
with a view to their liberation  —  nay, but of a future “international
brotherhood of peoples”  —  of your Peace League bourgeois “United States
of Europe"! [8]
There was, of course, no need whatever to mention the International
as such. But at the very least there should have been no going back on
the programme of 1869, and some sort of statement to the effect that, though
first of all the German workers’ party is acting within the limits
set by its political frontiers (it has no right to speak in the name of
the European proletariat, especially when what it says is wrong), it is
nevertheless conscious of its solidarity with the workers of all other
countries and will, as before, always be ready to meet the obligations
that solidarity entails. Such obligations, even if one does not definitely
proclaim or regard oneself as part of the “International,”  consist for
example in aid, abstention from blacklegging during strikes, making sure
that the party organs keep German workers informed of the movement abroad,
agitation against impending or incipient dynastic wars and, during such
wars, an attitude such as was exemplarily maintained in 1870 and 1871,
etc.
Thirdly, our people have allowed themselves to be saddled with
the Lassallean “iron law of wages” which is based on a completely outmoded
economic view, namely that on average the workers receive only the minimum
wage because, according to the Malthusian theory of population, there are
always too many workers (such was Lassalle’s reasoning). Now in Capital
Marx has amply demonstrated that the laws governing wages are very complex,
that, according to circumstances, now this law, now that, holds sway, that
they are therefore by no means iron but are, on the contrary, exceedingly
elastic, and that the subject really cannot be dismissed in a few words,
as Lassalle imagined. Malthus’ argument, upon which the law Lassalle derived
from him and Ricardo (whom he misinterpreted) is based, as that argument
appears, for instance, on p. 5 of the Arbeiterlesebuch, where it
is quoted from another pamphlet of Lassalle’s, [9] is
exhaustively refuted by Marx in the section on “Accumulation of Capital.” 
Thus, by adopting the Lassallean “iron law” one commits oneself to a false
proposition and false reasoning in support of the same.
Fourthly, as its one and only social demand, the programme
puts forward  —  Lassallean state aid in its starkest form, as stolen by
Lassalle from Buchez. [10] And this, after Bracke has
so ably demonstrated the sheer futility of that demand; after almost all
if not all, of our party speakers have, in their struggle against the Lassalleans,
been compelled to make a stand against this “state aid"! Our party could
hardly demean itself further. Internationalism sunk to the level of Amand
Goegg, socialism to that of the bourgeois republican Buchez, who confronted
the socialists with this demand in order to supplant them!
But “state aid” in the Lassallean sense of the word is, after
all, at most only one measure among many others for the attainment
of an end here lamely described as “paving the way for the solution of
the social question,”  as though in our case there were still a social question
that remained unsolved in theory! Thus, if you were to say: The
German workers’ party strives to abolish wage labour and hence class distinctions
by introducing co-operative production into industry and agriculture, and
on a national scale; it is in favour of any measure calculated to attain
that end!  —  then no Lassallean could possibly object.
Fifthly, there is absolutely no mention of the organisation of
the working class as a class through the medium of trade unions. And that
is a point of the utmost importance, this being the proletariat’s true
class organisation in which it fights its daily battles with capital, in
which it trains itself and which nowadays can no longer simply be smashed,
even with reaction at its worst (as presently in Paris). Considering the
importance this organisation is likewise assuming in Germany, it would
in our view be indispensable to accord it some mention in the programme
and, possibly, to leave some room for it in the organisation of the party.
All these things have been done by our people to oblige the Lassalleans.
And what have the others conceded? That a host of somewhat muddled and
purely democratic demands should figure in the programme, some of
them being of a purely fashionable nature  —  for instance “legislation
by the people” such as exists in Switzerland and does more harm than good,
if it can be said to do anything at all. Administration by the people
 —  that would at least be something. Similarly omitted is the first prerequisite
of all liberty  —  that all officials be responsible for all their official
actions to every citizen before the ordinary courts and in accordance with
common law. That demands such as freedom of science and freedom of conscience
figure in every liberal bourgeois programme and seem a trifle out of place
here is something I shall not enlarge upon.

The free people’s state is transformed into the free state. Grammatically
speaking, a free state is one in which the state is free vis-à-vis its
citizens, a state, that is, with a despotic government. All the palaver
about the state ought to be dropped, especially after the Commune, which
had ceased to be a state in the true sense of the term. The people’s
state has been flung in our teeth ad nauseam by the anarchists,
although Marx’s anti-Proudhon piece and after it the Communist Manifesto
declare outright that, with the introduction of the socialist order of
society, the state will dissolve of itself and disappear. Now, since the
state is merely a transitional institution of which use is made in the
struggle, in the revolution, to keep down one’s enemies by force, it is
utter nonsense to speak of a free people’s state; so long as the proletariat
still makes use of the state, it makes use of it, not for the purpose
of freedom, but of keeping down its enemies and, as soon as there can be
any question of freedom, the state as such ceases to exist. We would therefore
suggest that Gemeinwesen ["commonalty"] be universally substituted
for state; it is a good old German word that can very well do service
for the French “Commune.” 
"The elimination of all social and political inequality,”  rather
than “the abolition of all class distinctions,”  is similarly a most dubious
expression. As between one country, one province and even one place and
another, living conditions will always evince a certain inequality
which may be reduced to a minimum but never wholly eliminated. The living
conditions of Alpine dwellers will always be different from those of the
plainsmen. The concept of a socialist society as a realm of equality
is a one-sided French concept deriving from the old “liberty, equality,
fraternity,”  a concept which was justified in that, in its own time and
place, it signified a phase of development, but which, like all
the one-sided ideas of earlier socialist schools, ought now to be superseded,
since they produce nothing but mental confusion, and more accurate ways
of presenting the matter have been discovered.
I shall desist, although almost every word in this programme,
a programme which is, moreover, insipidly written, lays itself open to
criticism. It is such that, should it be adopted, Marx and I could never
recognise a new party set up on that basis and shall have to consider
most seriously what attitude  —  public as well as private  —  we should
adopt towards it. [11] Remember that abroad we
are held responsible for any and every statement and action of the German
Social-Democratic Workers’ Party. E.g. by Bakunin in his work Statehood
and Anarchy, in which we are made to answer for every injudicious word
spoken or written by Liebknecht since the inception of the Demokratisches
Wochenblatt. People imagine that we run the whole show from here, whereas
you know as well as I do that we have hardly ever interfered in the least
with internal party affairs, and then only in an attempt to make good,
as far as possible, what we considered to have been blunders  —  and only
theoretical blunders at that. But, as you yourself will realise, this
programme marks a turning-point which may very well force us to renounce
any kind of responsibility in regard to the party that adopts it.
Generally speaking, less importance attaches to the official programme
of a party than to what it does. But a new programme is after all
a banner planted in public, and the outside world judges the party by it.
Hence, whatever happens there should be no going-back, as there is here,
on the Eisenach programme. It should further be considered what the workers
of other countries will think of this programme; what impression will be
created by this genuflection on the part of the entire German socialist
proletariat before Lassalleanism.
I am, moreover, convinced that a union on this basis would
not last a year. Are the best minds of our party to descend to repeating,
parrot-fashion, Lassallean maxims concerning the iron law of wages and
state aid? I’d like to see you, for one, thus employed! And were they to
do so, their audiences would hiss them off the stage. And I feel sure that
it is precisely on these bits of the programme that the Lassalleans
are insisting, like Shylock the Jew on his pound of flesh. The split will
come; but we shall have “made honest men” again of Hasselmann, Hasenclever
and Tolcke and Co.; we shall emerge from the split weaker and the Lassalleans
stronger; our party will have lost its political virginity and will never
again be able to come out whole-heartedly against the Lassallean maxims
which for a time it inscribed on its own banner; and then, should the Lassalleans
again declare themselves to be the sole and most genuine workers’ party
and our people to be bourgeois, the programme would be there to prove it.
All the socialist measures in it are theirs, and our party
has introduced nothing save the demands of that petty-bourgeois democracy
which it has itself described in that same programme as part of
the “reactionary mass"!
I had held this letter back in view of the fact that you would
only be released on April 1, in honour of Bismarck’s birthday, [12]
not wanting to expose it to the risk of interception in the course of an
attempt to smuggle it in. Well, I have just had a letter from Bracke, who
has also felt grave doubts about the programme and asks for our opinion.
I shall therefore send this letter to him for forwarding, so that he can
read it without my having to write the whole thing over again. I have,
by the way, also spoken my mind to Ramm; to Liebknecht I wrote but briefly.
I cannot forgive his not having told us a single word about the
whole business (whereas Ramm and others believed he had given us exact
information) until it was, in a manner of speaking, too late. True, this
has always been his wont  —  hence the large amount of disagreeable correspondence
which we, both Marx and myself, have had with him, but this time it really
is too bad, and we definitely shan’t act in concert with him.
Do see that you manage to come here in the summer; you would,
of course, stay with me and, if the weather is fine, we might spend a day
or two taking sea baths, which would really do you good after your long
spell in jail.

Ever your friend,

F. E.
Marx has just moved house. He is living at 41 Maitland Park Crescent,
NW London.


Footnotes

1. Engels’ letter to August Bebel written between
March 18 and 28, 1875 is closely connected with Marx’s Critique of the
Gotha Programme and is traditionally published together with the latter
work. It conveyed the joint opinion of Marx and Engels concerning the fusion
of two German workers’ parties, the Eisenachers and the Lassalleans, scheduled
for early 1875. The immediate reason for the letter was the publication
of the draft programme of the future united Social-Democratic Workers’
Party of Germany (Programm der deutschen Arbeiterpartei) in Der
Volksstaat (the organ of the Eisenachers) and the Neuer Social-Demokrat
(the organ of the Lassalleans) on March 7, 1875. The draft programme was
approved with slight changes by the unity congress at Gotha on May 22-27,
1875, and came to be known as the Gotha Programme.

This letter was first published by Bebel, after the lapse of 36
years, in his Aus meinem Leben, Zweiter Teil, Stuttgart, 1911. In
the present edition the letter is printed according to this book.

It was published in English for the first time in: K. Marx, Critique
of the Gotha Programme, Lawrence, London [1933], pp. 51-62.

2. A reference to one of Lassalle’s programme
theses on the establishment of workers’ producer associations with the
aid of the state. Lassalle and his followers repeatedly emphasised that
what they had in mind was a state in which power would pass into the hands
of the working people through universal suffrage.

3. Engels is referring to the Programm
und Statuten der sozial-demokratischen Arbeiter-Partei, adopted at
the general German workers’ congress in Eisenach in August 1869 and published
in the Demokratisches Wochenblatt on August 14, 1869. The congress
founded the Social-Democratic Workers’ Party of Germany. By and large the
programme complied with the principles of the International Working Men’s
Association.

4. The "honest men”  —  nickname
of the members of the Social-Democratic Workers’ Party (the Eisenachers),
as distinct from the members of the General Association of German Workers
(the Lassalleans), the “dishonest men.” 

5. The German People’s Party,
established in September 1868, embraced the democratic section of the bourgeoisie,
mostly in the South-German states. The party opposed the establishment
of Prussian hegemony in Germany and advocated the idea of a federative
German state.

6. A reference to the following articles
of the draft Gotha Programme:


"The German workers’ party demands as the free basis of the state:

"1. Universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot for
all males who have reached the age of 21, for all elections in the state
and in the community. 2. Direct legislation by the people with the right
to initiate and to reject bills. 3. Universal military training. A people’s
militia in place of the standing army. Decisions regarding war and peace
to be taken by a representative assembly of the people. 4. Abolition of
all exceptional laws, in particular the laws on the press, associations
and assembly. 5. Jurisdiction by the people. Administration of justice
without fees.

"The German workers’ party demands as the intellectual and moral
basis of the state:

"1. Universal and equal education of the people by the state.
Compulsory school attendance. Free instruction. 2. Freedom of science.
Freedom of conscience."


7. The reference is to the Franco-Prussian war
of 1870-71.

8. The League of Peace and Freedom
 —  A pacifist organisation set up in Switzerland in 1867 with the active
participation of Victor Hugo, Giuseppe Garibaldi and other democrats. The
League asserted that it was possible to prevent wars by creating the “United
States of Europe.” Its leaders did not disclose the social sources of wars
and often confined anti-militarist activity to mere declarations. At the
General Council meeting of August 13, 1867 Marx spoke against the International’s
official participation in the League’s Inaugural Congress, since this would
have meant solidarity with its bourgeois programme, but recommended that
some members of the International should attend the Congress in their personal
capacity in order to support revolutionary-democratic decisions (see Marx’s
letter to Engels of September 4, 1867).

9. On page 5 of his Arbeiterlesebuch
Lassalle quotes a passage about the “iron law of wages” from his pamphlet
Offnes Antwortschreiben an das Central-Comite zur Berufung eines
Allgemeinen Deutschen Arbeitercongresses zu Leipzig, Zurich, 1863, pp.
15-16.

10. Philippe Joseph Buchez, one of the
first ideologists of the so-called Christian socialism, advanced a plan
for the establishment of workers’ producer associations with the aid of
the state.

11. On October 12, 1875 Engels wrote
to Bebel concerning this programme that, since both workers and their political
opponents “interpreted it communistically,”  “it is this circumstance
alone which has made it possible for Marx and myself not to disassociate
ourselves publicly from a programme such as this. So long as our opponents
as well as the workers continue to read our views into that programme,
we are justified in saying nothing about it.” 

12. In March 1872 August Bebel and Wilhelm
Liebknecht were sentenced to two years’ confinement in a fortress for their
adhesion to the International Working Men’s Association and their socialist
views. In April Bebel was sentenced, in addition, to nine months’ imprisonment
and deprived of his mandate as a Reichstag member for “insulting His Majesty.” 
Liebknecht was released on April 15, 1874, while Bebel was freed on April
1, 1875.
 


Critique of the Gotha Programme
1875 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx/Engels Archive





==========

## Letter from Engels to Karl Kautsky









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## Introduction to Dialectics of Nature






1883-Dialectics of Nature-Introduction






Dialectics of Nature. Frederick Engels (1883)

1. INTRODUCTION

MODERN natural science, which alone has achieved an all-round systematic and scientific
development, as contrasted with the brilliant natural-philosophical intuitions of antiquity
and the extremely important but sporadic discoveries of the Arabs, which for the most part
vanished without results – this modern natural science dates, like all more recent history,
from that mighty epoch which we Germans term the Reformation, from the national misfortune
that overtook us at that time, and which the French term the Renaissance and the Italians the
Cinquecento, although it is not fully expressed by any of these names. It is the epoch which
had its rise in the last half of the fifteenth century. Royalty, with the support of the
burghers of the towns, broke the power of the feudal nobility and established the great
monarchies, based essentially on nationality, within which the modern European nations and
modern bourgeois society came to development. And while the burghers and nobles were still
fighting one another, the peasant war in Germany pointed prophetically to future class
struggles, not only by bringing on to the stage the peasants in revolt – that was no longer
anything new – but behind them the beginnings of the modern proletariat, with the red flag in
their hands and the demand for common ownership of goods on their lips. In the manuscripts
saved from the fall of Byzantium, in the antique statues dug out of the ruins of Rome, a new
world was revealed to the astonished West, that of ancient Greece: the ghosts of the Middle
Ages vanished before its shining forms; Italy rose to an undreamt-of flowering of art, which
seemed like a reflection of classical antiquity and was never attained again. In Italy,
France, and Germany a new literature arose, the first, modern literature; shortly afterwards
came the classical epochs of English and Spanish literature. The bounds of the old orbis
terrarum were pierced. Only now for the first time was the world really discovered and
the basis laid for subsequent world trade and the transition from handicraft to manufacture,
which in its turn formed the starting-point for modern large scale industry. The dictatorship
of the Church over men's minds was shattered; it was directly cast off by the majority of the
Germanic peoples, who adopted Protestantism, while among the Latins a cheerful spirit of free
thought, taken over from the Arabs and nourished by the newly-discovered Greek philosophy,
took root more and more and prepared the way for the materialism of the eighteenth
century.

It was the greatest progressive revolution that mankind has so far experienced, a time
which called for giants and produced giants – giants in power of thought, passion, and
character, in universality and learning. The men who founded the modern rule of the
bourgeoisie had anything but bourgeois limitations. On the contrary, the adventurous
character of the time inspired them to a greater or less degree. There was hardly any man of
importance then living who had not travelled extensively, who did not command four or five
languages, who did not shine in a number of fields. Leonardo da Vinci was not only a great
painter but also a great mathematician, mechanician, and engineer, to whom the most diverse
branches of physics are indebted for important discoveries. Albrecht Dürer was painter,
engraver, sculptor, and architect, and in addition invented a system of fortification
embodying many of the ideas that much later were again taken up by Montalembert and the
modern German science of fortification. Machiavelli was statesman, historian, poet, and at
the same time the first notable military author of modern times. Luther not only cleaned the
Augean stable of the Church but also that of the German language; he created modern German
prose and composed the text and melody of that triumphal hymn which became the Marseillaise
of the sixteenth century. The heroes of that time had not yet come under the servitude of the
division of labour, the restricting effects of which, with its production of onesidedness, we
so often notice in their successors. But what is especially characteristic of them is that
they almost all pursue their lives and activities in the midst of the contemporary movements,
in the practical struggle; they take sides and join in the fight, one by speaking and
writing, another with the sword, many with both. Hence the fullness and force of character
that makes them complete men. Men of the study are the exception – either persons of second
or third rank or cautious philistines who do not want to burn their fingers.

At that time natural science also developed in the midst of the general revolution and was
itself thoroughly revolutionary; it had to win in struggle its right of existence. Side by
side with the great Italians from whom modern philosophy dates, it provided its martyrs for
the stake and the prisons of the Inquisition. And it is characteristic that Protestants
outdid Catholics in persecuting the free investigation of nature. Calvin had Servetus burnt
at the stake when the latter was on the point of discovering the circulation of the blood,
and indeed he kept him roasting alive during two hours; for the Inquisition at least it
sufficed to have Giordano Bruno simply burnt alive.

The revolutionary act by which natural science declared its independence and, as it were,
repeated Luther's burning of the Papal Bull was the publication of the immortal work by which
Copernicus, though timidly and, so to speak, only from his deathbed, threw down the gauntlet
to ecclesiastical authority in the affairs of nature. The emancipation of natural science
from theology dates from this act, although the fighting out of the particular antagonistic
claims has dragged out up to our day and in many minds is still far from completion.
Thenceforward, however, the development of the sciences proceeded with giant strides, and, it
might be said, gained in force in proportion to the square of the distance (in time) from its
point of departure. It was as if the world were to be shown that henceforth the reciprocal
law of motion would be as valid for the highest product of organic matter, the human mind, as
for inorganic substance.

The main work in the first period of natural science that now opened lay in mastering the
material immediately at hand. In most fields a start had to be made from the very beginning.
Antiquity had bequeathed Euclid and the Ptolemaic solar system; the Arabs had left behind the
decimal notation, the beginnings of algebra, the modern numerals, and alchemy; the Christian
Middle Ages nothing at all. Of necessity, in this situation the most fundamental natural
science, the mechanics of terrestrial and heavenly bodies, occupied first place, and
alongside of it, as handmaiden to it, the discovery and perfecting of mathematical methods.
Great work was achieved here. At the end of the period characterised by Newton and Linnaeus we
find these branches of science brought to a certain perfection. The basic features of the
most essential mathematical methods were established; analytical geometry by Descartes
especially, logarithms by Napier, and the differential and integral calculus by Leibniz and
perhaps Newton. The same holds good of the mechanics of rigid bodies, the main laws of which
were made clear once for all. Finally in the astronomy of the solar system Kepler discovered
the laws of planetary movement and Newton formulated them from the point of view of the
general laws of motion of matter. The other branches of natural science were far removed even
from this preliminary perfection. Only towards the end of the period did the mechanics of
fluid and gaseous bodies receive further treatment. Physics proper had still not gone beyond
its first beginnings, with the exception of optics, the exceptional progress of which was due
to the practical needs of astronomy. By the phlogistic theory, chemistry for the first time
emancipated itself from alchemy. Geology had not yet gone beyond the embryonic stage of
mineralogy; hence paleontology could not yet exist at all. Finally, in the field of biology
the essential preoccupation was still with the collection and first sifting of the immense
material, not only botanical and zoological but also anatomical and even physiological. There
could as yet be hardly any talk of the comparison of the various forms of life, of the
investigation of their geographical distribution and their climatic, etc., living conditions.
Here only botany and zoology arrived at an approximate completion owing to Linnaeus.

But what especially characterises this period is the elaboration of a peculiar general
outlook, in which the central point is the view of the absolute immutability of
nature. In whatever way nature itself might have come into being, once present it
remained as it was as long as it continued to exist. The planets and their satellites, once
set in motion by the mysterious "first impulse", circled on and on in their predestined
ellipses for all eternity, or at any rate until the end of all things. The stars remained for
ever fixed and immovable in their places, keeping one another therein by "universal
gravitation". The earth had persisted without alteration from all eternity, or,
alternatively, from the first day of its creation. The "five continents" of the present day
had always existed, and they had always had the same mountains, valleys, and rivers, the same
climate, and the same flora and fauna, except in so far as change or cultivation had taken
place at the hand of man. The species of plants and animals had been established once for all
when they came into existence; like continually produced like, and it was already a good deal
for Linnaeus to have conceded that possibly here and there new species could have arisen by
crossing. In contrast to the history of mankind, which develops in time, there was ascribed
to the history of nature only an unfolding in space. All change, all development in nature,
was denied. Natural science, so revolutionary at the outset, suddenly found itself confronted
by an out-and-out conservative nature in which even to-day everything was as it had been at
the beginning and in which – to the end of the world or for all eternity – everything would
remain as it had been since the beginning.

High as the natural science of the first half of the eighteenth century stood above Greek
antiquity in knowledge and even in the sifting of its material, it stood just as deeply below
Greek antiquity in the theoretical mastery of this material, in the general outlook on
nature. For the Greek philosophers the world was essentially something that had emerged from
chaos, something that had developed, that had come into being. For the natural scientists of
the period that we are dealing with it was something ossified, something immutable, and for
most of them something that had been created at one stroke. Science was still deeply enmeshed
in theology. Everywhere it sought and found its ultimate resort in an impulse from outside
that was not to be explained from nature itself. Even if attraction, by Newton pompously
baptised as "universal gravitation", was conceived as an essential property of matter, whence
comes the unexplained tangential force which first gives rise to the orbits of the planets?
How did the innumerable varieties of animals and plants arise? And how, above all, did man
arise, since after all it was certain that he was not present from all eternity? To such
questions natural science only too frequently answered by making the creator of all things
responsible. Copernicus, at the beginning of the period, writes a letter renouncing theology;
Newton closes the period with the postulate of a divine first impulse. The highest general
idea to which this natural science attained was that of the purposiveness of the arrangements
of nature, the shallow teleology of Wolff, according to which cats were created to eat mice,
mice to he eaten by cats, and the whole of nature to testify to the wisdom of the creator. It
is to the highest credit of the philosophy of the time that it did not let itself be led
astray by the restricted state of contemporary natural knowledge, and that – from Spinoza
right to the great French materialists – it insisted on explaining the world from the world
itself and left the justification in detail to the natural science of the future.

I include the materialists of the eighteenth century in this period because no natural
scientific material was available to them other than that above described. Kant's epoch-making work remained a secret to them, and Laplace came long after them. We should not forget
that this obsolete outlook on nature, although riddled through and through by the progress of
science, dominated the entire first half of the nineteenth century, and in substance is even
now still taught in all schools. 1

The first breach in this petrified outlook on nature was made not by a natural scientist
but by a philosopher. In 1755 appeared Kant's Allgemeine Naturgesehichte und Theorie des
Himmels [General Natural History and Theory of the Heavens]. The question of the first
impulse was abolished; the earth and the whole solar system appeared as something that had
come into being in the course of time. If the great majority of the natural scientists had
had a little less of the repugnance to thinking that Newton expressed in the warning: 
 "Physics, beware of metaphysics!", they would have been compelled from this single brilliant
discovery of Kant's to draw conclusions that would have spared them endless deviations and
immeasurable amounts of time and labour wasted in false directions. For Kant's discovery
contained the point of departure for all further progress. If the earth were something that
had come into being, then its present geological, geographical, and climatic state, and its
plants and animals likewise, must be something that had come into being; it must have had a
history not only of co-existence in space but also of succession in time. If at once further
investigations had been resolutely pursued in this direction, natural science would now be
considerably further advanced than it is. But what good could come of philosophy? Kant's work
remained without immediate results, until many years later Laplace and Herschel expounded its
contents and gave them a deeper foundation, thereby gradually bringing the "nebular
hypothesis" into favour. Further discoveries finally brought it victory; the most important
of these were: the proper motion of the fixed stars, the demonstration of a resistant medium
in universal space, the proof furnished by spectral analysis of the chemical identity of the
matter of the universe and the existence of such glowing nebular masses as Kant had
postulated.

It is, however, permissible to doubt whether the majority of natural scientists would so
soon have become conscious of the contradiction of a changing earth that bore immutable
organisms, had not the dawning conception that nature does not just exist, but
comes into being and passes away, derived support from another quarter. Geology
arose and pointed out, not only the terrestrial strata formed one after another and deposited
one upon another, but also the shells and skeletons of extinct animals and the trunks,
leaves, and fruits of no longer existing plants contained in these strata. It had finally to
be acknowledged that not only the earth as a whole but also its present surface and the
plants and animals living on it possessed a history in time. At first the acknowledgement
occurred reluctantly enough. Cuvier's theory of the revolutions of the earth was
revolutionary in phrase and reactionary in substance. In place of a single divine creation,
he put a whole series of repeated acts of creation, making the miracle an essential natural
agent. Lyell first brought sense into geology by substituting for the sudden revolutions due
to the moods of the creator the gradual effects of a slow transformation of the earth. 2

Lyell's theory was even more incompatible than any of its predecessors with the assumption
of constant organic species. Gradual transformation of the earth's surface and of all
conditions of life led directly to gradual transformation of the organisms and their
adaptation to the changing environment, to the mutability of species. But tradition is a
power not only in the Catholic Church but also in natural science. For years, Lyell himself
did not see the contradiction, and his pupils still less. This is only to be explained by the
division of labour that had meanwhile become dominant in natural science, which more or less
restricted each person to his special sphere, there being only a few whom it did not rob of a
comprehensive view. Meanwhile physics had made mighty advances, the results of which were
summed up almost simultaneously by three different persons in the year 1842, an epoch-making
year for this branch of natural investigation. Mayer in Heilbronn and Joule in Manchester
demonstrated the transformation of heat into mechanical energy and of mechanical energy into
heat. The determination of the mechanical equivalent of heat put this result beyond question.
Simultaneously, by simply working up the separate physical results already arrived at, Grove
- not a natural scientist by profession, but an English lawyer – proved that all so-called
physical energy, mechanical energy, heat, light, electricity magnetism, indeed even so-called
chemical energy, become transformed into one another under definite conditions without any
loss of energy occurring, and so proved post factum along physical lines Descartes'
principle that the quantity of motion present in the world is constant. With that the special
physical energies, the as it were immutable "species" of physics, were resolved into
variously differentiated forms of the motion of matter, convertible into one another
according to definite laws. The fortuitousness of the existence of a number of physical
energies was abolished from science by the proof of their interconnections and transitions.
Physics, like astronomy before it, had arrived at a result that necessarily pointed to the
eternal cycle of matter in motion as the ultimate reality.

The wonderfully rapid development of chemistry, since Lavoisier, and especially since
Dalton, attacked the old ideas of nature from another aspect. The preparation by inorganic
means of compounds that hitherto had been produced only in the living organism proved that
the laws of chemistry have the same validity for organic as for inorganic bodies, and to a
large extent bridged the gulf between inorganic and organic nature, a gulf that even Kant
regarded as for ever impassable.

Finally, in the sphere of biological research also the scientific journeys and expeditions
that had been systematically organised since the middle of the previous century, the more
thorough exploration of the European colonies in all parts of the world by specialists living
there, and further the progress of paleontology, anatomy, and physiology in general,
particularly since the systematic use of the microscope and the discovery of the cell, had
accumulated so much material that the application of the comparative method became possible
and at the same time indispensable. On the one hand the conditions of life of the various
floras and faunas were determined by means of comparative physical geography; on the other
hand the various organisms were compared with one another according to their homologous
organs, and this not only in the adult condition but at all stages of development. The more
deeply and exactly this research was carried on, the more did the rigid system of an



immutable, fixed organic nature crumble away at its touch. Not only did the separate species
of plants and animals become more and more inextricably intermingled, but animals turned up,
such as Amphioxus and Lepidosiren, that made a mockery of all previous
classification, and finally organisms were encountered of which it was not possible to say
whether they belonged to the plant or animal kingdom. More and more the gaps in the



paleontological record were filled up, compelling even the most reluctant to acknowledge the
striking parallelism between the evolutionary history of the organic world as a whole and
that of the individual organism, the Ariadne's thread that was to lead the way out of the
labyrinth in which botany and zoology appeared to have become more and more deeply lost. It
was characteristic that, almost simultaneously with Kant's attack on the eternity of the
solar system, C. F. Wolff in 1759 launched the first attack on the fixity of species and
proclaimed the theory of descent. But what in his case was still only a brilliant
anticipation took firm shape in the hands of Oken, Lamarck, Baer, and was victoriously
carried through by Darwin in 1859, exactly a hundred years later. Almost simultaneously it
was established that protoplasm and the cell, which had already been shown to be the ultimate
morphological constituents of all organisms, occurred independently as the lowest forms of
organic life. This not only reduced the gulf between inorganic and organic nature to a
minimum but removed one of the most essential difficulties that had previously stood in the
way of the theory of descent of organisms. The new conception of nature was complete in its
main features; all rigidity was dissolved, all fixity dissipated, all particularity that had
been regarded as eternal became transient, the whole of nature shown as moving in eternal
flux and cyclical course.

Thus we have once again returned to the point of view of the great founders of Greek
philosophy, the view that the whole of nature, from the smallest element to the greatest,



from grains of sand to suns, from protista to men, has its existence in eternal coming into
being and passing away, in ceaseless flux, in un-resting motion and change, only with the
essential difference that what for the Greeks was a brilliant intuition, is in our case the
result of strictly scientific research in accordance with experience, and hence also it
emerges in a much more definite and clear form. It is true that the empirical proof of this
motion is not wholly free from gaps, but these are insignificant in comparison with what has
already been firmly established, and with each year they become more and more filled up. And
how could the proof in detail be otherwise than defective when one bears in mind that the
most essential branches of science —trans-planetary astronomy, chemistry, geology— have a scientific existence of barely a hundred years, and the comparative method in physiology one
of barely fifty years, and that the basic form of almost all organic development, the cell,
is a discovery not yet forty years old?

The innumerable suns and solar systems of our island universe, bounded by the outermost
stellar rings of the Milky Way, developed from swirling, glowing masses of vapour, the laws
of motion of which will perhaps be disclosed after the observations of some centuries have
given us an insight into the proper motion of the stars. Obviously, this development did not
proceed everywhere at the same rate. Recognition of. the existence of dark bodies, not merely
planetary in nature, hence extinct suns in our stellar system, more and more forces itself on
astronomy (Mädler); on the other hand (according to Secchi) a part of the vaporous
nebular patches belong to our stellar system as suns not yet fully formed, whereby it is not
excluded that other nebulae, as Mädler maintains, are distant independent island
universes, the relative stage of development of which must be determined by the
spectroscope.

How a solar system develops from an individual nebular mass has been shown in detail by
Laplace in a manner still unsurpassed; subsequent science has more and more confirmed
him.

On the separate bodies so formed – suns as well as planets and satellites – the form of
motion of matter at first prevailing is that which we call heat. There can be no question of
chemical compounds of the elements even at a temperature like that still possessed by the
sun; the extent to which heat is transformed into electricity or magnetism under such
conditions, continued solar observations will show; it is already as good as proved that the
mechanical motion taking place in the sun arises solely from the conflict of heat with
gravity.

The smaller the individual bodies, the quicker they cool down, the satellites,
asteroids, and meteors first of all, just as our moon has long been extinct.
The planets cool more slowly, the central body slowest of all.

With progressive cooling the interplay of the physical forms of motion
which become transformed into one another comes more and more to the forefront
until finally a point is reached from when on chemical affinity begins
to make itself felt, the previously chemically indifferent elements become
differentiated chemically one after another, obtain chemical properties,
and enter into combination with one another. These compounds change continually
with the decreasing temperature, which affects differently not only each
element but also each separate compound of the elements, changing also
with the consequent passage of part of the gaseous matter first to the
liquid and then the solid state, and with the new conditions thus created.

The period when the planet has a firm shell and accumulations of water
on its surface coincides with that when its intrinsic heat diminishes more
and more in comparison to the heat emitted to it from the central body.
Its atmosphere becomes the arena of meteorological phenomena in the sense
in which we now understand the word; its surface becomes the arena of geological
changes in which the deposits resulting from atmospheric precipitation
become of ever greater importance in comparison to the slowly decreasing
external effects of the hot fluid interior.

If, finally, the temperature becomes so far equalised that over a considerable
portion of the surface at least it does not exceed the limits within which
protein is capable of life, then, if other chemical conditions are favourable,
living protoplasm is formed. What these conditions are, we do not yet know,
which is not to be wondered at since so far not even the chemical formula
of protein has been established – we do not even know how many chemically
different protein bodies there are – and since it is only about ten years
ago that the fact became known that completely structureless protein exercises
all the essential functions of life, digestion, excretion, movement, contraction,
reaction to stimuli, and reproduction.

Thousands of years may have passed before the conditions arose in which
the next advance could take place and this formless protein produce the
first cell by formation of nucleus and cell membrane. Rut this first cell
also provided the foundation for the morphological development of the whole
organic world; the first to develop, as it is permissible to assume from
the whole analogy of the palæontological record, were innumerable
species of non-cellular and cellular protista, of which Eozoon canadense
alone has come down to us, and of which some were gradually differentiated
into the first plants and others into the first animals. And from the first
animals were developed, essentially by further differentiation, the numerous
classes, orders, families, genera, and species of animals; and finally
mammals, the form in which the nervous system attains its fullest development;
and among these again finally that mammal in which nature attains consciousness
of itself – man.

Man too arises by differentiation. Not only individually, by differentiation
from a single egg cell to the most complicated organism that nature produces
- no, also historically. When after thousands of years of struggle the
differentiation of hand from foot, and erect gait, were finally established,
man became distinct from the monkey and the basis was laid for the development
of articulate speech and the mighty development of the brain that has since
made the gulf between man and monkey an unbridgeable one. The specialisation
of the hand – this implies the tool, and the tool implies specific human
activity, the transforming reaction of man on nature, production. Animals
in the narrower sense also have tools, but only as limbs of their bodies:
the ant, the bee, the beaver; animals also produce, but their productive
effect on surrounding nature in relation to the latter amounts to nothing
at all. Man alone has succeeded in impressing his stamp on nature, not
only by shifting the plant and animal world from one place to another,
but also by so altering the aspect and climate of his dwelling place, and
even the plants and animals themselves, that the consequences of his activity
can disappear only with the general extinction of the terrestrial globe.
And he has accomplished this primarily and essentially by means of the
hand. Even the steam engine, so far his most powerful tool for the transformation
of nature, depends, because it is a tool, in the last resort on the
hand. But step by step with the development of the hand went that of
the brain; first of all consciousness of the conditions for separate practically
useful actions, and later, among the more favoured peoples and arising
from the preceding, insight into the natural laws governing them. And with
the rapidly growing knowledge of the laws of nature the means for reacting
on nature also grew; the hand alone would never have achieved the steam
engine if the brain of man had not attained a correlative development with
it, and parallel to it, and partly owing to it.

With men we enter history. Animals also have a history, that
of their derivation and gradual evolution to their present position. This
history, however, is made for them, and in so far as they themselves take
part in it, this occurs without their knowledge or desire. On the other
hand, the more that human beings become removed from animals in the narrower
sense of the word, the more they make their own history consciously, the
less becomes the influence of unforeseen effects and uncontrolled forces
of this history, and the more accurately does the historical result correspond
to the aim laid down in advance. If, however, we apply this measure to
human history, to that of even the most developed peoples of the present
day, we find that there still exists here a colossal disproportion between
the proposed aims and the results arrived at, that unforeseen effects predominate,
and that the uncontrolled forces are far more powerful than those set into
motion according to plan. And this cannot be otherwise as long as the most
essential historical activity of men, the one which has raised them from
bestiality to humanity and which forms the material foundation of all their
other activities, namely the production of their requirements of life,
that is to-day social production, is above all subject to the interplay
of unintended effects from uncontrolled forces and achieves its desired
end only by way of exception and, much more frequently, the exact opposite.
In the most advanced industrial countries we have subdued the forces of
nature and pressed them into the service of mankind; we have thereby infinitely
multiplied production, so that a child now produces more than a hundred
adults previously did. And what is the result? Increasing overwork and
increasing misery of the masses, and every ten years a great collapse.
Darwin did not know what a bitter satire he wrote on mankind, and especially
on his countrymen, when he showed that free competition, the struggle for
existence, which the economists celebrate as the highest historical achievement,
is the normal state of the animal kingdom. Only conscious organisation
of social production, in which production and distribution are carried
on in a planned way, can lift mankind above the rest of the animal world
as regards the social aspect, in the same way that production in general
has done this for men in their aspect as species. Historical evolution
makes such an organisation daily more indispensable, but also with every
day more possible. From it will date a new epoch of history, in which mankind
itself, and with mankind all branches of its activity, and especially natural
science, will experience an advance that will put everything preceding
it in the deepest shade.

Nevertheless, "all that comes into being deserves to perish". Millions
of years may elapse, hundreds of thousands of generations be born and die,
but inexorably the time will come when the declining warmth of the sun
will no longer suffice to melt the ice thrusting itself forward from the
poles; when the human race, crowding more and more about the equator, will
finally no longer find even there enough heat for life; when gradually
even the last trace of organic life will vanish; and the earth, an extinct
frozen globe like the moon, will circle in deepest darkness and in an ever
narrower orbit about the equally extinct sun, and at last fall into it.
Other planets will have preceded it, others will follow it; instead of
the bright, warm solar system with its harmonious arrangement of members,
only a cold, dead sphere will still pursue its lonely path through universal
space. And what will happen to our solar system will happen sooner or later
to all the other systems of our island universe; it will happen to all
the other innumerable island universes, even to those the light of which
will never reach the earth while there is a living human eye to receive
it.

And when such a solar system has completed its life history and succumbs
to the fate of all that is finite, death, what then? Will the sun's corpse
roll on for all eternity through infinite space, and all the once infinitely
diverse, differentiated natural forces pass for ever into one single form
of motion, attraction ? "Or" – as Secchi asks – "do forces exist in nature
which can re-convert the dead system into its original state of an incandescent
nebula and re-awake it to new life? We do not know".

At all events we do not know in the sense that we know that 2 × 2 =
4, or that the attraction of matter increases and decreases according to
the square of the distance. In theoretical natural science, however, which
as far as possible builds up its view of nature into a harmonious whole,
and without which nowadays even the most thoughtless empiricist cannot
get anywhere, we have very often to reckon with incompletely known magnitudes;
and logical consistency of thought must at all times help to get over defective
knowledge. Modern natural science has had to take over from philosophy
the principle of the indestructibility of motion; it cannot any longer
exist without this principle. But the motion of matter is not merely crude
mechanical motion, mere change of place, it is heat and light, electric
and magnetic stress, chemical combination and dissociation, life and, finally,
consciousness. To say that matter during the whole unlimited time of its
existence has only once, and for what is an infinitesimally short period
in comparison to its eternity, found itself able to differentiate its motion
and thereby to unfold the whole wealth of this motion, and that before
and a.fter this remains restricted for eternity to mere change of place
- this is equivalent to maintaining that matter is mortal and motion transitory.
The indestructibility of motion cannot be merely quantitative, it must
also be conceived qualitatively; matter whose purely mechanical change
of place includes indeed the possibility under favourable conditions of
being transformed into heat, electricity, chemical action, or life, but
which is not capable of producing these conditions from out of itself,
such matter has forfeited motion; motion which has lost the capacity
of being transformed into the various forms appropriate to it may indeed
still have dynamis but no longer energeia, and so has become
partially destroyed. Both, however, are unthinkable.

This much is certain: there was a time when the matter of our island
universe had transformed a quantity of motion – of what kind we
do not yet know – into heat, such that there could be developed from it
the solar systems appertaining to (according to Mädler) at least twenty
million stars, the gradual extinction of which is likewise certain. How
did this transformation take place? We know just as little as Father Secchi
knows whether the future caput mortuum of our solar system will
once again be converted into the raw material of a new solar system. But
here either we must have recourse to a creator, or we are forced to the
conclusion that the incandescent raw material for the solar system of our
universe was produced in a natural way by transformations of motion which
are by nature inherent in moving matter, and the conditions of which
therefore also must be reproduced by matter, even if only after millions
and millions of years and more or less by chance but with the necessity
that is also inherent in chance.

The possibility of such a transformation is more and more being conceded.
The view is being arrived at that the heavenly bodies are ultimately destined
to fall into one another, and one even calculates the amount of heat which
must be developed on such collisions. The sudden flaring up of new stars,
and the equally sudden increase in brightness of familiar ones, of which
we are informed by astronomy, is most easily explained by such collisions.
Not only does our group of planets move about the sun, and our sun within
our island universe, but our whole island universe also moves in space
in temporary, relative equilibrium with the other island universes, for
even the relative equilibrium of freely moving bodies can only exist where
the motion is reciprocally determined; and it is assumed by many that the
temperature in space is not everywhere the same. Finally, we know that,
with the exception of an infinitesimal portion, the heat of the innumerable
suns of our island universe vanishes into space and fails to raise the
temperature of space even by a millionth of a degree centigrade. What becomes
of all this enormous quantity of heat? Is it for ever dissipated in the
attempt to heat universal space, has it ceased to exist practically, and
does it only continue to exist theoretically, in the fact that universal
space has become warmer by a decimal fraction of a degree beginning with
ten or more noughts? The indestructibility of motion forbids such an assumption,
but it allows the possibility that by the successive falling into one another
of the bodies of the universe all existing mechanical motion will be converted
into heat and the latter radiated into space, so that in spite of all "indestructibility
of force" all motion in general would have ceased. (Incidentally it is
seen here how inaccurate is the term "indestructibility of force" instead
of "indestructibility of motion".) Hence we arrive at the conclusion that
in some way, which it will later be the task of scientific research to
demonstrate, the heat radiated into space must be able to become transformed
into another form of motion, in which it can once more be stored up and
rendered active. Thereby the chief difficulty in the way of the reconversion
of extinct suns into incandescent vapour disappears.

For the rest, the eternally repeated succession of worlds in infinite
time is only the logical complement to the co-existence of innumerable
worlds in infinite space – a principle the necessity of which has forced
itself even on the anti-theoretical Yankee brain of Draper.
3

It is an eternal cycle in which matter moves, a cycle that certainly
only completes its orbit in periods of time for which our terrestrial year
is no adequate measure, a cycle in which the time of highest development,
the time of organic life and still more that of the life of beings conscious
of nature and of themselves, is just as narrowly restricted as the space
in which life and self-consciousness come into operation; a cycle in which
every finite mode of existence of matter, whether it be sun or nebular
vapour, single animal or genus of animals, chemical combination or dissociation,
is equally transient, and wherein nothing is eternal but eternally changing,
eternally moving matter and the laws according to which it moves and changes.
But however often, and however relentlessly, this cycle is completed in
time and space, however many millions of suns and earths may arise and
pass away, however long it may last before the conditions for organic life
develop, however innumerable the organic beings that have to arise and
to pass away before animals with a brain capable of thought are developed
from their midst, and for a short span of time find conditions suitable
for life, only to be exterminated later without mercy, we have the certainty
that matter remains eternally the same in all its transformations, that
none of its attributes can ever be lost, and therefore, also, that with
the same iron necessity that it will exterminate on the earth its highest
creation, the thinking mind, it must somewhere else and at another time
again produce it.


Notes

1.
How tenaciously even in 1861 this view could be held by a man whose scientific
achievements had provided highly important material for abolishing it is
shown by the following classic words: 𔄙All the arraignments of our solar
system, so far as we are capable of comprehending them, aim st preservation
of what exists and at unchanging continuance. Just as since the most ancient
times no animal and no plant on the earth has become more perfect or in
any way different, just as we find in all organisms only stages alongside
of one another and not following one another, just as our own race has
always remained the same in corporeal respects – so even the greatest diversity
in the co-existing heavenly bodies does not justify us in assuming that
these forms are merely different stages of development; it is rather that
everything created is equally perfect in itself.” (Mädler, Popular Astronomy
Berlin, 1861, 5th edition, p. 316.)

2. The defect
of Lyell's view – at least in its first form – lay in conceiving the forces
at work on the earth as constant, both in quality and quantity. The cooling
of the earth does not exist for him; the earth does not develop in a definite
direction but merely changes in an inconsequent fortuitous manner.

3. "The multiplicity
of worlds in infinite space leads to the conception of a succession of
worlds in infinite time." J. W. Draper, History of the Intellectual
Development of Europe, 1864. Vol. 2, p. 325.

 


Contents |
next section |
Marx Engels Archive




==========

## Old Preface to [Anti]-Dühring. On Dialectics









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man







The Part Played by Labor in the Transition From Ape to Man


Works of Frederick Engels 1876
The Part played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man



Written: in May-June 1876;
First published: in Die Neue Zeit 1895-06;
Translated: from the German by Clemens Dutt;
First published in English: by Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1934;
Transcribed: by director@marx.org, Jan 1996.


This article was intended to introduce a larger work
which Engels planned to call Die drei Grundformen der Knechtschaft –
Outline of the General Plan. Engels never finished it, nor even this
intro, which breaks off at the end. It would be included in Dialectics
of Nature.

I
Labour is the source of all wealth, the political
economists assert. And it really is the source – next to nature, which
supplies it with the material that it converts into wealth. But it is even
infinitely more than this. It is the prime basic condition for all human
existence, and this to such an extent that, in a sense, we have to say
that labour created man himself.
Many hundreds of thousands of years ago, during an epoch, not
yet definitely determinable, of that period of the earth’s history known
to geologists as the Tertiary period, most likely towards the end of it,
a particularly highly-developed race of anthropoid apes lived somewhere
in the tropical zone – probably on a great continent that has now sunk
to the bottom of the Indian Ocean. [1] Darwin has given
us an approximate description of these ancestors of ours. They were completely
covered with hair, they had beards and pointed ears, and they lived in
bands in the trees.

First, owing to their way of living which meant that the hands
had different functions than the feet when climbing, these apes began to
lose the habit of using their hands to walk and adopted a more and more
erect posture. This was the decisive step in the transition from ape
to man.
All extant anthropoid apes can stand erect and move about on their
feet alone, but only in case of urgent need and in a very clumsy way. Their
natural gait is in a half-erect posture and includes the use of the hands.
The majority rest the knuckles of the fist on the ground and, with legs
drawn up, swing the body through their long arms, much as a cripple moves
on crutches. In general, all the transition stages from walking on all
fours to walking on two legs are still to be observed among the apes today.
The latter gait, however, has never become more than a makeshift for any
of them.
It stands to reason that if erect gait among our hairy ancestors
became first the rule and then, in time, a necessity, other diverse functions
must, in the meantime, have devolved upon the hands. Already among the
apes there is some difference in the way the hands and the feet are employed.
In climbing, as mentioned above, the hands and feet have different uses.
The hands are used mainly for gathering and holding food in the same way
as the fore paws of the lower mammals are used. Many apes use their hands
to build themselves nests in the trees or even to construct roofs between
the branches to protect themselves against the weather, as the chimpanzee,
for example, does. With their hands they grasp sticks to defend themselves
against enemies, or bombard their enemies with fruits and stones. In captivity
they use their hands for a number of simple operations copied from human
beings. It is in this that one sees the great gulf between the undeveloped
hand of even the most man-like apes and the human hand that has been highly
perfected by hundreds of thousands of years of labour. The number and general
arrangement of the bones and muscles are the same in both hands, but the
hand of the lowest savage can perform hundreds of operations that no simian
hand can imitate – no simian hand has ever fashioned even the crudest stone
knife.
The first operations for which our ancestors gradually learned
to adapt their hands during the many thousands of years of transition from
ape to man could have been only very simple ones. The lowest savages, even
those in whom regression to a more animal-like condition with a simultaneous
physical degeneration can be assumed, are nevertheless far superior to
these transitional beings. Before the first flint could be fashioned into
a knife by human hands, a period of time probably elapsed in comparison
with which the historical period known to us appears insignificant. But
the decisive step had been taken, the hand had become free and could
henceforth attain ever greater dexterity; the greater flexibility thus
acquired was inherited and increased from generation to generation.
Thus the hand is not only the organ of labour, it is also the
product of labour. Only by labour, by adaptation to ever new operations,
through the inheritance of muscles, ligaments, and, over longer periods
of time, bones that had undergone special development and the ever-renewed
employment of this inherited finesse in new, more and more complicated
operations, have given the human hand the high degree of perfection required
to conjure into being the pictures of a Raphael, the statues of a Thorwaldsen,
the music of a Paganini.
But the hand did not exist alone, it was only one member of an
integral, highly complex organism. And what benefited the hand, benefited
also the whole body it served; and this in two ways.
In the first place, the body benefited from the law of correlation
of growth, as Darwin called it. This law states that the specialised forms
of separate parts of an organic being are always bound up with certain
forms of other parts that apparently have no connection with them. Thus
all animals that have red blood cells without cell nuclei, and in which
the head is attached to the first vertebra by means of a double articulation
(condyles), also without exception possess lacteal glands for suckling
their young. Similarly, cloven hoofs in mammals are regularly associated
with the possession of a multiple stomach for rumination. Changes in certain
forms involve changes in the form of other parts of the body, although
we cannot explain the connection. Perfectly white cats with blue eyes are
always, or almost always, deaf. The gradually increasing perfection of
the human hand, and the commensurate adaptation of the feet for erect gait,
have undoubtedly, by virtue of such correlation, reacted on other parts
of the organism. However, this action has not as yet been sufficiently
investigated for us to be able to do more here than to state the fact in
general terms.
Much more important is the direct, demonstrable influence of the
development of the hand on the rest of the organism. It has already been
noted that our simian ancestors were gregarious; it is obviously impossible
to seek the derivation of man, the most social of all animals, from non-gregarious
immediate ancestors. Mastery over nature began with the development of
the hand, with labour, and widened man’s horizon at every new advance.
He was continually discovering new, hitherto unknown properties in natural
objects. On the other hand, the development of labour necessarily helped
to bring the members of society closer together by increasing cases of
mutual support and joint activity, and by making clear the advantage of
this joint activity to each individual. In short, men in the making arrived
at the point where they had something to say to each other. Necessity
created the organ; the undeveloped larynx of the ape was slowly but surely
transformed by modulation to produce constantly more developed modulation,
and the organs of the mouth gradually learned to pronounce one articulate
sound after another.
Comparison with animals proves that this explanation of the origin
of language from and in the process of labour is the only correct one.
The little that even the most highly-developed animals need to communicate
to each other does not require articulate speech. In its natural state,
no animal feels handicapped by its inability to speak or to understand
human speech. It is quite different when it has been tamed by man. The
dog and the horse, by association with man, have developed such a good
ear for articulate speech that they easily learn to understand any language
within their range of concept. Moreover they have acquired the capacity
for feelings such as affection for man, gratitude, etc., which were previously
foreign to them. Anyone who has had much to do with such animals will hardly
be able to escape the conviction that in many cases they now feel their
inability to speak as a defect, although, unfortunately, it is one that
can no longer be remedied because their vocal organs are too specialised
in a definite direction. However, where vocal organs exist, within certain
limits even this inability disappears. The buccal organs of birds are as
different from those of man as they can be, yet birds are the only animals
that can learn to speak; and it is the bird with the most hideous voice,
the parrot, that speaks best of all. Let no one object that the parrot
does not understand what it says. It is true that for the sheer pleasure
of talking and associating with human beings, the parrot will chatter for
hours at a stretch, continually repeating its whole vocabulary. But within
the limits of its range of concepts it can also learn to understand what
it is saying. Teach a parrot swear words in such a way that it gets an
idea of their meaning (one of the great amusements of sailors returning
from the tropics); tease it and you will soon discover that it knows how
to use its swear words just as correctly as a Berlin costermonger. The
same is true of begging for titbits.
First labour, after it and then with it speech – these were the
two most essential stimuli under the influence of which the brain of the
ape gradually changed into that of man, which, for all its similarity is
far larger and more perfect. Hand in hand with the development of the brain
went the development of its most immediate instruments – the senses. Just
as the gradual development of speech is inevitably accompanied by a corresponding
refinement of the organ of hearing, so the development of the brain as
a whole is accompanied by a refinement of all the senses. The eagle sees
much farther than man, but the human eye discerns considerably more in
things than does the eye of the eagle. The dog has a far keener sense of
smell than man, but it does not distinguish a hundredth part of the odours
that for man are definite signs denoting different things. And the sense
of touch, which the ape hardly possesses in its crudest initial form, has
been developed only side by side with the development of the human hand
itself, through the medium of labour.
The reaction on labour and speech of the development of the brain
and its attendant senses, of the increasing clarity of consciousness, power
of abstraction and of conclusion, gave both labour and speech an ever-renewed
impulse to further development. This development did not reach its conclusion
when man finally became distinct from the ape, but on the whole made further
powerful progress, its degree and direction varying among different peoples
and at different times, and here and there even being interrupted by local
or temporary regression. This further development has been strongly urged
forward, on the one hand, and guided along more definite directions, on
the other, by a new element which came into play with the appearance of
fully-fledged man, namely, society.
Hundreds of thousands of years – of no greater significance in
the history of the earth than one second in the life of man [Engels note:
A leading authority in this respect, Sir William Thomson, has calculated
that little more than a hundred million years could have elapsed
since the time when the earth had cooled sufficiently for plants and animals
to be able to live on it.] – certainly elapsed before human society arose
out of a troupe of tree-climbing monkeys. Yet it did finally appear. And
what do we find once more as the characteristic difference between the
troupe of monkeys and human society? Labour. The ape herd was satisfied
to browse over the feeding area determined for it by geographical conditions
or the resistance of neighbouring herds; it undertook migrations and struggles
to win new feeding grounds, but it was incapable of extracting from them
more than they offered in their natural state, except that it unconsciously
fertilised the soil with its own excrement. As soon as all possible feeding
grounds were occupied, there could be no further increase in the ape population;
the number of animals could at best remain stationary. But all animals
waste a great deal of food, and, in addition, destroy in the germ the next
generation of the food supply. Unlike the hunter, the wolf does not spare
the doe which would provide it with the young the next year; the goats
in Greece, that eat away the young bushes before they grow to maturity,
have eaten bare all the mountains of the country. This “predatory economy”
of animals plays an important part in the gradual transformation of species
by forcing them to adapt themselves to other than the usual food, thanks
to which their blood acquires a different chemical composition and the
whole physical constitution gradually alters, while species that have remained
unadapted die out. There is no doubt that this predatory economy contributed
powerfully to the transition of our ancestors from ape to man. In a race
of apes that far surpassed all others in intelligence and adaptability,
this predatory economy must have led to a continual increase in the number
of plants used for food and the consumption of more and more edible parts
of food plants. In short, food became more and more varied, as did also
the substances entering the body with it, substances that were the chemical
premises for the transition to man.

But all that was not yet labour in
the proper sense of the word. Labour begins with the making of tools. And
what are the most ancient tools that we find – the most ancient judging
by the heirlooms of prehistoric man that have been discovered, and by the
mode of life of the earliest historical peoples and of the rawest of contemporary
savages? They are hunting and fishing implements, the former at the same
time serving as weapons. But hunting and fishing presuppose the transition
from an exclusively vegetable diet to the concomitant use of meat, and
this is another important step in the process of transition from ape to
man. A meat diet contained in an almost ready state the most essential
ingredients required by the organism for its metabolism. By shortening
the time required for digestion, it also shortened the other vegetative
bodily processes that correspond to those of plant life, and thus gained
further time, material and desire for the active manifestation of animal
life proper. And the farther man in the making moved from the vegetable
kingdom the higher he rose above the animal. Just as becoming accustomed
to a vegetable diet side by side with meat converted wild cats and dogs
into the servants of man, so also adaptation to a meat diet, side by side
with a vegetable diet, greatly contributed towards giving bodily strength
and independence to man in the making. The meat diet, however, had its
greatest effect on the brain, which now received a far richer flow of the
materials necessary for its nourishment and development, and which, therefore,
could develop more rapidly and perfectly from generation to generation.
With all due respect to the vegetarians man did not come into existence
without a meat diet, and if the latter, among all peoples known to us,
has led to cannibalism at some time or other (the forefathers of the Berliners,
the Weletabians or Wilzians, used to eat their parents as late as the tenth
century), that is of no consequence to us today.
The meat diet led to two new advances of decisive importance – the
harnessing of fire and the domestication of animals. The first still further
shortened the digestive process, as it provided the mouth with food already,
as it were, half-digested; the second made meat more copious by opening
up a new, more regular source of supply in addition to hunting, and moreover
provided, in milk and its products, a new article of food at least as valuable
as meat in its composition. Thus both these advances were, in themselves,
new means for the emancipation of man. It would lead us too far afield
to dwell here in detail on their indirect effects notwithstanding the great
importance they have had for the development of man and society.
Just as man learned to consume everything edible, he also learned
to live in any climate. He spread over the whole of the habitable world,
being the only animal fully able to do so of its own accord. The other
animals that have become accustomed to all climates – domestic animals
and vermin – did not become so independently, but only in the wake of
man. And the transition from the uniformly hot climate of the original
home of man to colder regions, where the year was divided into summer and
winter, created new requirements – shelter and clothing as protection
against cold and damp, and hence new spheres of labour, new forms of activity,
which further and further separated man from the animal.
By the combined functioning of hand, speech organs and brain,
not only in each individual but also in society, men became capable of
executing more and more complicated operations, and were able to set themselves,
and achieve, higher and higher aims. The work of each generation itself
became different, more perfect and more diversified. Agriculture was added
to hunting and cattle raising; then came spinning, weaving, metalworking,
pottery and navigation. Along with trade and industry, art and science
finally appeared. Tribes developed into nations and states. Law and politics
arose, and with them that fantastic reflection of human things in the human
mind – religion. In the face of all these images, which appeared in the
first place to be products of the mind and seemed to dominate human societies,
the more modest productions of the working hand retreated into the background,
the more so since the mind that planned the labour was able, at a very
early stage in the development of society (for example, already in the
primitive family), to have the labour that had been planned carried out
by other hands than its own. All merit for the swift advance of civilisation
was ascribed to the mind, to the development and activity of the brain.
Men became accustomed to explain their actions as arising out of thought
instead of their needs (which in any case are reflected and perceived in
the mind); and so in the course of time there emerged that idealistic world
outlook which, especially since the fall of the world of antiquity, has
dominated men’s minds. It still rules them to such a degree that even the
most materialistic natural scientists of the Darwinian school are still
unable to form any clear idea of the origin of man, because under this
ideological influence they do not recognise the part that has been played
therein by labour.
Animals, as has already been pointed out, change the environment
by their activities in the same way, even if not to the same extent, as
man does, and these changes, as we have seen, in turn react upon and change
those who made them. In nature nothing takes place in isolation. Everything
affects and is affected by every other thing, and it is mostly because
this manifold motion and interaction is forgotten that our natural scientists
are prevented from gaining a clear insight into the simplest things. We
have seen how goats have prevented the regeneration of forests in Greece;
on the island of St. Helena, goats and pigs brought by the first arrivals
have succeeded in exterminating its old vegetation almost completely, and
so have prepared the ground for the spreading of plants brought by later
sailors and colonists. But animals exert a lasting effect on their environment
unintentionally and, as far as the animals themselves are concerned, accidentally.
The further removed men are from animals, however, the more their effect
on nature assumes the character of premeditated, planned action directed
towards definite preconceived ends. The animal destroys the vegetation
of a locality without realising what it is doing. Man destroys it in order
to sow field crops on the soil thus released, or to plant trees or vines
which he knows will yield many times the amount planted. He transfers useful
plants and domestic animals from one country to another and thus changes
the flora and fauna of whole continents. More than this. Through artificial
breeding both plants and animals are so changed by the hand of man that
they become unrecognisable. The wild plants from which our grain varieties
originated are still being sought in vain. There is still some dispute
about the wild animals from which our very different breeds of dogs or
our equally numerous breeds of horses are descended.
It goes without saying that it would not occur to us to dispute
the ability of animals to act in a planned, premeditated fashion. On the
contrary, a planned mode of action exists in embryo wherever protoplasm,
living albumen, exists and reacts, that is, carries out definite, even
if extremely simple, movements as a result of definite external stimuli.
Such reaction takes place even where there is yet no cell at all, far less
a nerve cell. There is something of the planned action in the way insect-eating
plants capture their prey, although they do it quite unconsciously. In
animals the capacity for conscious, planned action is proportional to the
development of the nervous system, and among mammals it attains a fairly
high level. While fox-hunting in England one can daily observe how unerringly
the fox makes use of its excellent knowledge of the locality in order to
elude its pursuers, and how well it knows and turns to account all favourable
features of the ground that cause the scent to be lost. Among our domestic
animals, more highly developed thanks to association with man, one can
constantly observe acts of cunning on exactly the same level as those of
children. For, just as the development history of the human embryo in the
mother’s womb is only an abbreviated repetition of the history, extending
over millions of years, of the bodily development of our animal ancestors,
starting from the worm, so the mental development of the human child is
only a still more abbreviated repetition of the intellectual development
of these same ancestors, at least of the later ones. But all the planned
action of all animals has never succeeded in impressing the stamp of their
will upon the earth. That was left for man.
In short, the animal merely uses its environment, and brings
about changes in it simply by its presence; man by his changes makes it
serve his ends, masters it. This is the final, essential distinction
between man and other animals, and once again it is labour that brings
about this distinction. 
Let us not, however, flatter ourselves overmuch on account of
our human victories over nature. For each such victory nature takes its
revenge on us. Each victory, it is true, in the first place brings about
the results we expected, but in the second and third places it has quite
different, unforeseen effects which only too often cancel the first. The
people who, in Mesopotamia, Greece, Asia Minor and elsewhere, destroyed
the forests to obtain cultivable land, never dreamed that by removing along
with the forests the collecting centres and reservoirs of moisture they
were laying the basis for the present forlorn state of those countries.
When the Italians of the Alps used up the pine forests on the southern
slopes, so carefully cherished on the northern slopes, they had no inkling
that by doing so they were cutting at the roots of the dairy industry in
their region; they had still less inkling that they were thereby depriving
their mountain springs of water for the greater part of the year, and making
it possible for them to pour still more furious torrents on the plains
during the rainy seasons. Those who spread the potato in Europe were not
aware that with these farinaceous tubers they were at the same time spreading
scrofula. Thus at every step we are reminded that we by no means rule over
nature like a conqueror over a foreign people, like someone standing outside
nature – but that we, with flesh, blood and brain, belong to nature, and
exist in its midst, and that all our mastery of it consists in the fact
that we have the advantage over all other creatures of being able to learn
its laws and apply them correctly.
And, in fact, with every day that passes we are acquiring a better
understanding of these laws and getting to perceive both the more immediate
and the more remote consequences of our interference with the traditional
course of nature. In particular, after the mighty advances made by the
natural sciences in the present century, we are more than ever in a position
to realise, and hence to control, also the more remote natural consequences
of at least our day-to-day production activities. But the more this progresses
the more will men not only feel but also know their oneness with nature,
and the more impossible will become the senseless and unnatural idea of
a contrast between mind and matter, man and nature, soul and body, such
as arose after the decline of classical antiquity in Europe and obtained
its highest elaboration in Christianity.
It required the labour of thousands of years for us to learn a
little of how to calculate the more remote natural effects of our actions
in the field of production, but it has been still more difficult in regard
to the more remote social effects of these actions. We mentioned the potato
and the resulting spread of scrofula. But what is scrofula compared to
the effects which the reduction of the workers to a potato diet had on
the living conditions of the popular masses in whole countries, or compared
to the famine the potato blight brought to Ireland in 1847, which consigned
to the grave a million Irishmen, nourished solely or almost exclusively
on potatoes, and forced the emigration overseas of two million more? When
the Arabs learned to distil spirits, it never entered their heads that
by so doing they were creating one of the chief weapons for the annihilation
of the aborigines of the then still undiscovered American continent. And
when afterwards Columbus discovered this America, he did not know that
by doing so he was giving a new lease of life to slavery, which in Europe
had long ago been done away with, and laying the basis for the Negro slave
trade. The men who in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries laboured
to create the steam-engine had no idea that they were preparing the instrument
which more than any other was to revolutionise social relations throughout
the world. Especially in Europe, by concentrating wealth in the hands of
a minority and dispossessing the huge majority, this instrument was destined
at first to give social and political domination to the bourgeoisie, but
later, to give rise to a class struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat
which can end only in the overthrow of the bourgeoisie and the abolition
of all class antagonisms. But in this sphere too, by long and often cruel
experience and by collecting and analysing historical material, we are
gradually learning to get a clear view of the indirect, more remote social
effects of our production activity, and so are afforded an opportunity
to control and regulate these effects as well.
This regulation, however, requires something more than mere knowledge.
It requires a complete revolution in our hitherto existing mode of production,
and simultaneously a revolution in our whole contemporary social order.
All hitherto existing modes of production have aimed merely at
achieving the most immediately and directly useful effect of labour. The
further consequences, which appear only later and become effective through
gradual repetition and accumulation, were totally neglected. The original
common ownership of land corresponded, on the one hand, to a level of development
of human beings in which their horizon was restricted in general to what
lay immediately available, and presupposed, on the other hand, a certain
superfluity of land that would allow some latitude for correcting the possible
bad results of this primeval type of economy. When this surplus land was
exhausted, common ownership also declined. All higher forms of production,
however, led to the division of the population into different classes and
thereby to the antagonism of ruling and oppressed classes. Thus the interests
of the ruling class became the driving factor of production, since production
was no longer restricted to providing the barest means of subsistence for
the oppressed people. This has been put into effect most completely in
the capitalist mode of production prevailing today in Western Europe. The
individual capitalists, who dominate production and exchange, are able
to concern themselves only with the most immediate useful effect of their
actions. Indeed, even this useful effect – inasmuch as it is a question
of the usefulness of the article that is produced or exchanged – retreats
far into the background, and the sole incentive becomes the profit to be
made on selling.
Classical political economy, the social science of the bourgeoisie,
in the main examines only social effects of human actions in the fields
of production and exchange that are actually intended. This fully corresponds
to the social organisation of which it is the theoretical expression. As
individual capitalists are engaged in production and exchange for the sake
of the immediate profit, only the nearest, most immediate results must
first be taken into account. As long as the individual manufacturer or
merchant sells a manufactured or purchased commodity with the usual coveted
profit, he is satisfied and does not concern himself with what afterwards
becomes of the commodity and its purchasers. The same thing applies to
the natural effects of the same actions. What cared the Spanish planters
in Cuba, who burned down forests on the slopes of the mountains and obtained
from the ashes sufficient fertiliser for one generation of very highly
profitable coffee trees – what cared they that the heavy tropical rainfall
afterwards washed away the unprotected upper stratum of the soil, leaving
behind only bare rock! In relation to nature, as to society, the present
mode of production is predominantly concerned only about the immediate,
the most tangible result; and then surprise is expressed that the more
remote effects of actions directed to this end turn out to be quite different,
are mostly quite the opposite in character; that the harmony of supply
and demand is transformed into the very reverse opposite, as shown by the
course of each ten years’ industrial cycle – even Germany has had a little
preliminary experience of it in the “crash”; that private ownership based
on one’s own labour must of necessity develop into the expropriation of
the workers, while all wealth becomes more and more concentrated in the
hands of non-workers; that [... the manuscript breaks off here.]

Notes
1. In the 1870s, when this was written, British
zoogeographer Philip Lutley Sclater put forth the theory that a continent
(he called "Lemuria") existed which reached from modern Madagascar to India
and Sumatra – and this continent has since submerged beneath the Indian
Ocean.
 


Dialectics of Nature |
Origin of the Family |
Marx and Engels on Natural Science
Marxism and Natural Science |
Marx Engels Archive




==========

## Marx



==========

## Marx and Engels to A. Bebel, W. Liebknecht, W. Bracke and Others








Strategy and Tactics of the Class Struggle


Works of Marx and Engels 1879
Strategy and Tactics of the Class Struggle
Abstract


Written: September 17-18 1879;
Full text: Circular Letter to August Bebel, Wilhelm Liebknecht, Wilhelm Bracke and Others;
Transcribed: by Zodiac.

A Private Circulation Letter from Marx and Engels, (First drafted by Engels) to Germany's Social-Democratic leadership — Bebel, Liebknecht, Fritzsche, Geiser, Hasenclever, Bracke.

This was in response to an August 1879 article written by Karl Hochberg, Eduard Bernstein, and Carl August Schramm, entitled "Retrospects on the Socialist Movement in Germany". The magazine piece advocated transforming the German Social-Democratic party from a revolutionary to a reformist platform.

It is an unavoidable phenomenon, well established
in the course of development, that people from the ruling class also join
the proletariat and supply it with educated elements. This we have already
clearly stated in the Manifesto. Here, however, two remarks are to be made:

 First, such people, in order to be useful to the proletarian movement,
must bring with them really educated elements. This, however, is not the
case with the great majority of German bourgeois converts. Neither the
Zukunft [fortnightly Berlin magazine] nor the Neue Gesellschaft
[monthly Zurich periodical] has provided anything to advance the movement
one step. They are completely deficient in real, factual, or theoretical
material. Instead, there are efforts to bring superficial socialist ideas
into harmony with the various theoretical viewpoints which the gentlemen
from the universities, or from wherever, bring with them, and among whom
one is more confused than the other, thanks to the process of decomposition
in which German philosophy finds itself today. Instead of first studying
the new science [scientific socialism] thoroughly, everyone relies rather
on the viewpoint he brought with him, makes a short cut toward it with
his own private science, and immediately steps forth with pretensions of
wanting to teach it. Hence, there are among those gentlemen as many viewpoints
as there are heads; instead of clarifying anything, they only produce arrant
confusion — fortunately, almost always only among themselves. Such educated
elements, whose guiding principle is to teach what they have not learned,
the party can well dispense with.

Second, when such people from other classes join the proletarian movement,
the first demand upon them must be that they do not bring with them any
remnants of bourgeois, petty-bourgeois, etc., prejudices, but that they
irreversibly assimilate the proletarian viewpoint. But those gentlemen,
as has been shown, adhere overwhelmingly to petty-bourgeois conceptions.
In so petty-bourgeois a country as Germany, such conceptions certainly
have their justification, but only outside the Social-Democratic
Labor party. If the gentlemen want to build a social-democratic petty-bourgeois
party, they have a full right to do so; one could then negotiate with them,
conclude agreements, etc., according to circumstances. But in a labor party,
they are a falsifying element. If there are grounds which necessitates
tolerating them, it is a duty only to tolerate them, to allow them
no influence in party leadership, and to keep in mind that a break with
them is only a matter of time.

In any case, the time seems to have come.

It is inconceivable to us how the party can any longer tolerate in its
midst the authors of that [Hochberg, Bernstein, Schramm] article. If the
party leadership more or less falls into the hands of such people, the
party will simply be emasculated and, with it, an end to the proletarian
order.

So far as we are concerned, after our whole past only one way is open
to us. For nearly 40 years we have raised to prominence the idea of the
class struggle as the immediate driving force of history, and particularly
the class struggle between bourgeois and the proletariat as the great lever
of the modern social revolution; hence, we can hardly go along with people
who want to strike this class struggle from the movement. At the founding
of the International, we expressly formulated the battle cry: The emancipation
of the working class must be the work of the working class itself.

We cannot, therefore, go along with people who openly claim that the
workers are too ignorant to emancipate themselves but must first be emancipated
from the top down, by the philanthropic big and petty bourgeois. Should
the new party organ take a position that corresponds with the ideas of
those gentlemen, become bourgeois and not proletarian, then there is nothing
left for us, sorry as we should be to do so, than to speak out against
it publicly and dissolve the solidarity within which we have hitherto represented
the German party abroad. But we hope it will not come to that.

This letter is to be communicated to all the five members of the Committee
in Germany, as well as Bracke....

On our part, we have no objection to this being communicated to the
gentlemen in Zurich.


 


Full text of Circular Letter |
Works Index |
Marx Engels Archive




==========

## Socialism: Utopian and Scientific









Socialism: Utopian and Scientific




MIA: Marx & Engels


Frederick Engels
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific



Written: Between January and March of 1880;
Source: Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume 3, p. 95-151;
Publisher: Progress Publishers, 1970;
First Published: March, April, and May issues of Revue Socialiste in 1880;
Translated: from the French by Edward Aveling in 1892 (authorised by Engels)
Transcription/Markup: Zodiac/Brian Baggins;
Online Version: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 1993, 1999, 2003.



Introduction:

Preface to the First German Edition, Engels 1882
[General Introduction and the History of Materialism]
[History of the English middle-class]
Introduction to the French Edition, Karl Marx 1880



Contents:
Part I: [Utopian Socialism]
Part II: [Dialectics]
Part III: [Historical Materialism]
 

“At the request of my friend, Paul Lafargue, now representative of Lille in the French Chamber of Deputies, I arranged three chapters of this book as a pamphlet, which he translated and published in 1880, under the title: Socialisme utopique et Socialisme scientifique. From this French text, a Polish and a Spanish edition were prepared. In 1883, our German friends brought out the pamphlet in the original language. Italian, Russian, Danish, Dutch, and Roumanian translations, based upon the German text, have since been published. Thus, the present English edition, this little book circulates in 10 languages. I am not aware that any other Socialist work, not even our Communist Manifesto of 1848, or Marx's Capital, has been so often translated. In Germany, it has had four editions of about 20,000 copies in all.” [from the Preface to the 1892 English Edition]


Study Guide |
Marx/Engels Library






==========

## Special Introduction to the English Edition of 1892







Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (Introduction - History)




Frederick Engels

Socialism: Utopian and Scientific



1892 English Edition Introduction
[History (the role of Religion) in the English middle-class]


 


When Europe emerged from the Middle Ages, the rising
middle-class of the towns constituted its revolutionary element. It had
conquered a recognized position within mediaeval feudal organization, but
this position, also, had become too narrow for its expansive power. The
development of the middle-class, the bourgeoisie, became incompatible
with the maintenance of the feudal system; the feudal system, therefore,
had to fall.



But the great international centre of feudalism was the Roman
Catholic Church. It united the whole of feudalized Western Europe, in spite
of all internal wars, into one grand political system, opposed as much
to the schismatic Greeks as to the Mohammedan countries. It had organized
its own hierarchy on the feudal model, and, lastly, it was itself by far
the most powerful feudal lord, holding, as it did, fully 1/3rd of the soil
of the Catholic world. Before profane feudalism could be successfully attacked
in each country and in detail, this, its sacred central organization, had
to be destroyed.



Moreover, parallel with the rise of the middle-class went on the
great revival of science; astronomy, mechanics, physics, anatomy, physiology
were again cultivated. And the bourgeoisie, for the development of its
industrial production, required a science which ascertained the physical
properties of natural objects and the modes of action of the forces of
Nature. Now up to then science had but been the humble handmaid of the
Church, had not been allowed to overlap the limits set by faith, and for
that reason had been no science at all. Science rebelled against the Church;
the bourgeoisie could not do without science, and, therefore, had to join
in the rebellion.



The above, though touching but two of the points where the rising
middle-class was bound to come into collision with the established religion,
will be sufficient to show, first, that the class most directly interested
in the struggle against the pretensions of the Roman Church was the bourgeoisie;
and second, that every struggle against feudalism, at that time, had to
take on a religious disguise, had to be directed against the Church in
the first instance. But if the universities and the traders of the cities
started the cry, it was sure to find, and did find, a strong echo in the
masses of the country people, the peasants, who everywhere had to struggle
for their very existence with their feudal lords, spiritual and temporal.



The long fight of the bourgeoisie against feudalism culminated
in three great, decisive battles.



The first was what is called the Protestant Reformation in Germany.
The war cry raised against the Church, by Luther, was responded to by two
insurrections of a political nature; first, that of the lower nobility
under Franz von Sickingen (1523), then the great Peasants' War, 1525. Both
were defeated, chiefly in consequence of the indecision of the parties
most interested, the burghers of the towns – an indecision into the causes
of which we cannot here enter. From that moment, the struggle degenerated
into a fight between the local princes and the central power, and ended
by blotting out Germany, for 200 years, from the politically active nations
of Europe. The Lutheran Reformation produced a new creed indeed, a religion
adapted to absolute monarchy. No sooner were the peasant of North-east
Germany converted to Lutheranism than they were from freemen reduced to
serfs.



But where Luther failed, Calvin won the day. Calvin's creed was
one fit for the boldest of the bourgeoisie of his time. His predestination
doctrine was the religious expression of the fact that in the commercial
world of competition success or failure does not depend upon a man's activity
or cleverness, but upon circumstances uncontrollable by him. It is not
of him that willeth or of him that runneth, but of the mercy of unknown
superior economic powers; and this was especially true at a period of economic
revolution, when all old commercial routes and centres were replaced by
new ones, when India and America were opened to the world, and when even
the most sacred economic articles of faith – the value of gold and silver
– began to totter and to break down. Calvin's church constitution of God
was republicanized, could the kingdoms of this world remains subject to
monarchs, bishops, and lords? While German Lutheranism became a willing
tool in the hands of princes, Calvinism founded a republic in Holland,
and active republican parties in England, and, above all, Scotland.



In Calvinism, the second great bourgeois upheaval found its doctrine
ready cut and dried. This upheaval took place in England. The middle-class
of the towns brought it on, and the yeomanry of the country districts fought
it out. Curiously enough, in all the three great bourgeois risings, the
peasantry furnishes the army that has to do the fighting; and the peasantry
is just the class that, the victory once gained, is most surely ruined
by the economic consequences of that victory. A hundred years after Cromwell,
the yeomanry of england had almost disappeared. Anyhow, had it not been
for that yeomanry and for the plebian element in the towns, the
bourgeoisie alone would never have fought the matter out to the bitter
end, and would never have brought Charles I to the scaffold. In order to
secure even those conquests of the bourgeoisie that were ripe for gathering
at the time, the revolution had to be carried considerably further – exactly
as in 1793 in France and 1848 in Germany. This seems, in fact, to be one
of the laws of evolution of bourgeois society.



Well, upon this excess of revolutionary activity there necessarily
followed the inevitable reaction which, in its turn, went beyond the point
where it might have maintained itself. After a series of oscillations,
the new centre of gravity was at last attained and became a new starting-point.
The grand period of English history, known to respectability under the
name of "the Great Rebellion", and the struggles succeeding it, were brought
to a close by the comparatively puny events entitled by Liberal historians
"the Glorious Revolution".



The new starting-point was a compromise between the rising middle-class
and the ex-feudal landowners. The latter, though called, as now, the aristocracy,
had been long since on the way which led them to become what Louis Philippe
in France became at a much later period: "The first bourgeois of the kingdom".
Fortunately for England, the old feudal barons had killed one another during
the War of the Roses. Their successors, though mostly scions of the old
families, had been so much out of the direct line of descent that they
constituted quite a new body, with habits and tendencies far more bourgeois
than feudal. They fully understood the value of money, and at once began
to increase their rents by turning hundreds of small farmers out and replacing
them with sheep. Henry VIII, while squandering the Church lands, created
fresh bourgeois landlords by wholesale; the innumerable confiscation of
estates, regranted to absolute or relative upstarts, and continued during
the whole of the 17th century, had the same result. Consequently, ever
since Henry VII, the English "aristocracy", far from counteracting the
development of industrial production, had, on the contrary, sought to indirectly
profit thereby; and there had always been a section of the great landowners
willing, from economical or political reasons, to cooperate with the leading
men of the financial and industrial bourgeoisie. The compromise of 1689
was, therefore, easily accomplished. The political spoils of "pelf and
place" were left to the great landowning families, provided the economic
interests of the financial, manufacturing, and commercial middle-class
were sufficiently attended to. And these economic interests were at that
time powerful enough to determine the general policy of the nation. There
might be squabbles about matters of detail, but, on the whole, the aristocratic
oligarchy knew too well that its own economic prosperity was irretrievably
bound up with that of the industrial and commercial middle-class.



From that time, the bourgeoisie was a humble, but still a recognized,
component of the ruling classes of England. With the rest of them, it had
a common interest in keeping in subjection the great working mass of the
nation. The merchant or manufacturer himself stood in the position of master,
or, as it was until lately called, of "natural superior" to his clerks,
his work-people, his domestic servants. His interest was to get as much
and as good work out of them as he could; for this end, they had to be
trained to proper submission. He was himself religious; his religion had
supplied the standard under which he had fought the king and the lords;
he was not long in discovering the opportunities this same religion offered
him for working upon the minds of his natural inferiors, and making them
submissive to the behests of the masters it had pleased God to place over
them. In short, the English bourgeoisie now had to take a part in keeping
down the "lower orders", the great producing mass of the nation, and one
of the means employed for that purpose was the influence of religion.



There was another factor that contributed to strengthen the religious
leanings of the bourgeoisie. That was the rise of materialism in England.
This new doctrine not only shocked the pious feelings of the middle-class;
it announced itself as a philosophy only fit for scholars and cultivated
men of the world, in contrast to religion, which was good enough for the
uneducated masses, including the bourgeoisie. With Hobbes, it stepped on
the stage as a defender of royal prerogative and omnipotence; it called
upon absolute monarchy to keep down that puer robustus sed malitiosus
["Robust but malicious boy"] – to wit, the people. Similarly, with the
successors of Hobbes, with Bolingbroke, Shaftesbury, etc., the new deistic
form of materialism remained an aristocratic, esoteric doctrine, and, therefore,
hateful to the middle-class both for its religious heresy and for its anti-bourgeois
political connections. Accordingly, in opposition to the materialism and
deism of the aristocracy, those Protestant sects which had furnished the
flag and the fighting contingent against the Stuarts continued to furnish
the main strength of the progressive middle-class, and form even today
the backbone of "the Great Liberal Party".



In the meantime, materialism passed from England to France, where
it met and coalesced with another materialistic school of philosophers,
a branch of Cartesianism. In France, too, it remained at first an exclusively
aristocratic doctrine. But, soon, its revolutionary character asserted
itself. The French materialists did not limit their criticism to matters
of religious belief; they extended it to whatever scientific tradition
or political institution they met with; and to prove the claim of their
doctrine to universal application, they took the shortest cut, and boldly
applied it to all subjects of knowledge in the giant work after which they
were named – the Encyclopaedia. Thus, in one or the other of its two forms
– avowed materialism or deism – it became the creed of the whole cultures
youth of France; so much so that, when the Great Revolution broke out,
the doctrine hatched by English Royalists gave a theoretical flag to French
Republicans and Terrorists, and furnished the text for the Declaration
of the Rights of Man. The Great French Revolution was the third uprising
of the bourgeoisie, but the first that had entirely cast off the religious
cloak, and was fought out on undisguised political lines; it was the first,
too, that was really fought out up to the destruction of one of the combatants,
the aristocracy, and the complete triumph of the other, the bourgeoisie.
In England, the continuity of pre-revolutionary and post-revolutionary
institutions, and the compromise between landlords and capitalists, found
its expression in the continuity of judicial precedents and in the religious
preservation of the feudal forms of the law. In France, the Revolution
constituted a complete breach with the traditions of the past; it cleared
out the very last vestiges of feudalism, and created in the Code Civil
a masterly adaptation of the old Roman law – that almost perfect expression
of the juridical relations corresponding to the economic stage called by
Marx the production of commodities – to modern capitalist conditions;
so masterly that this French revolutionary code still serves as a model
for reforms of the law of property in all other countries, not excepting
England. Let us, however, not forget that if English law continues to express
the economic relations of capitalist society in that barbarous feudal language
which corresponds to the thing expressed, just as English spelling corresponds
to English pronunciation – vous ecrivez Londres et vous prononcez Constantinople,
said a Frenchman – that same English law is the only one which has preserved
through ages, and transmitted to America and the Colonies, the best part
of that old Germanic personal freedom, local self-government, and independence
from all interference (but that of the law courts), which on the Continent
has been lost during the period of absolute monarchy, and has nowhere been
as yet fully recovered.



To return to our British bourgeois. The French Revolution gave
him a splendid opportunity, with the help of the Continental monarchies,
to destroy French maritime commerce, to annex French colonies, and to crush
the last French pretensions to maritime rivalry. That was one reason why
he fought it. Another was that the ways of this revolution went very much
against his grain. Not only its "execrable" terrorism, but the very attempt
to carry bourgeois rule to extremes. What should the British bourgeois
do without his aristocracy, that taught him manners, such as they were,
and invented fashions for him – that furnished officers for the army,
which kept order at home, and the navy, which conquered colonial possessions
and new markets aboard? There was, indeed, a progressive minority of the
bourgeoisie, that minority whose interests were not so well attended to
under the compromise; this section, composed chiefly of the less wealthy
middle-class, did sympathize with the Revolution, but it was powerless
in Parliament.



Thus, if materialism became the creed of the French Revolution,
the God-fearing English bourgeois held all the faster to his religion.
Had not the reign of terror in Paris proved what was the upshot, if the
religious instincts of the masses were lost? The more materialism spread
from France to neighboring countries, and was reinforced by similar doctrinal
currents, notably by German philosophy, the more, in fact, materialism
and free thought generally became, on the Continent, the necessary qualifications
of a cultivated man, the more stubbornly the English middle-class stuck
to its manifold religious creeds. These creeds might differ from one another,
but they were, all of them, distinctly religious, Christian creeds.



While the Revolution ensured the political triumph of the bourgeoisie
in France, in England Watt, Arkwright, Cartwright, and others, initiated
an industrial revolution, which completely shifted the centre of gravity
of economic power. The wealth of the bourgeoisie increased considerably
faster than that of the landed aristocracy. Within the bourgeoisie itself,
the financial aristocracy, the bankers, etc., were more and more pushed
into the background by the manufacturers. The compromise of 1689, even
after the gradual changes it had undergone in favor of the bourgeoisie,
no longer corresponded to the relative position of the parties to it. The
character of these parties, too, had changed; the bourgeoisie of 1830 was
very different from that of the preceding century. The political power
still left to the aristocracy, and used by them to resist the pretensions
of the new industrial bourgeoisie, became incompatible with the new economic
interests. A fresh struggle with the aristocracy was necessary; it could
end only in a victory of the new economic power. First, the Reform Act
was pushed through, in spite of all resistance, under the impulse of the
French Revolution of 1830. It gave to the bourgeoisie a recognized and
powerful place in Parliament. Then the Repeal of the Corn Laws [a move
toward free-trade], which settled, once and for all, the supremacy of the
bourgeoisie, and especially of its most active portion, the manufacturers,
over the landed aristocracy. This was the greatest victory of the bourgeoisie;
it was, however, also the last it gained in its own exclusive interest.
Whatever triumphs it obtained later on, it had to share with a new social
power – first its ally, but soon its rival.



The industrial revolution had created a class of large manufacturing
capitalists, but also a class – and a far more numerous one – of manufacturing
work-people. This class gradually increased in numbers, in proportion as
the industrial revolution seized upon one branch of manufacture after another,
and in the same proportion it increased its power. This power it proved
as early as 1824, by forcing a reluctant Parliament to repeal the acts
forbidding combinations of workmen. During the Reform agitation, the workingmen
constituted the Radical wing of the Reform party; the Act of 1832 having
excluded them from the suffrage, the formulated their demands in the People's
Charter, and constituted themselves, in opposition to the great bourgeois
Anti-Corn Law party, into an independent party, the Chartists, the first
working-men's party of modern times.



Then came the Continental revolutions of February and March 1848,
in which the working people played such a prominent part, and, at least
in Paris, put forward demands which were certainly inadmissible from the
point of view of capitalist society. And then came the general reaction.
First, the defeat of the Chartists on April 10, 1848; then the crushing
of the Paris workingmen's insurrection in June of the same year; then the
disasters of 1849 in Italy, Hungary, South Germany, and at last the victory
of Louis Bonaparte over Paris, December 2, 1851. For a time, at least,
the bugbear of working-class pretensions was put down, but at what cost!
If the British bourgeois had been convinced before of the necessity of
maintaining the common people in a religious mood, how much more must he
feel that necessity after all these experiences? Regardless of the sneers
of his Continental compeers, he continued to spend thousands and tens of
thousands, year after year, upon the evangelization of the lower orders;
not content with his own native religious machinery, he appealed to Brother
Jonathan 1),
the greatest organizer in existence of religion as a trade, and imported
from America revivalism, Moody and Sankey, and the like;
and, finally, he accepted the dangerous aid of the Salvation Army, which
revives the propaganda of early Christianity, appeals to the poor as the
elect, fights capitalism in a religious way, and thus fosters an element
of early Christian class antagonism, which one day may become troublesome
to the well-to-do people who now find the ready money for it.



It seems a law of historical development that the bourgeoisie
can in no European country get hold of political power – at least for
any length of time – in the same exclusive way in which the feudal aristocracy
kept hold of it during the Middle Ages. Even in France, where feudalism
was completely extinguished, the bourgeoisie as a whole has held full possession
of the Government for very short periods only. During Louis Philippe's
reign, 1830-48, a very small portion of the bourgeoisie ruled the kingdom;
by far the larger part were excluded from the suffrage by the high qualification.
Under the Second Republic, 1848-51, the whole bourgeoisie ruled but for
three years only; their incapacity brought on the Second Empire. It is
only now, in the Third Republic, that the bourgeoisie as a whole have kept
possession of the helm for more than 20 years; and they are already showing
lively signs of decadence. A durable reign of the bourgeoisie has been
possible only in countries like America, where feudalism was unknown, and
society at the very beginning started from a bourgeois basis. And even
in France and America, the successors of the bourgeoisie, the working people,
are already knocking at the door.



In England, the bourgeoisie never held undivided sway. Even the
victory of 1832 left the landed aristocracy in almost exclusive possession
of all the leading Government offices. The meekness with which the middle-class
submitted to this remained inconceivable to me until the great Liberal
manufacturer, Mr. W. A. Forster, in a public speech, implored the young
men of Bradford to learn French, as a means to get on in the world, and
quoted from his own experience how sheepish he looked when, as a Cabinet
Minister, he had to move in society where French was, at least, as necessary
as English! The fact was, the English middle-class of that time were, as
a rule, quite uneducated upstarts, and could not help leaving to the aristocracy
those superior Government places where other qualifications were required
than mere insular narrowness and insular conceit, seasoned by business
sharpness. 2)
Even now the endless newspaper debates about middle-class education show
that the English middle-class does not yet consider itself good enough
for the best education, and looks to something more modest. Thus, even
after the repeal of the Corn Laws, it appeared a matter of course that
the men who had carried the day – the Cobdens, Brights, Forsters, etc.
– should remain excluded from a share in the official government of the
country, until 20 years afterwards a new Reform Act opened to them the
door of the Cabinet. The English bourgeoisie are, up to the present day,
so deeply penetrated by a sense of their social inferiority that they keep
up, at their own expense and that of the nation, an ornamental caste of
drones to represent the nation worthily at all State functions; and they
consider themselves highly honored whenever one of themselves is found
worthy of admission into this select and privileged body, manufactured,
after all, by themselves.



The industrial and commercial middle-class had, therefore, not
yet succeeded in driving the landed aristocracy completely from political
power when another competitor, the working-class, appeared on the stage.
The reaction after the Chartist movement and the Continental revolutions,
as well as the unparalleled extension of English trade from 1848-66 (ascribed
vulgarly to Free Trade alone, but due far more to the colossal development
of railways, ocean steamers, and means of intercourse generally), had again
driven the working-class into the dependency of the Liberal party, of which
they formed, as in pre-Chartist times, the Radical wing. Their claims to
the franchise, however, gradually became irresistible; while the Whig leaders
of the Liberals "funked", Disraeli showed his superiority by making the
Tories seize the favorable moment and introduce household suffrage in the
boroughs, along with a redistribution of seats. Then followed the ballot;
then, in 1884, the extension of household suffrage to the counties and
a fresh redistribution of seats, by which electoral districts were, to
some extent, equalized. All these measures considerably increased the electoral
power of the working-class, so much so that in at least 150 to 200 constituencies
that class now furnished the majority of the voters. But parliamentary
government is a capital school for teaching respect for tradition; if the
middle-class look with awe and veneration upon what Lord John Manners playfully
called "our old nobility", the mass of the working-people then looked up
with respect and deference to what used to be designated as "their betters",
the middle-class. Indeed, the British workman, some 15 years ago, was the
model workman, whose respectful regard for the position of his master,
and whose self-restraining modesty in claiming rights for himself, consoled
our German economists of the Katheder-Socialist school for the incurable
communistic and revolutionary tendencies of their own working-men at home.



But the English middle-class – good men of business as they are
– saw farther than the German professors. They had shared their powers
but reluctantly with the working-class. They had learnt, during the Chartist
years, what that puer robustus sed malitiosus, the people, is capable
of. And since that time, they had been compelled to incorporate the better
part of the People's Charter in the Statutes of the United Kingdom. Now,
if ever, the people must be kept in order by moral means, and the first
and foremost of all moral means of action upon the masses is and remains
– religion. Hence the parsons' majorities on the School Boards, hence
the increasing self-taxation of the bourgeoisie for the support of all
sorts of revivalism, from ritualism to the Salvation Army.



And now came the triumph of British respectability over the free
thought and religious laxity of the Continental bourgeois. The workmen
of France and Germany had become rebellious. They were thoroughly infected
with Socialism, and, for very good reasons, were not at all particular
as to the legality of the means by which to secure their own ascendancy.
The puer robustus, here, turned from day-to-day more malitiosus.
Nothing remained to the French and German bourgeoisie as a last resource
but to silently drop their free thought, as a youngster, when sea-sickness
creeps upon him, quietly drops the burning cigar he brought swaggeringly
on board; one-by-one, the scoffers turned pious in outward behavior, spoke
with respect of the Church, its dogmas and rites, and even conformed with
the latter as far as could not be helped. French bourgeois dined maigre
on Fridays, and German ones say out long Protestant sermons in their pews
on Sundays. They had come to grief with materialism. "Die Religion muss
dem Volk erhalten werden" – religion must be kept alive for the people
– that was the only and the last means to save society from utter ruin.
Unfortunately for themselves, they did not find this out until they had
done their level best to break up religion for ever. And now it was the
turn of the British bourgeoisie to sneer and to say: "Why, you fools, I
could have told you that 200 years ago!"



However, I am afraid neither the religious stolidity of the British,
nor the post festum conversion of the Continental bourgeois will
stem the rising Proletarian tide. Tradition is a great retarding force,
is the vis inertiae of history, but, being merely passive, is sure
to be broken down; and thus religion will be no lasting safeguard to capitalist
society. If our juridical, philosophical, and religious ideas are the more
or less remote offshoots of the economical relations prevailing in a given
society, such ideas cannot, in the long run, withstand the effects of a
complete change in these relations. And, unless we believe in supernatural
revelation, we must admit that no religious tenets will ever suffice to
prop up a tottering society.



In fact, in England too, the working-people have begun to move
again. They are, no doubt, shackled by traditions of various kinds. Bourgeois
traditions, such as the widespread belief that there can be but two parties,
Conservatives and Liberals, and that the working-class must work out its
salvation by and through the great Liberal Party. Working-men's traditions,
inherited from their first tentative efforts at independent action, such
as the exclusion, from ever so many old Trade Unions, of all applicants
who have not gone through a regular apprenticeship; which means the breeding,
by every such union, of its own blacklegs. But, for all that, the English
working-class is moving, as even Professor Brentano has sorrowfully had
to report to his brother Katheder-Socialists. It moves, like all things
in England, with a slow and measured step, with hesitation here, with more
or less unfruitful, tentative attempts there; it moves now and then with
an over-cautious mistrust of the name of Socialism, while it gradually
absorbs the substance; and the movement spreads and seizes one layer of
the workers after another. It has now shaken out of their torpor the unskilled
laborers of the East End of London, and we all know what a splendid impulse
these fresh forces have given it in return. And if the pace of the movement
is not up to the impatience of some people, let them not forget that it
is the working-class which keeps alive the finest qualities of the English
character, and that, if a step in advance is once gained in England, it
is, as a rule, never lost afterwards. If the sons of the old Chartists,
for reasons unexplained above, were not quite up to the mark, the grandsons
bid fair to be worthy of their forefathers.



But the triumph of the European working-class does not depend
upon England alone. It can only be secured by the cooperation of, at least,
England, France, and Germany. In both the latter countries, the working-class
movement is well ahead of England. In Germany, it is even within measurable
distance of success. The progress it has there made during the last 25
years is unparalleled. It advances with ever-increasing velocity. If the
German middle-class have shown themselves lamentably deficient in political
capacity, discipline, courage, energy, and perseverance, the German working-class
have given ample proof of all these qualities. Four hundred years ago,
Germany was the starting-point of the first upheaval of the European middle-class;
as things are now, is it outside the limits of possibility that Germany
will be the scene, too, of the first great victory of the European proletariat?




Frederick Engels
London
April 20, 1892
 


Notes


1.
"Brother Jonathan" – A sort of Anglo-Christian "Uncle Sam".



2.
And even in business matters, the conceit of 
    national Chauvinism is but a sorry adviser.  Up to quite recently, 
    the average English manufacturer considered it derogatory for an 
    Englishman to speak any language but his own, and felt rather proud 
    than otherwise of the fact that "poor devils" of foreigners settled 
    in England and took off his hands the trouble of disposing of his 
    products abroad.  He never noticed that these foreigners, mostly 
    Germans, thus got command of a very large part of British foreign 
    trade, imports and exports, and that the direct foreign trade of 
    Englishmen became limited, almost entirely, to the colonies, China, 
    the United States, and South America.  Nor did he notice that these 
    Germans traded with other Germans abroad, who gradually organized a 
    complete network of commercial colonies all over the world.  But, 
    when Germany, about 40 years ago [c.1850], seriously began 
    manufacturing for export, this network served her admirably in her 
    transformation, in so short a time, from a corn-exporting into a 
    first-rate manufacturing country.  Then, about 10 years ago, the 
    British manufacturer got frightened, and asked his ambassadors and 
    consuls how it was that he could no longer keep his customers 
    together.  The unanimous answer was: 
 


    (1) You don't learn customer's language but expect him to speak  
        your own; 



    (2) You don't even try to suit your customer's wants, habits,  
        and tastes, but expect him to conform to your English ones.  

 


Next: French Socialism
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific




==========

## I








Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (Chpt. 1)




Frederick Engels
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific


I
[The Development of Utopian Socialism]

 
 

Modern Socialism is, in its essence, the direct product
of the recognition, on the one hand, of the class antagonisms existing
in the society of today between proprietors and non-proprietors, between
capitalists and wage-workers; on the other hand, of the anarchy existing
in production. But, in its theoretical form, modern Socialism originally
appears ostensibly as a more logical extension of the principles laid down
by the great French philosophers of the 18th century. Like every new theory,
modern Socialism had, at first, to connect itself with the intellectual
stock-in-trade ready to its hand, however deeply its roots lay in material
economic facts. 
The great men, who in France prepared men’s minds for the coming
revolution, were themselves extreme revolutionists. They recognized no
external authority of any kind whatever. Religion, natural science, society,
political institutions – everything was subjected to the most unsparing
criticism: everything must justify its existence before the judgment-seat
of reason or give up existence. Reason became the sole measure of everything.
It was the time when, as Hegel says, the world stood upon its head [1];
first in the sense that the human head, and the principles arrived at by
its thought, claimed to be the basis of all human action and association;
but by and by, also, in the wider sense that the reality which was in contradiction
to these principles had, in fact, to be turned upside down. Every form
of society and government then existing, every old traditional notion,
was flung into the lumber-room as irrational; the world had hitherto allowed
itself to be led solely by prejudices; everything in the past deserved
only pity and contempt. Now, for the first time, appeared the light of
day, the kingdom of reason; henceforth superstition, injustice, privilege,
oppression, were to be superseded by eternal truth, eternal Right, equality
based on Nature and the inalienable rights of man. 
We know today that this kingdom of reason was nothing more than
the idealized kingdom of the bourgeoisie; that this eternal Right found
its realization in bourgeois justice; that this equality reduced itself
to bourgeois equality before the law; that bourgeois property was proclaimed
as one of the essential rights of man; and that the government of reason,
the Contrat Social of Rousseau, came into being, and only could
come into being, as a democratic bourgeois republic. The great thinkers
of the 18th century could, no more than their predecessors, go beyond the
limits imposed upon them by their epoch. 
But, side by side with the antagonisms of the feudal nobility
and the burghers, who claimed to represent all the rest of society, was
the general antagonism of exploiters and exploited, of rich idlers and
poor workers. It was this very circumstance that made it possible for the
representatives of the bourgeoisie to put themselves forward as representing
not one special class, but the whole of suffering humanity. Still further.
From its origin the bourgeoisie was saddled with its antithesis: capitalists
cannot exist without wage-workers, and, in the same proportion as the mediaeval
burgher of the guild developed into the modern bourgeois, the guild journeyman
and the day-laborer, outside the guilds, developed into the proletarian.
And although, upon the whole, the bourgeoisie, in their struggle with the
nobility, could claim to represent at the same time the interests of the
different working-classes of that period, yet in every great bourgeois
movement there were independent outbursts of that class which was the forerunner,
more or less developed, of the modern proletariat. For example, at the
time of the German Reformation and the Peasants’ War, the Anabaptists and
Thomas Münzer; in the great English Revolution, the Levellers;
in the great French Revolution, Babeuf. 
These were theoretical enunciations, corresponding with these
revolutionary uprisings of a class not yet developed; in the 16th and 17th
centuries, Utopian pictures of ideal social conditions; in the 18th century, actual communistic theories (Morelly and Mably)[2]. The
demand for equality was no longer limited to political rights; it was extended
also to the social conditions of individuals. It was not simply class privileges
that were to be abolished, but class distinctions themselves. A Communism,
ascetic, denouncing all the pleasures of life, Spartan, was the first form
of the new teaching. Then came the three great Utopians: Saint-Simon, to
whom the middle-class movement, side by side with the proletarian, still
had a certain significance; Fourier; and Owen, who in the country where
capitalist production was most developed, and under the influence of the
antagonisms begotten of this, worked out his proposals for the removal
of class distinction systematically and in direct relation to French materialism. 
One thing is common to all three. Not one of them appears as a
representative of the interests of that proletariat which historical development
had, in the meantime, produced. Like the French philosophers, they do not
claim to emancipate a particular class to begin with, but all humanity
at once. Like them, they wish to bring in the kingdom of reason and eternal
justice, but this kingdom, as they see it, is as far as Heaven from Earth,
from that of the French philosophers. 
For, to our three social reformers, the bourgeois world, based
upon the principles of these philosophers, is quite as irrational and unjust,
and, therefore, finds its way to the dust-hole quite as readily as feudalism
and all the earlier stages of society. If pure reason and justice have
not, hitherto, ruled the world, this has been the case only because men
have not rightly understood them. What was wanted was the individual man
of genius, who has now arisen and who understands the truth. That he has
now arisen, that the truth has now been clearly understood, is not an inevitable
event, following of necessity in the chains of historical development,
but a mere happy accident. He might just as well have been born 500 years
earlier, and might then have spared humanity 500 years of error, strife,
and suffering.  
We saw how the French philosophers of the 18th century, the forerunners of the Revolution, appealed to reason as the sole judge of all that is. A rational government, rational society, were to be founded; everything that ran counter to eternal reason was to be remorselessly done away with. We saw also that this eternal reason was in reality nothing but the idealized understanding of the 18th century citizen, just then evolving into the bourgeois. The French Revolution had realized this rational society and government.    
But the new order of things, rational enough as compared with earlier conditions, turned out to be by no means absolutely rational. The state based upon reason completely collapsed. Rousseau’s Contrat Social had found its realization in the Reign of Terror, from which the bourgeoisie, who had lost confidence in their own political capacity, had taken refuge first in the corruption of the Directorate, and, finally, under the wing of the Napoleonic despotism. The promised eternal peace was turned into an endless war of conquest. The society based upon reason had fared no better. The antagonism between rich and poor, instead of dissolving into general prosperity, had become intensified by the removal of the guild and other privileges, which had to some extent bridged it over, and by the removal of the charitable institutions of the Church. The “freedom of property” from feudal fetters, now veritably accomplished, turned out to be, for the small capitalists and small proprietors, the freedom to sell their small property, crushed under the overmastering competition of the large capitalists and landlords, to these great lords, and thus, as far as the small capitalists and peasant proprietors were concerned, became “freedom from property”. The development of industry upon a capitalistic basis made poverty and misery of the working masses conditions of existence of society. Cash payment became more and more, in Carlyle’s phrase [See Thomas Carlyle, Past and Present, London 1843], the sole nexus between man and man. The number of crimes increased from year to year. Formerly, the feudal vices had openly stalked about in broad daylight; though not eradicated, they were now at any rate thrust into the background. In their stead, the bourgeois vices, hitherto practiced in secret, began to blossom all the more luxuriantly. Trade became to a greater and greater extent cheating. The “fraternity” of the revolutionary motto was realized in the chicanery and rivalries of the battle of competition. Oppression by force was replaced by corruption; the sword, as the first social lever, by gold. The right of the first night was transferred from the feudal lords to the bourgeois manufacturers. Prostitution increased to an extent never heard of. Marriage itself remained, as before, the legally recognized form, the official cloak of prostitution, and, moreover, was supplemented by rich crops of adultery.    
In a word, compared with the splendid promises of the philosophers, the social and political institutions born of the “triumph of reason” were bitterly disappointing caricatures. All that was wanting was the men to formulate this disappointment, and they came with the turn of the century. In 1802, Saint-Simon’s Geneva letters appeared; in 1808 appeared Fourier’s first work, although the groundwork of his theory dated from 1799; on January 1, 1800, Robert Owen undertook the direction of New Lanark.    
At this time, however, the capitalist mode of production, and with it the antagonism between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, was still very incompletely developed. Modern Industry, which had just arisen in England, was still unknown in France. But Modern Industry develops, on the one hand, the conflicts which make absolutely necessary a revolution in the mode of production, and the doing away with its capitalistic character – conflicts not only between the classes begotten of it, but also between the very productive forces and the forms of exchange created by it. And, on the other hand, it develops, in these very gigantic productive forces, the means of ending these conflicts. If, therefore, about the year 1800, the conflicts arising from the new social order were only just beginning to take shape, this holds still more fully as to the means of ending them. The “have-nothing” masses of Paris, during the Reign of Terror, were able for a moment to gain the mastery, and thus to lead the bourgeois revolution to victory in spite of the bourgeoisie themselves. But, in doing so, they only proved how impossible it was for their domination to last under the conditions then obtaining. The proletariat, which then for the first time evolved itself from these “have-nothing” masses as the nucleus of a new class, as yet quite incapable of independent political action, appeared as an oppressed, suffering order, to whom, in its incapacity to help itself, help could, at best, be brought in from without or down from above.    
This historical situation also dominated the founders of Socialism. To the crude conditions of capitalistic production and the crude class conditions correspond crude theories. The solution of the social problems, which as yet lay hidden in undeveloped economic conditions, the Utopians attempted to evolve out of the human brain. Society presented nothing but wrongs; to remove these was the task of reason. It was necessary, then, to discover a new and more perfect system of social order and to impose this upon society from without by propaganda, and, wherever it was possible, by the example of model experiments. These new social systems were foredoomed as Utopian; the more completely they were worked out in detail, the more they could not avoid drifting off into pure phantasies.    
These facts once established, we need not dwell a moment longer upon this side of the question, now wholly belonging to the past. We can leave it to the literary small fry to solemnly quibble over these phantasies, which today only make us smile, and to crow over the superiority of their own bald reasoning, as compared with such “insanity”. For ourselves, we delight in the stupendously grand thoughts and germs of thought that everywhere break out through their phantastic covering, and to which these Philistines are blind.    
 Saint-Simon was a son of the great French Revolution, at the outbreak of which he was not yet 30. The Revolution was the victory of the 3rd estate – i.e., of the great masses of the nation, working in production and in trade, over the privileged idle classes, the nobles and the priests. But the victory of the 3rd estate soon revealed itself as exclusively the victory of a smaller part of this “estate”, as the conquest of political power by the socially privileged section of it – i.e., the propertied bourgeoisie. And the bourgeoisie had certainly developed rapidly during the Revolution, partly by speculation in the lands of the nobility and of the Church, confiscated and afterwards put up for sale, and partly by frauds upon the nation by means of army contracts. It was the domination of these swindlers that, under the Directorate, brought France to the verge of ruin, and thus gave Napoleon the pretext for his coup d’état.    
Hence, to Saint-Simon the antagonism between the 3rd Estate and the privileged classes took the form of an antagonism between “workers” and “idlers”. The idlers were not merely the old privileged classes, but also all who, without taking any part in production or distribution, lived on their incomes. And the workers were not only the wage-workers, but also the manufacturers, the merchants, the bankers. That the idlers had lost the capacity for intellectual leadership and political supremacy had been proved, and was by the Revolution finally settled. That the non-possessing classes had not this capacity seemed to Saint-Simon proved by the experiences of the Reign of Terror. Then, who was to lead and command? According to Saint-Simon, science and industry, both united by a new religious bond, destined to restore that unity of religious ideas which had been lost since the time of the Reformation – a necessarily mystic and rigidly hierarchic “new Christianity”. But science, that was the scholars; and industry, that was, in the first place, the working bourgeois, manufacturers, merchants, bankers. These bourgeois were, certainly, intended by Saint-Simon to transform themselves into a kind of public officials, of social trustees; but they were still to hold, vis-à-vis of the workers, a commanding and economically privileged position. The bankers especially were to be called upon to direct the whole of social production by the regulation of credit. This conception was in exact keeping with a time in which Modern Industry in France and, with it, the chasm between bourgeoisie and proletariat was only just coming into existence. But what Saint-Simon especially lays stress upon is this: what interests him first, and above all other things, is the lot of the class that is the most numerous and the most poor (“la classe la plus nombreuse et la plus pauvre”).    
Already in his Geneva letters, Saint-Simon lays down the proposition that “all men ought to work”. In the same work he recognizes also that the Reign of Terror was the reign of the non-possessing masses.    
“See,” says he to them, “what happened in France at the time when your comrades held sway there; they brought about a famine.” [Lettres d’un habitant de Genève à ses contemporains, Saint-Simon, 1803]
 But to recognize the French Revolution as a class war, and not simply one between nobility and bourgeoisie, but between nobility, bourgeoisie, and the non-possessors, was, in the year 1802, a most pregnant discovery. In 1816, he declares that politics is the science of production, and foretells the complete absorption of politics by economics. The knowledge that economic conditions are the basis of political institutions appears here only in embryo. Yet what is here already very plainly expressed is the idea of the future conversion of political rule over men into an administration of things and a direction of processes of production – that is to say, the “abolition of the state”, about which recently there has been so much noise. 
Saint-Simon shows the same superiority over his contemporaries, when in 1814, immediately after the entry of the allies into Paris, and again in 1815, during the Hundred Days’ War, he proclaims the alliance of France and England, and then of both of these countries, with Germany, as the only guarantee for the prosperous development and peace of Europe. To preach to the French in 1815 an alliance with the victors of Waterloo required as much courage as historical foresight. 
 If in Saint-Simon we find a comprehensive breadth of view, by virtue of which almost all the ideas of later Socialists that are not strictly economic are found in him in embryo, we find in Fourier a criticism of the existing conditions of society, genuinely French and witty, but not upon that account any the less thorough. Fourier takes the bourgeoisie, their inspired prophets before the Revolution, and their interested eulogists after it, at their own word. He lays bare remorselessly the material and moral misery of the bourgeois world. He confronts it with the earlier philosophers’ dazzling promises of a society in which reason alone should reign, of a civilization in which happiness should be universal, of an illimitable human perfectibility, and with the rose-colored phraseology of the bourgeois ideologists of his time. He points out how everywhere the most pitiful reality corresponds with the most high-sounding phrases, and he overwhelms this hopeless fiasco of phrases with his mordant sarcasm. 
Fourier is not only a critic, his imperturbably serene nature makes him a satirist, and assuredly one of the greatest satirists of all time. He depicts, with equal power and charm, the swindling speculations that blossomed out upon the downfall of the Revolution, and the shopkeeping spirit prevalent in, and characteristic of, French commerce at that time. Still more masterly is his criticism of the bourgeois form of the relations between sexes, and the position of woman in bourgeois society. He was the first to declare that in any given society the degree of woman’s emancipation is the natural measure of the general emancipation. 
But Fourier is at his greatest in his conception of the history of society. He divides its whole course, thus far, into four stages of evolution – savagery, barbarism, the patriarchate, civilization. This last is identical with the so-called civil, or bourgeois, society of today – i.e., with the social order that came in with the 16th century. He proves “that the civilized stage raises every vice practiced by barbarism in a simple fashion into a form of existence, complex, ambiguous, equivocal, hypocritical” – that civilization moves “in a vicious circle”, in contradictions which it constantly reproduces without being able to solve them; hence it constantly arrives at the very opposite to that which it wants to attain, or pretends to want to attain, so that, e.g., “under civilization poverty is born of superabundance itself”. [Théorie de l’unite universelle, Fourier, 1843 and Le nouveau monde industriel et sociétaire, ou invention du procédé d'industrie attrayante et enaturelle distribuée en séries passionnées, Fourier, 1845] 
Fourier, as we see, uses the dialectic method in the same masterly way as his contemporary, Hegel. Using these same dialectics, he argues against talk about illimitable human perfectibility, that every historical phase has its period of ascent and also its period of descent, and he applies this observation to the future of the whole human race. As Kant introduced into natural science the idea of the ultimate destruction of the Earth, Fourier introduced into historical science that of the ultimate destruction of the human race. 
Whilst in France the hurricane of the Revolution swept over the land, in England a quieter, but not on that account less tremendous, revolution was going on. Steam and the new tool-making machinery were transforming manufacture into modern industry, and thus revolutionizing the whole foundation of bourgeois society. The sluggish march of development of the manufacturing period changed into a veritable storm and stress period of production. With constantly increasing swiftness the splitting-up into large capitalists and non-possessing proletarians went on. Between these, instead of the former stable middle-class, an unstable mass of artisans and small shopkeepers, the most fluctuating portion of the population, now led a precarious existence. 
The new mode of production was, as yet, only at the beginning of its period of ascent; as yet it was the normal, regular method of production – the only one possible under existing conditions. Nevertheless, even then it was producing crying social abuses – the herding together of a homeless population in the worst quarters of the large towns; the loosening of all traditional moral bonds, of patriarchal subordination, of family relations; overwork, especially of women and children, to a frightful extent; complete demoralization of the working-class, suddenly flung into altogether new conditions, from the country into the town, from agriculture into modern industry, from stable conditions of existence into insecure ones that change from day to day. 
 At this juncture, there came forward as a reformer a manufacturer 29-years-old – a man of almost sublime, childlike simplicity of character, and at the same time one of the few born leaders of men. Robert Owen had adopted the teaching of the materialistic philosophers: that man’s character is the product, on the one hand, of heredity; on the other, of the environment of the individual during his lifetime, and especially during his period of development. In the industrial revolution most of his class saw only chaos and confusion, and the opportunity of fishing in these troubled waters and making large fortunes quickly. He saw in it the opportunity of putting into practice his favorite theory, and so of bringing order out of chaos. He had already tried it with success, as superintendent of more than 500 men in a Manchester factory. From 1800 to 1829, he directed the great cotton mill at New Lanark, in Scotland, as managing partner, along the same lines, but with greater freedom of action and with a success that made him a European reputation. A population, originally consisting of the most diverse and, for the most part, very demoralized elements, a population that gradually grew to 2,500, he turned into a model colony, in which drunkenness, police, magistrates, lawsuits, poor laws, charity, were unknown. And all this simply by placing the people in conditions worthy of human beings, and especially by carefully bringing up the rising generation. He was the founder of infant schools, and introduced them first at New Lanark. At the age of two, the children came to school, where they enjoyed themselves so much that they could scarely be got home again. Whilst his competitors worked their people 13 or 14 hours a day, in New Lanark the working-day was only 10 and a half hours. When a crisis in cotton stopped work for four months, his workers received their full wages all the time. And with all this the business more than doubled in value, and to the last yielded large profits to its proprietors. 
In spite of all this, Owen was not content. The existence which he secured for his workers was, in his eyes, still far from being worthy of human beings. "The people were slaves at my mercy." The relatively favorable conditions in which he had placed them were still far from allowing a rational development of the character and of the intellect in all directions, much less of the free exercise of all their faculties. 
 “And yet, the working part of this population of 2,500 persons was daily producing as much real wealth for society as, less than half a century before, it would have required the working part of a population of 600,000 to create. I asked myself, what became of the difference between the wealth consumed by 2,500 persons and that which would have been consumed by 600,000?” [3] 
The answer was clear. It had been used to pay the proprietors of the establishment 5 per cent on the capital they had laid out, in addition to over £300,000 clear profit. And that which held for New Lanark held to a still greater extent for all the factories in England. 
“If this new wealth had not been created by machinery, imperfectly as it has been applied, the wars of Europe, in opposition to Napoleon, and to support the aristocratic principles of society, could not have been maintained. And yet this new power was the creation of the working-classes.” 
 Note, l. c., p.22. 
To them, therefore, the fruits of this new power belonged. The newly-created gigantic productive forces, hitherto used only to enrich individuals and to enslave the masses, offered to Owen the foundations for a reconstruction of society; they were destined, as the common property of all, to be worked for the common good of all. 
Owen’s communism was based upon this purely business foundation, the outcome, so to say, of commercial calculation. Throughout, it maintained this practical character. Thus, in 1823, Owen proposed the relief of the distress in Ireland by Communist colonies, and drew up complete estimates of costs of founding them, yearly expenditure, and probable revenue. And in his definite plan for the future, the technical working out of details is managed with such practical knowledge – ground plan, front and side and bird’s-eye views all included – that the Owen method of social reform once accepted, there is from the practical point of view little to be said against the actual arrangement of details. 
His advance in the direction of Communism was the turning-point in Owen’s life. As long as he was simply a philanthropist, he was rewarded with nothing but wealth, applause, honor, and glory. He was the most popular man in Europe. Not only men of his own class, but statesmen and princes listened to him approvingly. But when he came out with his Communist theories that was quite another thing. Three great obstacles seemed to him especially to block the path to social reform: private property, religion, the present form of marriage. 
He knew what confronted him if he attacked these – outlawry, excommunication from official society, the loss of his whole social position. But nothing of this prevented him from attacking them without fear of consequences, and what he had foreseen happened. Banished from official society, with a conspiracy of silence against him in the press, ruined by his unsuccessful Communist experiments in America, in which he sacrificed all his fortune, he turned directly to the working-class and continued working in their midst for 30 years. Every social movement, every real advance in England on behalf of the workers links itself on to the name of Robert Owen. He forced through in 1819, after five years’ fighting, the first law limiting the hours of labor of women and children in factories. He was president of the first Congress at which all the Trade Unions of England united in a single great trade association. He introduced as transition measures to the complete communistic organization of society, on the one hand, cooperative societies for retail trade and production. These have since that time, at least, given practical proof that the merchant and the manufacturer are socially quite unnecessary. On the other hand, he introduced labor bazaars for the exchange of the products of labor through the medium of labor-notes, whose unit was a single hour of work; institutions necessarily doomed to failure, but completely anticipating Proudhon’s bank of exchange of a much later period, and differing entirely from this in that it did not claim to be the panacea for all social ills, but only a first step towards a much more radical revolution of society. 
The Utopians’ mode of thought has for a long time governed the Socialist ideas of the 19th century, and still governs some of them. Until very recently, all French and English Socialists did homage to it. The earlier German Communism, including that of Weitling, was of the same school. To all these, Socialism is the expression of absolute truth, reason and justice, and has only to be discovered to conquer all the world by virtue of its own power. And as an absolute truth is independent of time, space, and of the historical development of man, it is a mere accident when and where it is discovered. With all this, absolute truth, reason, and justice are different with the founder of each different school. And as each one’s special kind of absolute truth, reason, and justice is again conditioned by his subjective understanding, his conditions of existence, the measure of his knowledge and his intellectual training, there is no other ending possible in this conflict of absolute truths than that they shall be mutually exclusive of one another. Hence, from this nothing could come but a kind of eclectic, average Socialism, which, as a matter of fact, has up to the present time dominated the minds of most of the socialist workers in France and England. Hence, a mish-mash allowing of the most manifold shades of opinion: a mish-mash of such critical statements, economic theories, pictures of future society by the founders of different sects, as excite a minimum of opposition; a mish-mash which is the more easily brewed the more definite sharp edges of the individual constituents are rubbed down in the stream of debate, like rounded pebbles in a brook. 
To make a science of Socialism, it had first to be placed upon a real basis. 
 

Next: Dialectics
 

Notes

1.
This is the passage on the French Revolution:

“Thought, the concept of law, all at once made itself felt, and against this the old scaffolding of wrong could make no stand.  In this conception of law, therefore, a constitution has now been established, and henceforth everything must be based upon this.  Since the Sun had been in the firmament, and the planets circled around him, the sight had never been seen of man standing upon his head – i.e., on the Idea – and building reality after this image.  Anaxagoras first said that the Nous, Reason, rules the world; but now, for the first time, had men come to recognize that the Idea must rule the mental reality.  And this was a magnificent sunrise.  All thinking Beings have participated in celebrating this holy day.  A sublime emotion swayed men at that time, an enthusiasm of reason pervaded the world, as if now had come the reconciliation of the Divine Principle with the world.”

[Hegel: “The Philosophy of history”, 1840, p.535] 

Is it not high time to set the anti-Socialist law in action against such teachings, subversive and to the common danger, by the late Professor Hegel?

2.
Engels refers here to the works of the utopian Socialists Thomas More (16th century) and Tommaso Campanella (17th century). See Code de la nature, Morelly, Paris 1841 and De la législation, ou principe des lois, Mably, Amsterdam 1776.

3.
From The Revolution in Mind and Practice, p.21, a memorial addressed to all the “red Republicans, Communists and Socialists of Europe,” and sent to the provisional government of France, 1848, and also “to Queen Victoria and her responsible advisers.” 
 


Table of Contents |
Utopian Socialism |
Fourier Archive




==========

## II







Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (Chpt. 2)




Frederick Engels
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific

II
[Dialectics]

 


In the meantime, along with and after the French philosophy
of the 18th century, had arisen the new German philosophy, culminating
in Hegel.

Its greatest merit was the taking up again of dialectics as the
highest form of reasoning. The old Greek philosophers were all born natural
dialecticians, and Aristotle, the most encyclopaedic of them, had already
analyzed the most essential forms of dialectic thought. The newer philosophy,
on the other hand, although in it also dialectics had brilliant exponents
(e.g. Descartes and Spinoza), had, especially through English influence,
become more and more rigidly fixed in the so-called metaphysical mode of
reasoning, by which also the French of the 18th century were almost wholly
dominated, at all events in their special philosophical work. Outside philosophy
in the restricted sense, the French nevertheless produced masterpieces
of dialectic. We need only call to mind Diderot's Le Neveu de Rameau,
and Rousseau's Discours sur l'origine et les fondements de l'inegalite
parmi les hommes. We give here, in brief, the essential character
of these two modes of thought.

When we consider and reflect upon Nature at large, or the history
of mankind, or our own intellectual activity, at first we see the picture
of an endless entanglement of relations and reactions, permutations and
combinations, in which nothing remains what, where and as it was, but everything
moves, changes, comes into being and passes away. We see, therefore, at
first the picture as a whole, with its individual parts still more or less
kept in the background; we observe the movements, transitions, connections,
rather than the things that move, combine, and are connected. This primitive,
naive but intrinsically correct conception of the world is that of ancient
Greek philosophy, and was first clearly formulated by Heraclitus: everything
is and is not, for everything is fluid, is constantly changing, constantly
coming into being and passing away.[A]

But this conception, correctly as it expresses the general character
of the picture of appearances as a whole, does not suffice to explain the
details of which this picture is made up, and so long as we do not understand
these, we have not a clear idea of the whole picture. In order to understand
these details, we must detach them from their natural, special causes,
effects, etc. This is, primarily, the task of natural science and historical
research: branches of science which the Greek of classical times, on very
good grounds, relegated to a subordinate position, because they had first
of all to collect materials for these sciences to work upon. A certain
amount of natural and historical material must be collected before there
can be any critical analysis, comparison, and arrangement in classes, orders,
and species. The foundations of the exact natural sciences were, therefore,
first worked out by the Greeks of the Alexandrian period [B],
and later on, in the Middle Ages, by the Arabs. Real natural science dates

from the second half of the 15th century, and thence onward it had advanced

with constantly increasing rapidity. The analysis of Nature into its individual

parts, the grouping of the different natural processes and objects in definite

classes, the study of the internal anatomy of organized bodies in their

manifold forms — these were the fundamental conditions of the gigantic

strides in our knowledge of Nature that have been made during the last

400 years. But this method of work has also left us as legacy the habit

of observing natural objects and processes in isolation, apart from their

connection with the vast whole; of observing them in repose, not in motion;

as constraints, not as essentially variables; in their death, not in their

life. And when this way of looking at things was transferred by Bacon and

Locke from natural science to philosophy, it begot the narrow, metaphysical

mode of thought peculiar to the last century.

To the metaphysician, things and their mental reflexes, ideas,
are isolated, are to be considered one after the other and apart from
each other, are objects of investigation fixed, rigid, given once for all.
He thinks in absolutely irreconcilable antitheses. His communication is
'yea, yea; nay, nay'; for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil."
For him, a thing either exists or does not exist; a thing cannot at the
same time be itself and something else. Positive and negative absolutely
exclude one another; cause and effect stand in a rigid antithesis, one to
the other.

At first sight, this mode of thinking seems to us very luminous,
because it is that of so-called sound commonsense. Only sound commonsense,
respectable fellow that he is, in the homely realm of his own four walls,
has very wonderful adventures directly he ventures out into the wide world
of research. And the metaphysical mode of thought, justifiable and necessary
as it is in a number of domains whose extent varies according to the nature
of the particular object of investigation, sooner or later reaches a limit,
beyond which it becomes one-sided, restricted, abstract, lost in insoluble
contradictions. In the contemplation of individual things, it forgets the
connection between them; in the contemplation of their existence, it forgets
the beginning and end of that existence; of their repose, it forgets their
motion. It cannot see the woods for the trees.

For everyday purposes, we know and can say, e.g., whether an animal
is alive or not. But, upon closer inquiry, we find that this is, in many
cases, a very complex question, as the jurists know very well. They have
cudgelled their brains in vain to discover a rational limit beyond which
the killing of the child in its mother's womb is murder. It is just as
impossible to determine absolutely the moment of death, for physiology
proves that death is not an instantaneous, momentary phenomenon, but a
very protracted process.

In like manner, every organized being is every moment the same
and not the same; every moment, it assimilates matter supplied from without,
and gets rid of other matter; every moment, some cells of its body die
and others build themselves anew; in a longer or shorter time, the matter
of its body is completely renewed, and is replaced by other molecules of
matter, so that every organized being is always itself, and yet something
other than itself.

Further, we find upon closer investigation that the two poles
of an antithesis, positive and negative, e.g., are as inseparable as they
are opposed, and that despite all their opposition, they mutually interpenetrate.
And we find, in like manner, that cause and effect are conceptions which
only hold good in their application to individual cases; but as soon as
we consider the individual cases in their general connection with the universe
as a whole, they run into each other, and they become confounded when we
contemplate that universal action and reaction in which causes and effects
are eternally changing places, so that what is effect here and now will
be cause there and then, and vice versa.

None of these processes and modes of thought enters into the framework
of metaphysical reasoning. Dialectics, on the other hand, comprehends things
and their representations, ideas, in their essential connection, concatenation,
motion, origin and ending. Such processes as those mentioned above are,
therefore, so many corroborations of its own method of procedure.

Nature is the proof of dialectics, and it must be said for modern
science that it has furnished this proof with very rich materials increasingly
daily, and thus has shown that, in the last resort, Nature works dialectically
and not metaphysically; that she does not move in the eternal oneness of
a perpetually recurring circle, but goes through a real historical evolution.
In this connection, Darwin must be named before all others. He dealt the
metaphysical conception of Nature the heaviest blow by his proof that all
organic beings, plants, animals, and man himself, are the products of a
process of evolution going on through millions of years. But, the naturalists,
who have learned to think dialectically, are few and far between, and this
conflict of the results of discovery with preconceived modes of thinking,
explains the endless confusion now reigning in theoretical natural science,
the despair of teachers as well as learners, of authors and readers alike.

An exact representation of the universe, of its evolution, of
the development of mankind, and of the reflection of this evolution in
the minds of men, can therefore only be obtained by the methods of dialectics
with its constant regard to the innumerable actions and reactions of life
and death, of progressive or retrogressive changes. And in this spirit,
the new German philosophy has worked. Kant began his career by resolving
the stable Solar system of Newton and its eternal duration, after the famous
initial impulse had once been given, into the result of a historical process,
the formation of the Sun and all the planets out of a rotating, nebulous
mass. From this, he at the same time drew the conclusion that, given this
origin of the Solar system, its future death followed of necessity. His
theory, half a century later, was established mathematically by Laplace,
and half a century after that, the spectroscope proved the existence in
space of such incandescent masses of gas in various stages of condensation.


This new German philosophy culminated in the Hegelian system. In this system
— and herein is its great merit — for the first time the whole world,
natural, historical, intellectual, is represented as a process — i.e.,
as in constant motion, change, transformation, development; and the attempt
is made to trace out the internal connection that makes a continuous whole
of all this movement and development. From this point of view, the history
of mankind no longer appeared as a wild whirl of senseless deeds of violence,
all equally condemnable at the judgment seat of mature philosophic reason
and which are best forgotten as quickly as possible, but as the process
of evolution of man himself. It was now the task of the intellect to follow
the gradual march of this process through all its devious ways, and to
trace out the inner law running through all its apparently accidental phenomena.

That the Hegelian system did not solve the problem it propounded
is here immaterial. Its epoch-making merit was that it propounded the problem.
This problem is one that no single individual will ever be able to solve.
Although Hegel was — with Saint-Simon — the most encyclopaedic mind of
his time, yet he was limited, first, by the necessary limited extent of
his own knowledge and, second, by the limited extent and depth of the knowledge
and conceptions of his age. To these limits, a third must be added; Hegel
was an idealist. To him, the thoughts within his brain were not the more
or less abstract pictures of actual things and processes, but, conversely,
things and their evolution were only the realized pictures of the "Idea",
existing somewhere from eternity before the world was. This way of thinking
turned everything upside down, and completely reversed the actual connection
of things in the world. Correctly and ingeniously as many groups of facts
were grasped by Hegel, yet, for the reasons just given, there is much that
is botched, artificial, labored, in a word, wrong in point of detail. The
Hegelian system, in itself, was a colossal miscarriage — but it was also
the last of its kind.

It was suffering, in fact, from an internal and incurable contradiction.
Upon the one hand, its essential proposition was the conception that human
history is a process of evolution, which, by its very nature, cannot find
its intellectual final term in the discovery of any so-called absolute
truth. But, on the other hand, it laid claim to being the very essence
of this absolute truth. A system of natural and historical knowledge, embracing
everything, and final for all time, is a contradiction to the fundamental
law of dialectic reasoning.

This law, indeed, by no means excludes, but, on the contrary,
includes the idea that the systematic knowledge of the external universe
can make giant strides from age to age.

The perception of the the fundamental contradiction in German
idealism led necessarily back to materialism, but — nota bene —
not to the simply metaphysical, exclusively mechanical materialism of the
18th century. Old materialism looked upon all previous history as a crude
heap of irrationality and violence; modern materialism sees in it the process
of evolution of humanity, and aims at discovering the laws thereof. With
the French of the 18th century, and even with Hegel, the conception obtained
of Nature as a whole — moving in narrow circles, and forever immutable,
with its eternal celestial bodies, as Newton, and unalterable organic species,
as Linnaeus, taught. Modern materialism embraces the more recent discoveries
of natural science, according to which Nature also has its history in time,
the celestial bodies, like the organic species that, under favorable conditions,
people them, being born and perishing. And even if Nature, as a whole,
must still be said to move in recurrent cycles, these cycles assume infinitely
larger dimensions. In both aspects, modern materialism is essentially dialectic,
and no longer requires the assistance of that sort of philosophy which,
queen-like, pretended to rule the remaining mob of sciences. As soon as
each special science is bound to make clear its position in the great totality
of things and of our knowledge of things, a special science dealing with
this totality is superfluous or unnecessary. That which still survives
of all earlier philosophy is the science of thought and its law — formal
logic and dialectics. Everything else is subsumed in the positive science
of Nature and history.

Whilst, however, the revolution in the conception of Nature could
only be made in proportion to the corresponding positive materials furnished
by research, already much earlier certain historical facts had occurred
which led to a decisive change in the conception of history. In 1831, the
first working-class rising took place in Lyons; between 1838 and 1842,
the first national working-class movement, that of the English Chartists,
reached its height. The class struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie
came to the front in the history of the most advanced countries in Europe,
in proportion to the development, upon the one hand, of modern industry,
upon the other, of the newly-acquired political supremacy of the bourgeoisie.
Facts more and more strenuously gave the lie to the teachings of bourgeois
economy as to the identity of the interests of capital and labor, as to
the universal harmony and universal prosperity that would be the consequence
of unbridled competition. All these things could no longer be ignored,
any more than the French and English Socialism, which was their theoretical,
though very imperfect, expression. But the old idealist conception of history,
which was not yet dislodged, knew nothing of class struggles based upon

economic interests, knew nothing of economic interests; production and

all economic relations appeared in it only as incidental, subordinate elements

in the "history of civilization".





The new facts made imperative a new examination of all past history.

Then it was seen that all past history, with the exception of its

primitive stages, was the history of class struggles; that these warring

classes of society are always the products of the modes of production and

of exchange — in a word, of the economic conditions of their time;

that the economic structure of society always furnishes the real basis,

starting from which we can alone work out the ultimate explanation of the

whole superstructure of juridical and political institutions as well as

of the religious, philosophical, and other ideas of a given historical

period. Hegel has freed history from metaphysics — he made it dialectic;

but his conception of history was essentially idealistic. But now idealism

was driven from its last refuge, the philosophy of history; now a materialistic

treatment of history was propounded, and a method found of explaining man's

"knowing" by his "being", instead of, as heretofore, his "being" by his

"knowing".





From that time forward, Socialism was no longer an accidental

discovery of this or that ingenious brain, but the necessary outcome of

the struggle between two historically developed classes — the proletariat

and the bourgeoisie. Its task was no longer to manufacture a system of

society as perfect as possible, but to examine the historico-economic succession

of events from which these classes and their antagonism had of necessity

sprung, and to discover in the economic conditions thus created the means

of ending the conflict. But the Socialism of earlier days was as incompatible

with this materialist conception as the conception of Nature of the French

materialists was with dialectics and modern natural science. The Socialism

of earlier days certainly criticized the existing capitalistic mode of

production and its consequences. But it could not explain them, and, therefore,

could not get the mastery of them. It could only simply reject them as

bad. The more strongly this earlier Socialism denounced the exploitations

of the working-class, inevitable under Capitalism, the less able was it

clearly to show in what this exploitation consisted and how it arose, but

for this it was necessary —





to present the capitalistic mode of production in its historical connection

and its inevitableness during a particular historical period, and therefore,

also, to present its inevitable downfall; and



to lay bare its essential character, which was still a secret. This was

done by the discovery of surplus-value.



It was shown that the appropriation of unpaid labor is the basis of the

capitalist mode of production and of the exploitation of the worker that

occurs under it; that even if the capitalist buys the labor power of his

laborer at its full value as a commodity on the market, he yet extracts

more value from it than he paid for; and that in the ultimate analysis,

this surplus-value forms those sums of value from which are heaped up constantly

increasing masses of capital in the hands of the possessing classes. The

genesis of capitalist production and the production of capital were both

explained.



These two great discoveries, the materialistic conception of history

and the revelation of the secret of capitalistic production through surplus-value,

we owe to Marx. With these discoveries, Socialism became a science. The

next thing was to work out all its details and relations.


 



Next: Historical Materialism

 



Notes



[A]

Unknown to the Western world until the 20th-century, the Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu was a predecessor of or possibly contemporary to Heraclitus. Lao Tzu wrote the renowned Tao Te Ching in which he also espouses the fundamental principles of dialectics.



[B]

The Alexandrian period of the development of science comprises the 

     period extending from the 3rd century B.C. to the 17th century 

     A.D.  It derives its name from the town of Alexandria in Egypt, 

     which was one of the most important centres of international 

     economic intercourses at that time.  In the Alexandrian period, 

     mathematics (Euclid and Archimedes), geography, astronomy, anatomy, 

     physiology, etc., attained considerable development.  

     


China also been began development in natural sciences in the third century B.C.E.

 


Table of Contents




==========

## III







Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (Chpt. 3)





Frederick Engels



Socialism: Utopian and Scientific





III

[Historical Materialism]



 



The materialist conception of history starts from

the proposition that the production of the means to support human life

and, next to production, the exchange of things produced, is the basis

of all social structure; that in every society that has appeared in history,

the manner in which wealth is distributed and society divided into classes

or orders is dependent upon what is produced, how it is produced, and how

the products are exchanged. From this point of view, the final causes of

all social changes and political revolutions are to be sought, not in men's

brains, not in men's better insights into eternal truth and justice, but

in changes in the modes of production and exchange. They are to be sought,

not in the philosophy, but in the economics of each particular

epoch. The growing perception that existing social institutions are unreasonable

and unjust, that reason has become unreason, and right wrong [1],

is only proof that in the modes of production and exchange changes have

silently taken place with which the social order, adapted to earlier economic

conditions, is no longer in keeping. From this it also follows that the

means of getting rid of the incongruities that have been brought to light

must also be present, in a more or less developed condition, within the

changed modes of production themselves. These means are not to be invented

by deduction from fundamental principles, but are to be discovered in the

stubborn facts of the existing system of production.





What is, then, the position of modern Socialism in this connection?





The present situation of society — this is now pretty generally

conceded — is the creation of the ruling class of today, of the bourgeoisie.

The mode of production peculiar to the bourgeoisie, known, since Marx,

as the capitalist mode of production, was incompatible with the feudal

system, with the privileges it conferred upon individuals, entire social

ranks and local corporations, as well as with the hereditary ties of subordination

which constituted the framework of its social organization. The bourgeoisie

broke up the feudal system and built upon its ruins the capitalist order

of society, the kingdom of free competition, of personal liberty, of the

equality, before the law, of all commodity owners, of all the rest of the

capitalist blessings. Thenceforward, the capitalist mode of production

could develop in freedom. Since steam, machinery, and the making of machines

by machinery transformed the older manufacture into modern industry, the

productive forces, evolved under the guidance of the bourgeoisie, developed

with a rapidity and in a degree unheard of before. But just as the older

manufacture, in its time, and handicraft, becoming more developed under

its influence, had come into collision with the feudal trammels of the

guilds, so now modern industry, in its complete development, comes into

collision with the bounds within which the capitalist mode of production

holds it confined. The new productive forces have already outgrown the

capitalistic mode of using them. And this conflict between productive forces

and modes of production is not a conflict engendered in the mind of man,

like that between original sin and divine justice. It exists, in fact,

objectively, outside us, independently of the will and actions even of

the men that have brought it on. Modern Socialism is nothing but the reflex,

in thought, of this conflict in fact; its ideal reflection in the minds,

first, of the class directly suffering under it, the working class.





Now, in what does this conflict consist?





Before capitalist production — i.e., in the Middle Ages — the

system of petty industry obtained generally, based upon the private property

of the laborers in their means of production; in the country, the agriculture

of the small peasant, freeman, or serf; in the towns, the handicrafts organized

in guilds. The instruments of labor — land, agricultural implements, the

workshop, the tool — were the instruments of labor of single individuals,

adapted for the use of one worker, and, therefore, of necessity, small,

dwarfish, circumscribed. But, for this very reason, they belonged as a

rule to the producer himself. To concentrate these scattered, limited means

of production, to enlarge them, to turn them into the powerful levers of

production of the present day — this was precisely the historic role of

capitalist production and of its upholder, the bourgeoisie. In the fourth

section of Capital, Marx has explained in detail how since the 15th

century this has been historically worked out through the three phases

of simple co-operation, manufacture, and modern industry. But the bourgeoisie,

as is shown there, could not transform these puny means of production into

mighty productive forces without transforming them, at the same time, from

means of production of the individual into social means of production

only workable by a collectivity of men. The spinning wheel, the handloom,

the blacksmith's hammer, were replaced by the spinning-machine, the power-loom,

the steam-hammer; the individual workshop, by the factory implying the

co-operation of hundreds and thousands of workmen. In like manner, production

itself changed from a series of individual into a series of social acts,

and the production from individual to social products. The yarn, the cloth,

the metal articles that now come out of the factory were the joint product

of many workers, through whose hands they had successively to pass before

they were ready. No one person could say of them: "I made that; this is

my product."





But where, in a given society, the fundamental form of production

is that spontaneous division of labor which creeps in gradually and not

upon any preconceived plan, there the products take on the form of commodities,

whose mutual exchange, buying and selling, enable the individual producers

to satisfy their manifold wants. And this was the case in the Middle Ages.

The peasant, e.g., sold to the artisan agricultural products and bought

from him the products of handicraft. Into this society of individual producers,

of commodity producers, the new mode of production thrust itself. In the

midst of the old division of labor, grown up spontaneously and upon no

definite plan, which had governed the whole of society, now arose division

of labor upon a definite plan, as organized in the factory; side

by side with individual production appeared social production.

The products of both were sold in the same market, and, therefore, at prices

at least approximately equal. But organization upon a definite plan was

stronger than spontaneous division of labor. The factories working with

the combined social forces of a collectivity of individuals produced their

commodities far more cheaply than the individual small producers. Individual

producers succumbed in one department after another. Socialized production

revolutionized all the old methods of production. But its revolutionary

character was, at the same time, so little recognized that it was, on the

contrary, introduced as a means of increasing and developing the production

of commodities. When it arose, it found ready-made, and made liberal use

of, certain machinery for the production and exchange of commodities: merchants'

capital, handicraft, wage-labor. Socialized production thus introducing

itself as a new form of the production of commodities, it was a matter

of course that under it the old forms of appropriation remained in full

swing, and were applied to its products as well.





In the medieval stage of evolution of the production of commodities,

the question as to the owner of the product of labor could not arise. The

individual producer, as a rule, had, from raw material belonging to himself,

and generally his own handiwork, produced it with his own tools, by the

labor of his own hands or of his family. There was no need for him to appropriate

the new product. It belonged wholly to him, as a matter of course. His

property in the product was, therefore, based upon his own labor.

Even where external help was used, this was, as a rule, of little importance,

and very generally was compensated by something other than wages. The apprentices

and journeymen of the guilds worked less for board and wages than for education,

in order that they might become master craftsmen themselves.





Then came the concentration of the means of production and of

the producers in large workshops and manufactories, their transformation

into actual socialized means of production and socialized producers. But

the socialized producers and means of production and their products were

still treated, after this change, just as they had been before — i.e.,

as the means of production and the products of individuals. Hitherto, the

owner of the instruments of labor had himself appropriated the product,

because, as a rule, it was his own product and the assistance of others

was the exception. Now, the owner of the instruments of labor always appropriated

to himself the product, although it was no longer his product but

exclusively the product of the labor of others. Thus, the products

now produced socially were not appropriated by those who had actually set

in motion the means of production and actually produced the commodities,

but by the capitalists. The means of production, and production

itself, had become in essence socialized. But they were subjected to a

form of appropriation which presupposes the private production of individuals,

under which, therefore, every one owns his own product and brings it to

market. The mode of production is subjected to this form of appropriation,

although it abolishes the conditions upon which the latter rests. [2]


This contradiction, which gives to the new mode of production

its capitalistic character, contains the germ of the whole of the social

antagonisms of today. The greater the mastery obtained by the new mode

of production over all important fields of production and in all manufacturing

countries, the more it reduced individual production to an insignificant

residuum, the more clearly was brought out the incompatibility of socialized

production with capitalistic appropriation.





The first capitalists found, as we have said, alongside of other

forms of labor, wage-labor ready-made for them on the market. But it was

exceptional, complementary, accessory, transitory wage-labor. The agricultural

laborer, though, upon occasion, he hired himself out by the day, had a

few acres of his own land on which he could at all events live at a pinch.

The guilds were so organized that the journeyman of today became the master

of tomorrow. But all this changed, as soon as the means of production became

socialized and concentrated in the hands of capitalists. The means of production,

as well as the product, of the individual producer became more and more

worthless; there was nothing left for him but to turn wage-worker under

the capitalist. Wage-labor, aforetime the exception and accessory, now

became the rule and basis of all production; aforetime complementary, it

now became the sole remaining function of the worker. The wage-worker for

a time became a wage-worker for life. The number of these permanent was

further enormously increased by the breaking-up of the feudal system that

occurred at the same time, by the disbanding of the retainers of the feudal

lords, the eviction of the peasants from their homesteads, etc. The separation

was made complete between the means of production concentrated in the hands

of the capitalists, on the one side, and the producers, possessing nothing

but their labor-power, on the other. The contradiction between socialized

production and capitalistic appropriation manifested itself as the antagonism

of proletariat and bourgeoisie.


We have seen that the capitalistic mode of production thrust its

way into a society of commodity-producers, of individual producers, whose

social bond was the exchange of their products. But every society based

upon the production of commodities has this peculiarity: that the producers

have lost control over their own social inter-relations. Each man produces

for himself with such means of production as he may happen to have, and

for such exchange as he may require to satisfy his remaining wants. No

one knows how much of his particular article is coming on the market, nor

how much of it will be wanted. No one knows whether his individual product

will meet an actual demand, whether he will be able to make good his costs

of production or even to sell his commodity at all. Anarchy reigns in socialized

production.





But the production of commodities, like every other form of production,

has it peculiar, inherent laws inseparable from it; and these laws work,

despite anarchy, in and through anarchy. They reveal themselves in the

only persistent form of social inter-relations — i.e., in exchange —

and here they affect the individual producers as compulsory laws of competition.

They are, at first, unknown to these producers themselves, and have to

be discovered by them gradually and as the result of experience. They work

themselves out, therefore, independently of the producers, and in antagonism

to them, as inexorable natural laws of their particular form of production.

The product governs the producers.





In mediaeval society, especially in the earlier centuries, production

was essentially directed toward satisfying the wants of the individual.

It satisfied, in the main, only the wants of the producer and his family.

Where relations of personal dependence existed, as in the country, it also

helped to satisfy the wants of the feudal lord. In all this there was,

therefore, no exchange; the products, consequently, did not assume the

character of commodities. The family of the peasant produced almost everything

they wanted: clothes and furniture, as well as the means of subsistence.

Only when it began to produce more than was sufficient to supply its own

wants and the payments in kind to the feudal lords, only then did it also

produce commodities. This surplus, thrown into socialized exchange and

offered for sale, became commodities.





The artisan in the towns, it is true, had from the first to produce

for exchange. But they, also, themselves supplied the greatest part of

their individual wants. They had gardens and plots of land. They turned

their cattle out into the communal forest, which, also, yielded them timber

and firing. The women spun flax, wool, and so forth. Production for the

purpose of exchange, production of commodities, was only in its infancy.

Hence, exchange was restricted, the market narrow, the methods of production

stable; there was local exclusiveness without, local unity within; the

mark in the country; in the town, the guild.





But with the extension of the production of commodities, and especially

with the introduction of the capitalist mode of production, the laws of

commodity-production, hitherto latent, came into action more openly and

with greater force. The old bonds were loosened, the old exclusive limits

broken through, the producers were more and more turned into independent,

isolated producers of commodities. It became apparent that the production

of society at large was ruled by absence of plan, by accident, by anarchy;

and this anarchy grew to greater and greater height. But the chief means

by aid of which the capitalist mode of production intensified this anarchy

of socialized production was the exact opposite of anarchy. It was the

increasing organization of production, upon a social basis, in every individual

productive establishment. By this, the old, peaceful, stable condition

of things was ended. Wherever this organization of production was introduced

into a branch of industry, it brooked no other method of production by

its side. The field of labor became a battle-ground. The great geographical

discoveries, and the colonization following them, multiplied markets and

quickened the transformation of handicraft into manufacture. The war did

not simply break out between the individual producers of particular localities.

The local struggles begat, in their turn, national conflicts, the commercial

wars of the 17th and 18th centuries.





Finally, modern industry and the opening of the world-market made

the struggle universal, and at the same time gave it an unheard-of virulence.

Advantages in natural or artificial conditions of production now decide

the existence or non-existence of individual capitalists, as well as of

whole industries and countries. He that falls is remorselessly cast aside.

It is the Darwinian struggle of the individual for existence transferred

from Nature to society with intensified violence. The conditions of existence

natural to the animal appear as the final term of human development. The

contradiction between socialized production and capitalistic appropriation

now presents itself as an antagonism between the organization of production

in the individual workshop and the anarchy of production in society generally.


The capitalistic mode of production moves in these two forms of

the antagonism immanent to it from its very origin. It is never able to

get out of that "vicious circle" which Fourier had already discovered.

What Fourier could not, indeed, see in his time is that this circle is

gradually narrowing; that the movement becomes more and more a spiral,

and must come to an end, like the movement of planets, by collision with

the centre. It is the compelling force of anarchy in the production of

society at large that more and more completely turns the great majority

of men into proletarians; and it is the masses of the proletariat again

who will finally put an end to anarchy in production. It is the compelling

force of anarchy in social production that turns the limitless perfectibility

of machinery under modern industry into a compulsory law by which every

individual industrial capitalist must perfect his machinery more and more,

under penalty of ruin.





But the perfecting of machinery is making human labor superfluous.

If the introduction and increase of machinery means the displacement of

millions of manual by a few machine-workers, improvement in machinery means

the displacement of more and more of the machine-workers themselves. It

means, in the last instance, the production of a number of available wage

workers in excess of the average needs of capital, the formation of a complete

industrial reserve army, as I called it in 1845 [3],

available at the times when industry is working at high pressure, to be

cast out upon the street when the inevitable crash comes, a constant dead

weight upon the limbs of the working-class in its struggle for existence

with capital, a regulator for keeping of wages down to the low level that

suits the interests of capital.





Thus it comes about, to quote Marx, that machinery becomes the most powerful

weapon in the war of capital against the working-class; that the instruments

of labor constantly tear the means of subsistence out of the hands of the

laborer; that they very product of the worker is turned into an instrument

for his subjugation.





Thus it comes about that the economizing of the instruments of labor becomes

at the same time, from the outset, the most reckless waste of labor-power,

and robbery based upon the normal conditions under which labor functions;

that machinery,



"the most powerful instrument for shortening labor time, becomes the

most unfailing means for placing every moment of the laborer's time and

that of his family at the disposal of the capitalist for the purpose of

expanding the value of his capital." (Capital, English edition,

p. 406)





Thus it comes about that the overwork of some becomes the preliminary

condition for the idleness of others, and that modern industry, which hunts

after new consumers over the whole world, forces the consumption of the

masses at home down to a starvation minimum, and in doing thus destroys

its own home market.



"The law that always equilibrates the relative surplus- population,

or industrial reserve army, to the extent and energy of accumulation, this

law rivets the laborer to capital more firmly than the wedges of Vulcan

did Prometheus to the rock. It establishes an accumulation of misery, corresponding

with the accumulation of capital. Accumulation of wealth at one pole is,

therefore, at the same time accumulation of misery, agony of toil, slavery,

ignorance, brutality, mental degradation, at the opposite pole, i.e., on

the side of the class that produces its own product in the form of capital

(Marx's Capital, p. 661)





And to expect any other division of the products from the capitalist mode
of production is the same as expecting the electrodes of a battery not
to decompose acidulated water, not to liberate oxygen at the positive,
hydrogen at the negative pole, so long as they are connected with the
battery.



We have seen that the ever-increasing perfectibility of modern machinery

is, by the anarchy of social production, turned into a compulsory law that

forces the individual industrial capitalist always to improve his machinery,

always to increase its productive force. The bare possibility of extending

the field of production is transformed for him into a similarly compulsory

law. The enormous expansive force of modern industry, compared with which

that of gases is mere child's play, appears to us now as a necessity

for expansion, both qualitative and quantative, that laughs at all resistance.

Such resistance is offered by consumption, by sales, by the markets for

the products of modern industry. But the capacity for extension, extensive

and intensive, of the markets is primarily governed by quite different

laws that work much less energetically. The extension of the markets cannot

keep pace with the extension of production. The collision becomes inevitable,

and as this cannot produce any real solution so long as it does not break

in pieces the capitalist mode of production, the collisions become periodic.

Capitalist production has begotten another "vicious circle".





As a matter of fact, since 1825, when the first general crisis

broke out, the whole industrial and commercial world, production and exchange

among all civilized peoples and their more or less barbaric hangers-on,

are thrown out of joint about once every 10 years. Commerce is at a stand-still,

the markets are glutted, products accumulate, as multitudinous as they

are unsaleable, hard cash disappears, credit vanishes, factories are closed,

the mass of the workers are in want of the means of subsistence, because

they have produced too much of the means of subsistence; bankruptcy follows

upon bankruptcy, execution upon execution. The stagnation lasts for years;

productive forces and products are wasted and destroyed wholesale, until

the accumulated mass of commodities finally filter off, more or less depreciated

in value, until production and exchange gradually begin to move again.

Little by little, the pace quickens. It becomes a trot. The industrial

trot breaks into a canter, the canter in turn grows into the headlong gallop

of a perfect steeplechase of industry, commercial credit, and speculation,

which finally, after breakneck leaps, ends where it began — in the ditch

of a crisis. And so over and over again. We have now, since the year 1825,

gone through this five times, and at the present moment (1877), we are

going through it for the sixth time. And the character of these crises

is so clearly defined that Fourier hit all of them off when he described

the first "crise plethorique", a crisis from plethora.





In these crises, the contradiction between socialized production

and capitalist appropriation ends in a violent explosion. The circulation

of commodities is, for the time being, stopped. Money, the means of circulation,

becomes a hindrance to circulation. All the laws of production and circulation

of commodities are turned upside down. The economic collision has reached

its apogee. The mode of production is in rebellion against the mode

of exchange.


The fact that the socialized organization of production within

the factory has developed so far that it has become incompatible with the

anarchy of production in society, which exists side by side with and dominates

it, is brought home to the capitalist themselves by the violent concentration

of capital that occurs during crises, through the ruin of many large, and

a still greater number of small, capitalists. The whole mechanism of the

capitalist mode of production breaks down under the pressure of the productive

forces, its own creations. It is no longer able to turn all this mass of

means of production into capital. They lie fallow, and for that very reason

the industrial reserve army must also lie fallow. Means of production,

means of subsistence, available laborers, all the elements of production

and of general wealth, are present in abundance. But "abundance becomes

the source of distress and want" (Fourier), because it is the very thing

that prevents the transformation of the means of production and subsistence

into capital. For in capitalistic society, the means of production can

only function when they have undergone a preliminary transformation into

capital, into the means of exploiting human labor-power. The necessity

of this transformation into capital of the means of production and subsistence

stands like a ghost between these and the workers. It alone prevents the

coming together of the material and personal levers of production; it alone

forbids the means of production to function, the workers to work and live.

On the one hand, therefore, the capitalistic mode of production stands

convicted of its own incapacity to further direct these productive forces.

On the other, these productive forces themselves, with increasing energy,

press forward to the removal of the existing contradiction, to the abolition

of their quality as capital, to the practical recognition of their character

as social production forces.


This rebellion of the productive forces, as they grow more and

more powerful, against their quality as capital, this stronger and stronger

command that their social character shall be recognized, forces the capital

class itself to treat them more and more as social productive forces, so

far as this is possible under capitalist conditions. The period of industrial

high pressure, with its unbounded inflation of credit, not less than the

crash itself, by the collapse of great capitalist establishments, tends

to bring about that form of the socialization of great masses of the means

of production which we meet with in the different kinds of joint-stock

companies. Many of these means of production and of distribution are, from

the outset, so colossal that, like the railways, they exclude all other

forms of capitalistic expansion. At a further stage of evolution, this

form also becomes insufficient. The producers on a large scale in a particular

branch of an industry in a particular country unite in a "Trust", a union

for the purpose of regulating production. They determine the total amount

to be produced, parcel it out among themselves, and thus enforce the selling

price fixed beforehand. But trusts of this kind, as soon as business becomes

bad, are generally liable to break up, and on this very account compel

a yet greater concentration of association. The whole of a particular industry

is turned into one gigantic joint-stock company; internal competition gives

place to the internal monopoly of this one company. This has happened in

1890 with the English alkali production, which is now, after the fusion

of 48 large works, in the hands of one company, conducted upon a single

plan, and with a capital of 6,000,000 pounds.





In the trusts, freedom of competition changes into its very opposite

— into monopoly; and the production without any definite plan of capitalistic

society capitulates to the production upon a definite plan of the invading

socialistic society. Certainly, this is so far still to the benefit and

advantage of the capitalists. But, in this case, the exploitation is so

palpable, that it must break down. No nation will put up with production

conducted by trusts, with so barefaced an exploitation of the community

by a small band of dividend-mongers.





In any case, with trusts or without, the official representative

of capitalist society — the state — will ultimately have to undertake

the direction of production. [4]

This necessity for conversion into State property is felt first in the

great institutions for intercourse and communication — the post office,

the telegraphs, the railways.





If the crises demonstrate the incapacity of the bourgeoisie for

managing any longer modern productive forces, the transformation of the

great establishments for production and distribution into joint-stock companies,

trusts, and State property, show how unnecessary the bourgeoisie are for

that purpose. All the social functions of the capitalist has no further

social function than that of pocketing dividends, tearing off coupons,

and gambling on the Stock Exchange, where the different capitalists despoil

one another of their capital. At first, the capitalistic mode of production

forces out the workers. Now, it forces out the capitalists, and reduces

them, just as it reduced the workers, to the ranks of the surplus-population,

although not immediately into those of the industrial reserve army.





But, the transformation — either into joint-stock companies and

trusts, or into State-ownership — does not do away with the capitalistic

nature of the productive forces. In the joint-stock companies and trusts,

this is obvious. And the modern State, again, is only the organization

that bourgeois society takes on in order to support the external conditions

of the capitalist mode of production against the encroachments as well

of the workers as of individual capitalists. The modern state, no matter

what its form, is essentially a capitalist machine — the state of the

capitalists, the ideal personification of the total national capital. The

more it proceeds to the taking over of productive forces, the more does

it actually become the national capitalist, the more citizens does it exploit.

The workers remain wage-workers — proletarians. The capitalist relation

is not done away with. It is, rather, brought to a head. But, brought to

a head, it topples over. State-ownership of the productive forces is not

the solution of the conflict, but concealed within it are the technical

conditions that form the elements of that solution.





This solution can only consist in the practical recognition of

the social nature of the modern forces of production, and therefore in

the harmonizing with the socialized character of the means of production.

And this can only come about by society openly and directly taking possession

of the productive forces which have outgrown all control, except that of

society as a whole. The social character of the means of production and

of the products today reacts against the producers, periodically disrupts

all production and exchange, acts only like a law of Nature working blindly,

forcibly, destructively. But,with the taking over by society of the productive

forces, the social character of the means of production and of the products

will be utilized by the producers with a perfect understanding of its nature,

and instead of being a source of disturbance and periodical collapse, will

become the most powerful lever of production itself.





Active social forces work exactly like natural forces: blindly,

forcibly, destructively, so long as we do not understand, and reckon with,

them. But, when once we understand them, when once we grasp their action,

their direction, their effects, it depends only upon ourselves to subject

them more and more to our own will, and, by means of them, to reach our

own ends. And this holds quite especially of the mighty productive forces

of today. As long as we obstinately refuse to understand the nature and

the character of these social means of action — and this understanding

goes against the grain of the capitalist mode of production, and its defenders

— so long these forces are at work in spite of us, in opposition to us,

so long they master us, as we have shown above in detail.





But when once their nature is understood, they can, in the hands of the
producers

working together, be transformed from master demons into willing servants.

The difference is as that between the destructive force of electricity

in the lightning in the storm, and electricity under command in the telegraph

and the voltaic arc; the difference between a conflagration, and fire working

in the service of man. With this recognition, at last, of the real nature

of the productive forces of today, the social anarchy of production gives

place to a social regulation of production upon a definite plan, according

to the needs of the community and of each individual. Then the capitalist

mode of appropriation, in which the product enslaves first the producer,

and then the appropriator, is replaced by the mode of appropriation of

the products that is based upon the nature of the modern means of production;

upon the one hand, direct social appropriation, as means to the maintenance

and extension of production — on the other, direct individual appropriation,

as means of subsistence and of enjoyment.





Whilst the capitalist mode of production more and more completely

transforms the great majority of the population into proletarians, it creates

the power which, under penalty of its own destruction, is forced to accomplish

this revolution. Whilst it forces on more and more of the transformation

of the vast means of production, already socialized, into State property,

it shows itself the way to accomplishing this revolution. The proletariat

seizes political power and turns the means of production into State property.


But, in doing this, it abolishes itself as proletariat, abolishes

all class distinction and class antagonisms, abolishes also the State as

State. Society, thus far, based upon class antagonisms, had need of the

State. That is, of an organization of the particular class which was, pro

tempore, the exploiting class, an organization for the purpose of preventing

any interference from without with the existing conditions of production,

and, therefore, especially, for the purpose of forcibly keeping the exploited

classes in the condition of oppression corresponding with the given mode

of production (slavery, serfdom, wage-labor). The State was the official

representative of society as a whole; the gathering of it together into

a visible embodiment. But, it was this only in so far as it was the State

of that class which itself represented, for the time being, society as

a whole:





in ancient times, the State of slaveowning citizens;



in the Middle Ages, the feudal lords;



in our own times, the bourgeoisie.





When, at last, it becomes the real representative of the whole of society,

it renders itself unnecessary. As soon as there is no longer any social

class to be held in subjection; as soon as class rule, and the individual

struggle for existence based upon our present anarchy in production, with

the collisions and excesses arising from these, are removed, nothing more

remains to be repressed, and a special repressive force, a State, is no

longer necessary. The first act by virtue of which the State really constitutes

itself the representative of the whole of society — the taking possession

of the means of production in the name of society — this is, at the same

time, its last independent act as a State. State interference in social

relations becomes, in one domain after another, superfluous, and then dies

out of itself; the government of persons is replaced by the administration

of things, and by the conduct of processes of production. The State is

not "abolished". It dies out. This gives the measure of the value

of the phrase: "a free State", both as to its justifiable use at times by

agitators, and as to its ultimate scientific insufficiency; and also of

the demands of the so-called anarchists for the abolition of the State

out of hand.





Since the historical appearance of the capitalist mode of production,

the appropriation by society of all the means of production has often been

dreamed of, more or less vaguely, by individuals, as well as by sects,

as the ideal of the future. But it could become possible, could become

a historical necessity, only when the actual conditions for its realization

were there. Like every other social advance, it becomes practicable, not

by men understanding that the existence of classes is in contradiction

to justice, equality, etc., not by the mere willingness to abolish these

classes, but by virtue of certain new economic conditions. The separation

of society into an exploiting and an exploited class, a ruling and an oppressed

class, was the necessary consequences of the deficient and restricted development

of production in former times. So long as the total social labor only yields

a produce which but slightly exceeds that barely necessary for the existence

of all; so long, therefore, as labor engages all or almost all the time

of the great majority of the members of society — so long, of necessity,

this society is divided into classes. Side by side with the great majority,

exclusively bond slaves to labor, arises a class freed from directly productive

labor, which looks after the general affairs of society: the direction

of labor, State business, law, science, art, etc. It is, therefore, the

law of division of labor that lies at the basis of the division into classes.

But this does not prevent this division into classes from being carried

out by means of violence and robbery, trickery and fraud. it does not prevent

the ruling class, once having the upper hand, from consolidating its power

at the expense of the working-class, from turning its social leadership

into an intensified exploitation of the masses.





But if, upon this showing, division into classes has a certain

historical justification, it has this only for a given period, only under

given social conditions. It was based upon the insufficiency of production.

It will be swept away by the complete development of modern productive

forces. And, in fact, the abolition of classes in society presupposes a

degree of historical evolution at which the existence, not simply of this

or that particular ruling class, but of any ruling class at all, and, therefore,

the existence of class distinction itself, has become a obsolete anachronism.

It presupposes, therefore, the development of production carried out to

a degree at which appropriation of the means of production and of the products,

and, with this, of political domination, of the monopoly of culture, and

of intellectual leadership by a particular class of society, has become

not only superfluous but economically, politically, intellectually, a hindrance

to development.





This point is now reached. Their political and intellectual bankruptcy

is scarcely any longer a secret to the bourgeoisie themselves. Their economic

bankruptcy recurs regularly every 10 years. In every crisis, society is

suffocated beneath the weight of its own productive forces and products,

which it cannot use, and stands helpless, face-to-face with the absurd

contradiction that the producers have nothing to consume, because consumers

are wanting. The expansive force of the means of production bursts the bonds

that the capitalist mode of production had imposed upon them. Their deliverance

from these bonds is the one precondition for an unbroken, constantly-accelerated

development of the productive forces, and therewith for a practically unlimited

increase of production itself. Nor is this all. The socialized appropriation

of the means of production does away, not only with the present artificial

restrictions upon production, but also with the positive waste and devastation

of productive forces and products that are at the present time the inevitable

concomitants of production, and that reach their height in the crises.

Further, it sets free for the community at large a mass of means of production

and of products, by doing away with the senseless extravagance of the ruling

classes of today, and their political representatives. The possibility

of securing for every member of society, by means of socialized production,

an existence not only fully sufficient materially, and becoming day-by-day

more full, but an existence guaranteeing to all the free development and

exercise of their physical and mental faculties — this possibility is

now, for the first time, here, but it is here. [5]


With the seizing of the means of production by society, production

of commodities is done away with, and, simultaneously, the mastery of the

product over the producer. Anarchy in social production is replaced by

systematic, definite organization. The struggle for individual existence

disappears. Then, for the first time, man, in a certain sense, is finally

marked off from the rest of the animal kingdom, and emerges from mere animal

conditions of existence into really human ones. The whole sphere of the

conditions of life which environ man, and which have hitherto ruled man,

now comes under the dominion and control of man, who for the first time

becomes the real, conscious lord of nature, because he has now become master

of his own social organization. The laws of his own social action, hitherto

standing face-to-face with man as laws of Nature foreign to, and dominating

him, will then be used with full understanding, and so mastered by him.

Man's own social organization, hitherto confronting him as a necessity

imposed by Nature and history, now becomes the result of his own free action.

The extraneous objective forces that have, hitherto, governed history,pass

under the control of man himself. Only from that time will man himself,

more and more consciously, make his own history — only from that time

will the social causes set in movement by him have, in the main and in

a constantly growing measure, the results intended by him. It is the ascent

of man from the kingdom of necessity to the kingdom of freedom.



Let us briefly sum up our sketch of historical evolution.




I. Mediaeval Society — Individual production on a small scale.

Means of production adapted for individual use; hence primitive, ungainly,

petty, dwarfed in action. Production for immediate consumption, either

of the producer himself or his feudal lord. Only where an excess of production

over this consumption occurs is such excess offered for sale, enters into

exchange. Production of commodities, therefore, only in its infancy. But

already it contains within itself, in embryo, anarchy in the production

of society at large.






II. Capitalist Revolution — transformation of industry, at first

be means of simple cooperation and manufacture. Concentration of the means

of production, hitherto scattered, into great workshops. As a consequence,

their transformation from individual to social means of production — a

transformation which does not, on the whole, affect the form of exchange.

The old forms of appropriation remain in force. The capitalist appears.

In his capacity as owner of the means of production, he also appropriates

the products and turns them into commodities. Production has become a social

act. Exchange and appropriation continue to be individual acts,

the acts of individuals. The social product is appropriated by the individual

capitalist. Fundamental contradiction, whence arise all the contradictions

in which our present-day society moves, and which modern industry brings

to light.




A. Severance of the producer from the means of production. Condemnation
of the worker to wage-labor for life. Antagonism between the proletariat
and the bourgeoisie.

B. Growing predominance and increasing effectiveness of the laws
governing the production of commodities. Unbridled competition. Contradiction
between socialized organization in the individual factory and social anarchy
in the production as a whole.

C. On the one hand, perfecting of machinery, made by competition
compulsory for each individual manufacturer, and complemented by a constantly
growing displacement of laborers. Industrial reserve-army. On the other
hand, unlimited extension of production, also compulsory under competition,
for every manufacturer. On both sides, unheard-of development of productive
forces, excess of supply over demand, over-production and products — excess
there, of laborers, without employment and without means of existence.
But these two levers of production and of social well-being are unable
to work together, because the capitalist form of production prevents the
productive forces from working and the products from circulating, unless
they are first turned into capital — which their very superabundance prevents.
The contradiction has grown into an absurdity. The mode of production rises
in rebellion against the form of exchange.

D. Partial recognition of the social character of the productive
forces forced upon the capitalists themselves. Taking over of the great
institutions for production and communication, first by joint-stock companies,
later in by trusts, then by the State. The bourgeoisie demonstrated to
be a superfluous class. All its social functions are now performed by salaried
employees.


III. Proletarian Revolution — Solution of the contradictions.

The proletariat seizes the public power, and by means of this transforms

the socialized means of production, slipping from the hands of the bourgeoisie,

into public property. By this act, the proletariat frees the means of production

from the character of capital they have thus far borne, and gives their

socialized character complete freedom to work itself out. Socialized production

upon a predetermined plan becomes henceforth possible. The development

of production makes the existence of different classes of society thenceforth

an anachronism. In proportion as anarchy in social production vanishes,

the political authority of the State dies out. Man, at last the master

of his own form of social organization, becomes at the same time the lord

over Nature, his own master — free.





To accomplish this act of universal emancipation is the historical

mission of the modern proletariat. To thoroughly comprehend the historical

conditions and thus the very nature of this act, to impart to the now oppressed

proletarian class a full knowledge of the conditions and of the meaning

of the momentous act it is called upon to accomplish, this is the task

of the theoretical expression of the proletarian movement, scientific Socialism.


 

Notes


1.
Mephistopheles in Goethe's Faust


2.
It is hardly necessary in this connection to point out that, even if the form of appropriation remains the same, the character of the appropriation is just as much revolutionized as production is by the changes described above.  It is, of course, a very different matter whether I appropriate to myself my own product or that of another.  Note in passing that wage-labor, which contains the whole capitalist mode of production in embryo, is very ancient; in a sporadic, scattered form, it existed for centuries alongside slave-labor.  But the embryo could duly develop into the capitalistic mode of production only when the necessary historical pre-conditions had been furnished.


3.
 "The Conditions of the Working-Class in England" — Sonnenschein & Co., p.84.


4.
I say "have to".  For only when the means of production and distribution have actually outgrown the form of management by joint-stock companies, and when, therefore, the taking them over by the State has become economically inevitable, only then — even if it is the State of today that effects this — is there an economic advance, the attainment of another step preliminary to the taking over of all productive forces by society itself.  But of late, since Bismarck went in for State-ownership of industrial establishments, a kind of spurious Socialism has arisen, degenerating, now and again, into something of flunkyism, that without more ado declares all State-ownership, even of the Bismarkian sort, to be socialistic.  Certainly, if the taking over by the State of the tobacco industry is socialistic, then Napoleon and Metternich must be numbered among the founders of Socialism.  


If the Belgian State, for quite ordinary political and financial reasons, itself constructed its chief railway lines; if Bismarck, not under any economic compulsion, took over for the State the chief Prussian lines, simply to be the better able to have them in hand in case of war, to bring up the railway employees as voting cattle for the Government, and especially to create for himself a new source of income independent of parliamentary votes — this was, in no sense, a socialistic measure, directly or indirectly, consciously or unconsciously.  Otherwise, the Royal Maritime Company, the Royal porcelain manufacture, and even the regimental tailor of the army would also be socialistic institutions, or even, as was seriously proposed by a sly dog in Frederick William III's reign, the taking over by the State of the brothels. 


5.
A few figures may serve to give an approximate idea of the enormous expansive force of the modern means of production, even under capitalist pressure.  According to Mr.  Giffen, the total wealth of Great Britain and Ireland amounted, in round  numbers in 


          1814 to £ 2,200,000,000,
          1865 to £ 6,100,000,000,
          1875 to £ 8,500,000,000. 


As an instance of the squandering of means of production and of products during a crisis, the total loss in the German iron industry alone, in the crisis of 1873-78, was given at the second German Industrial Congress (Berlin, February 21, 1878), as  22,750,000 pounds.
 


Socialism: Utopian and Scientific



==========

## First Draft of the Reply to Vera Zasulich’s Letter







Marx-Zasulich Correspondence February/March 1881


Marx-Zasulich Correspondence February/March 1881
The ‘First’ Draft
(1) In discussing the genesis of capitalist production, I said [that the secret is that there is at bottom ‘a complete separation of ... the producer from the means of production’ (p. 315, column l, French edition of Capital) and that ‘the expropriation of the agricultural producer is the basis of the whole process. Only in England has it been so far accomplished in a radical manner. ... But all the other countries of Western Europe are following the same course’ (loc. cit., column II). 
Thus I expressly restricted the ‘historical inevitability’ of this process to the countries of Western Europe. Why did I do this? Please refer to the argument in Chapter XXXII;
‘The transformation of the individualised and scattered means of production into socially concentrated means of production, the transformation, therefore, of the dwarf-like property of the many into the giant property of the few, this terrible and arduously accomplished expropriation of the mass of the people forms the pre-history of capital. Private property, founded on personal labour ... is supplanted by capitalist private property, which rests on exploitation of the labour of others, on wage-labour’ (p. 340, column II).
In the last analysis, then, one form of private property is transformed into another form of private property; (the Western course). Since the Russian peasant lands have never been their private property, how could this tendency be applied to them?
(2) From a historical point of view, only one serious argument has been given for the inevitable dissolution of the Russian peasant commune: If we go far back, it is said, a more or less archaic type of communal property may be found everywhere in Western Europe. But with the progress of society it has everywhere disappeared. Why should it escape the same fate only in Russia?
My answer is that, thanks to the unique combination of circumstances in Russia, the rural commune, which is still established on a national scale, may gradually shake off its primitive characteristics and directly develop as an element of collective production on a national scale. Precisely because it is contemporaneous with capitalist production, the rural commune may appropriate all its positive achievements without undergoing its [terrible] frightful vicissitudes. Russia does not live in isolation from the modern world, and nor has it fallen prey, like the East Indies, to a conquering foreign power.
Should the Russian admirers of the capitalist system deny that such a development is theoretically possible, then I would ask them the following question. Did Russia have to undergo a long Western-style incubation of mechanical industry before it could make use of machinery, steamships, railways, etc.? Let them also explain how they managed to introduce, in the twinkling of an eye, that whole machinery of exchange (banks, credit companies, etc.) which was the work of centuries in the West.
If, at the time of the emancipation, the rural commune had been initially placed under conditions of normal prosperity, if, moreover, the huge public debt, mostly financed at the peasants’ expense, along with the enormous sums which the state (still at the peasants’ expense) provided for the ‘new pillars of society’, transformed into capitalists – if all these expenses had served for the further development of the rural commune, no one would be dreaming today of the ‘historical inevitability’ of the annihilation of the commune. Everyone would see the commune as the element in the regeneration of Russian society, and an element of superiority over countries still enslaved by the capitalist regime.
[The contemporaneity of capitalist production was not the only factor that could provide the Russian commune with the elements of development.]
Also favourable to the maintenance of the Russian commune (on the path of development) is the fact not only that it is contemporary with capitalist production [in the Western countries], but that it has survived the epoch when the social system stood intact. Today, it faces a social system which, both in Western Europe and the United States, is in conflict with science, with the popular masses, and with the very productive forces that it generates [in short, this social system has become the arena of flagrant antagonisms, conflicts and periodic disasters; it makes clear to the blindest observer that it is a transitory system of production, doomed to be eliminated as soc(iety) returns to... ]. In short, the rural commune finds it in a state of crisis that will end only when the social system is eliminated through the return of modern societies to the ‘archaic’ type of communal property. In the words of an American writer who, supported in his work by the Washington government, is not at all to be suspected of revolutionary tendencies, [’the higher plane'] ‘the new system’ to which modern society is tending ‘will be a revival, in a superior form, of an archaic social type.’ We should not, then, be too frightened by the word ‘archaic’.
But at least we should be thoroughly acquainted with all the historical twists and turns. We know nothing about them. In one way or another, this commune perished in the midst of never­ ending foreign and intestine warfare. It probably died a violent death when the Germanic tribes came to conquer Italy, Spain, Gaul, and so on. The commune of the archaic type had already ceased to exist. And yet, its natural vitality is proved by two facts. Scattered examples survived all the vicissitudes of the Middle Ages and have maintained themselves up to the present day- e.g. in my own home region of Trier. More importantly, however, it so stamped its own features on the commune that supplanted it (a commune in which arable land became private property, while the forests, pastures, waste ground, etc., remained communal property), that Maurer was able to reconstruct the archaic prototype while deciphering the commune [of more recent origin] of secondary formation. Thanks to the characteristic features inherited from the prototype, the new commune which the Germans introduced into every conquered region became the only focus of liberty and popular life throughout the Middle Ages.
We know nothing of the life of the [Germanic] [rural] [archaic] commune after Tacitus, nor how and when it actually disappeared. Thanks to Julius Caesar, however, we do at least know its point of departure. In Caesar’s time, the [arable] land was already distributed on an annual basis- not yet, however, among individual members of a commune, but among the gentes [Geschlechter] and tribes of the [various] Germanic confederations. The agricultural rural commune therefore emerged in Germania from a more archaic type; it was the product of spontaneous development rather than being imported ready-made from Asia. It may also be found in Asia- in the East Indies- always as the final term or last period of the archaic formation.
If I am [now] to assess the possible destinies [of the ‘rural commune'] from a purely theoretical point of view- that is, always supposing conditions of normal life – I must now refer to certain characteristics which differentiate the ‘agricultural commune’ from the more archaic type.
Firstly, the earlier primitive communities all rested on the natural kinship of their members. In breaking this strong yet narrow tie, the agricultural commune proved more capable of adapting and expanding, and of undergoing contact with strangers.
Secondly, within the commune, the house and its complementary yard were already the farmer’s private property, whereas the communal house was one of the material bases of previous communities, long before agriculture was even introduced.
Finally, although the arable land remained communal property, it was periodically divided among the members of the agricultural commune, so that each farmer tilled on his own behalf the various fields allocated to him and individually appropriated their fruits. In the more archaic communities, by contrast, production was a common activity, and only the final produce was distributed among individual members. Of course, this primitive type of collective or co-operative production stemmed from the weakness of the isolated individual, not from socialisation of the means of production.
It is easy to see that the dualism inherent in the ‘agricultural commune’ may give it a sturdy life: for communal property and all the resulting social relations provide it with a solid foundation, while the privately owned houses, fragmented tillage of the arable land and private appropriation of its fruits all permit a development of individuality incompatible with conditions in the more primitive communities. It is just as evident, however, that the very same dualism may eventually become a source of disintegration. Apart from the influence of a hostile environment, the mere accumulation over time of movable property, beginning with wealth in livestock and even extending to wealth in serfs, combines with the ever more prominent role played by movables in agriculture itself and with a host of other circumstances, inseparable from such accumulation, which would take me too far from the central theme. All these factors, then, serve to dissolve economic and social equality, generating within the commune itself a conflict of interests which leads, first, to the conversion of arable land into private property, and ultimately to the private appropriation of forests, pastures, waste ground, etc., already no more than communal appendages of private property. (dl Accordingly, the ‘agricultural commune’ every­ here presents itself as the most recent type of the archaic formation of societies; and the period of the agricultural commune appears in the historical course of Western Europe, both ancient and modern, as a period of transition from communal to private property, from the primary to the secondary formation. But does this mean that the development of the ‘agricultural commune’ must follow this route in every circumstance [in every historical context]? Not at all. Its constitutive form allows of the following alternative: either the element of private property which it implies gains the upper hand over the collective element, or the reverse takes place. Everything depends upon the historical context in which it is situated.... Both solutions are a priori possibilities, but each one naturally requires a completely different historical context.
(3) Coming now to the ‘agricultural commune’ in Russia, I shall leave aside for the moment all the evils which weigh upon it, and only consider the capacities for further development permitted by its constitutive form and its historical context.
Russia is the only European country in which the ‘agricultural commune’ has maintained itself on a national scale up to the present day. It is not, like the East Indies, the prey of a conquering foreign power. Nor does it live in isolation from the modern world. On the one hand, communal land ownership allows it directly and gradually to transform fragmented, individualist agriculture into collective agriculture [at the same time that the contemporaneity of capitalist production in the West, with which it has both material and intellectual links . . . ], and the Russian peasants already practise it in the jointly owned meadows; the physical configuration of the land makes it suitable for huge-scale mechanised cultivation; the peasant’s familiarity with the artel relationship (contrat d'arte) can help him to make the transition from augmented to co-operative labour; and, finally, Russian society, which has for so long lived at his expense, owes him the credits required for such a transition. [To be sure, the first step should be to create normal conditions for the commune on its present basis, for the peasant is above all hostile to any abrupt change.] On the other hand, the contemporaneity of Western [capitalist] production, which dominates the world market, enables Russia to build into the commune all the positive achievements of the capitalist system, without having to pass under its harsh tribute.
If the spokesmen of the ‘new pillars of society’ deny that it is theoretically possible for the modern rural commune to follow such a path, then they should tell us whether Russia, like the West, was forced to pass through a long incubation of mechanical industry before it could acquire machinery, steamships, railways, and so on. One might then ask them how they managed to introduce, in the twinkling of an eye, the whole machinery of exchange (banks, credit companies, etc.) which was the work of centuries [elsewhere] in the West.
One debilitating feature of the ‘agricultural commune’ in Russia is inimical to it in every way. This is its isolation, the lack of connection between the lives of different communes. It is not an immanent or universal characteristic of this type that the commune should appear as a localised microcosm. But wherever it does so appear, it leads to the formation of a more or less central despotism above the communes. The federation of North Russian republics proves that such isolation, which seems to have been originally imposed by the huge size of the country, was largely consolidated by Russia’s political changes of fortune after the Mongol invasion.
Today, it is an obstacle that could be removed with the utmost ease. All that is necessary is to replace the ‘volost’, a government institution, with a peasant assembly chosen by the communes themselves – an economic and administrative body serving their own interests.
Historically very favourable to the preservation of the ‘agricultural commune’ through its further development is the fact not only that it is contemporaneous with Western capitalist production [so that it] and therefore able to acquire its fruits without bowing to its modus operandi, but also that it has survived the epoch when the capitalist system stood intact. Today it finds that system, both in Western Europe and the United States, in conflict with the working masses, with science, and with the very productive forces which it generates – in short, in a crisis that will end through its own elimination, through the return of modern societies to a higher form of an ‘archaic’ type of collective ownership and production.
It is understood that the commune would develop gradually, and that the first step would be to place it under normal conditions on its present basis.
[The historical situation of the Russian ‘rural commune’ is without parallel! Alone in Europe, it has preserved itself not as scattered debris (like the rare and curious miniatures of an archaic type that were recently to be found in the West), but as the more or less dominant form of popular life spread over a vast empire. While it has in common land ownership the natural basis of collective appropriation, its historical context – the contemporaneity of capitalist production – provides it with ready-made material conditions for huge-scale common labour. It is therefore able to incorporate the positive achievements of the capitalist system, without having to pass under its harsh tribute. The commune may gradually replace fragmented agriculture with large-scale, machine­ assisted agriculture particularly suited to the physical configuration of Russia. It may thus become the direct starting-point of the economic system towards which modern society is tending; it may open a new chapter that does not begin with its own suicide. [Indeed, the first thing to do would be to place it under normal conditions.] [But it is not enough to eliminate the dualism within the rural commune, which it could eliminate by ... ]
It is confronted, however, by landed property, which controls nearly half the land, and the best at that, not to mention the state holdings. In this respect, the preservation of the ‘rural commune’ through its further development merges with the general course of Russian society: it is, indeed, the price for its regeneration.
[Even from an] Even from a purely economic point of view, Russia can break out of its agricultural. ... ? ... .(e) through the evolution of its rural commune; it would try in vain to find a way out through [the introduction of] English-style capitalised farming, against which [the totality] all the rural conditions of the country would rebel.
[Thus, only a general uprising can break the isolation of the ‘rural commune’, the lack of connection between the lives of different communes, in short, its existence as a localised microcosm which denies it any the historical initiative.]
[Theoretically speaking, then, the Russian ‘rural commune’ may preserve its land – by developing its base of common land ownership, and by eliminating the principle of private property which it also implies. It may become a direct starting-point of the economic system towards which modern society is tending; it may open a new chapter that does not begin with its own suicide; it may reap the fruits with which capitalist production has enriched humanity, without passing through the capitalist regime which, simply in terms of its possible duration, hardly counts in the life of society. But it is necessary to descend from pure theory to Russian reality.]
If we abstract from all the evils now weighing down upon the Russian ‘rural commune’ and merely consider its constitutive form and historical context, it is immediately apparent that one of its fundamental characteristics, common land ownership, forms the natural basis of collective production and appropriation. Furthermore, the Russian peasant’s familiarity with the artel relationship would facilitate the transition from fragmented to collective labour, already practised to some extent in the jointly owned meadows for the drying of grass and other ventures of general interest. If in agriculture proper, however, collective labour is to supplant fragmented labour (the form of private appropriation), then two things are necessary: the economic need for such a transformation; and the material conditions for its realisation.
The economic need would make itself felt in the ‘rural commune’ as soon as it is placed under normal conditions – that is to say, as soon as its burdens are lifted and its land for cultivation expands to a normal size. The time has passed when Russian agriculture required no more than land and tillers of parcellised holdings armed with rather primitive instruments [and the fertility of the soil].... That time has passed all the more quickly in that the oppression of the farmer has infected and sterilised his fields. He now needs co-operative labour, organised on a large scale. Moreover, since the peasant does not have what is necessary to till his three desyatins, would he be any better off if he had ten times the number of desyatins?
But where is the peasant to find the tools, the fertiliser, the agronomic methods, etc.. – all the things required for collective labour? This is precisely where the Russian ‘rural commune’ is greatly superior to archaic communes of the same type. For, alone in Europe, it has maintained itself on a vast, nationwide basis. It is thus placed within a historical context in which the contemporaneity of capitalist production provides it with all the conditions for co-operative labour. lt is in a position to incorporate the positive achievements of the capitalist system, without having to pass under its harsh tribute. The physical configuration of the Russian land is eminently suited to machine-assisted agriculture, organised on a large scale and [in the hands] performed by co-operative labour. As for the initial expenses, both intellectual and material, Russian society owes them to the ‘rural commune’ at whose expense it has lived for so long and in which it must seek its ‘regenerative element’.
The best proof that such a development of the ‘rural commune’ corresponds to the historical trend of our epoch, is the fatal crisis undergone by capitalist production in those European and American countries where it reached its highest peak. The crisis will come to an end with the elimination of capitalist production and the return of modern society to a higher form of the most archaic type – collective production and appropriation.
(4) [In descending from theory to reality, no one can disguise the fact that the Russian commune now faces a conspiracy by powerful forces and interests. Not only has the state subjected it to ceaseless exploitation, it has also fostered, at the peasant’s expense, the domiciliation of a certain part of the capitalist system – stock exchange, bank, railways, trade....]
Life is the first requirement for development, and no one can hide from themselves that, here and now, the life of the ‘rural commune’ is in peril.
[You are perfectly aware that the very existence of the Russian commune is now threatened by a conspiracy of powerful interests. Overburdened by direct state exactions, fraudulently exploited by intruding capitalists, merchants, etc., and the landed ‘proprietors’, it is also being undermined by village usurers and the conflict of interests in its midst aroused by the situation in which it has been placed.
In order to expropriate the agricultural producers, it is not necessary to drive them from the land, as happened in England and elsewhere; nor to abolish communal property by some ukase. If you go and take from the peasants more than a certain proportion of the product of their agricultural labour, then not even your gendarmes and your army will enable you to tie them to their fields. In the last years of the Roman Empire some provincial decurions, not peasants but actual landowners, fled their homes, abandoned their land, and even sold themselves into bondage – all in order to be rid of a property that had become nothing more than an official pretext for exerting quite merciless pressure over them.
After the so-called emancipation of the peasantry, the state placed the Russian commune in abnormal economic conditions; and since that time, it has never ceased to weigh it down with the social force concentrated in its hands. Exhausted by tax demands, the commune became a kind of inert matter easily exploited by traders, landowners and usurers. This oppression from without unleashed the conflict of interests already present at the heart of the commune, rapidly developing the seeds of its disintegration. But that is not all. [At the peasant’s expense, it grew as in a hothouse those excrescences of the capitalist system that can be most easily acclimatised (the stock exchange, speculation, banks, share companies, railways), writing off their deficits, advancing profits to their entrepreneurs, etc., etc.] At the peasant’s expense, the state [lent a hand to] grew in hothouse conditions certain branches of the Western capitalist system which, in no way developing the productive premises of agriculture, are the best suited to facilitate and precipitate the theft of its fruits by un productive middlemen. In this way, it helped to enrich a new capitalist vermin which is sucking the already depleted blood of the ‘rural commune’.
.... In short, the state [came forward as middleman] lent a hand in the precocious development of the technical and economic instruments best suited to facilitate and precipitate the exploitation of the farmer – Russia’s greatest productive force – and to enrich the ‘new pillars of society’.
(5) [One can see at a glance the combination of these hostile forces which are favouring and precipitating the exploitation of the farmers, Russia’s greatest productive force.]
[One can see at a glance that unless there is a powerful reaction, this combination of hostile forces will inevitably bring about the ruin of the commune through the simple pressure of events.]
Unless it is broken by a powerful reaction, this combination of destructive influences must naturally lead to the death of the rural commune.
It may be asked, however: why have all these interests (and I include the big government-protected industries) found an advantage in the present situation of the rural commune? Why should they knowingly conspire to kill the goose that lays the golden eggs? Precisely because they feel that ‘this present situation’ is no longer tenable, and that the present mode of exploiting it [is not tenable either] is therefore no longer in vogue. The land, infected by the farmer’s poverty, is already growing sterile. Good harvests [which favourable weather conditions sometimes draw from the land] are matched by periods of famine. Instead of exporting, Russia has to import grain. The average results of the last ten years reveal a level of agricultural production that is not only stagnant but actually declining. For the first time, Russia has to import grain instead of exporting it. And so, there is no longer any time to lose. And so, an end must be made to the situation. The more or less well-off minority of peasants must be formed into a rural middle class, and the majority simply converted into proletarians [into wage­ labourers]. – To this end, the spokesmen of the ‘new pillars of society’ denounce the very evils weighing upon the commune as so many natural symptoms of its decrepitude.
Since so many different interests, particularly the new ‘pillars of society’ constructed under Alexander Il’s benevolent empire, find an advantage in the present situation of the rural commune, why should they knowingly conspire to bring about its death? Why do their spokesmen denounce the evils weighing upon it as irrefutable proof of its natural decay? Why do they wish to kill the goose that lays the golden eggs? Quite simply, the economic facts, which it would take me too long to analyse, have uncovered the secret that the present situation of the commune is no longer tenable, and that, through mere force of circumstances, the present mode of exploiting the popular masses will go out of fashion. Thus, something new is required; and this something new, insinuated in the most diverse forms, always comes down to the abolition of communal property, the formation of the more or less well-off minority of peasants into a rural middle class, and the straight­ forward conversion of the majority into proletarians.
[One cannot disguise from oneself that] On the one hand the ‘rural commune’ is almost at its last gasp; on the other, a powerful conspiracy is waiting in the wings to finish it off. To save the Russian commune, there must be a Russian Revolution. For their part, those who hold the political and social power are doing their best to prepare the masses for such a catastrophe. While the commune is being bled and tortured, its lands sterilised and impoverished, the literary flunkeys of the ‘new pillars of society’ ironically refer to the evils heaped on the commune as if they were symptoms of spontaneous, indisputable decay, arguing that it is dying a natural death and that it would be an act of kindness to shorten its agony. At this level, it is a question no longer of a problem to be solved, but simply of an enemy to be beaten. Thus, it is no longer a theoretical problem; [it is a question to be solved, it is quite simply an enemy to be beaten.] To save the Russian commune, there must be a Russian Revolution. For their part, the Russian government and the ‘new pillars of society’ are doing their best to prepare the masses for such a catastrophe. If the revolution takes place in time, if it concentrates all its forces [if the intelligent part of Russian society] [if the Russian intelligentsia (l'intelligence russe) concentrates all the living forces of the country] to ensure the unfettered rise of the rural commune, the latter will soon develop as a regenerating element of Russian society and an element of superiority over the countries enslaved by the capitalist regime.
 


Contents





==========

## Speech at the Graveside of Marx






Engels' burial speech




The Death of Karl Marx

Frederick Engels’ Speech at the Grave of Karl Marx
Highgate Cemetery, London. March 17, 1883


Transcribed: by Mike Lepore, 1993.

On the 14th of March, at a quarter to three in
the afternoon, the greatest living thinker ceased to think. He had been
left alone for scarcely two minutes, and when we came back we found him
in his armchair, peacefully gone to sleep -- but for ever.
An immeasurable loss has been sustained both by the militant proletariat
of Europe and America, and by historical science, in the death of this
man. The gap that has been left by the departure of this mighty spirit
will soon enough make itself felt.
Just as Darwin discovered the law of development of organic nature,
so Marx discovered the law of development of human history: the simple
fact, hitherto concealed by an overgrowth of ideology, that mankind must
first of all eat, drink, have shelter and clothing, before it can pursue
politics, science, art, religion, etc.; that therefore the production of
the immediate material means, and consequently the degree of economic development
attained by a given people or during a given epoch, form the foundation
upon which the state institutions, the legal conceptions, art, and even
the ideas on religion, of the people concerned have been evolved, and in
the light of which they must, therefore, be explained, instead of vice
versa, as had hitherto been the case.
But that is not all. Marx also discovered the special law of motion
governing the present-day capitalist mode of production, and the bourgeois
society that this mode of production has created. The discovery of surplus
value suddenly threw light on the problem, in trying to solve which all
previous investigations, of both bourgeois economists and socialist critics,
had been groping in the dark.
Two such discoveries would be enough for one lifetime. Happy the
man to whom it is granted to make even one such discovery. But in every
single field which Marx investigated -- and he investigated very many fields,
none of them superficially -- in every field, even in that of mathematics,
he made independent discoveries.
Such was the man of science. But this was not even half the man.
Science was for Marx a historically dynamic, revolutionary force. However
great the joy with which he welcomed a new discovery in some theoretical
science whose practical application perhaps it was as yet quite impossible
to envisage, he experienced quite another kind of joy when the discovery
involved immediate revolutionary changes in industry, and in historical
development in general. For example, he followed closely the development
of the discoveries made in the field of electricity and recently those
of Marcel Deprez.
For Marx was before all else a revolutionist. His real mission
in life was to contribute, in one way or another, to the overthrow of capitalist
society and of the state institutions which it had brought into being,
to contribute to the liberation of the modern proletariat, which he was
the first to make conscious of its own position and its needs, conscious
of the conditions of its emancipation. Fighting was his element. And he
fought with a passion, a tenacity and a success such as few could rival.
His work on the first Rheinische Zeitung (1842), the Paris Vorwarts
(1844), the Deutsche Brusseler Zeitung (1847), the Neue Rheinische
Zeitung (1848-49), the New York Tribune (1852-61), and, in addition
to these, a host of militant pamphlets, work in organisations in Paris,
Brussels and London, and finally, crowning all, the formation of the great
International Working Men's
Association -- this was indeed an achievement of which its founder
might well have been proud even if he had done nothing else.
And, consequently, Marx was the best hated and most calumniated
man of his time. Governments, both absolutist and republican, deported
him from their territories. Bourgeois, whether conservative or ultra-democratic,
vied with one another in heaping slanders upon him. All this he brushed
aside as though it were a cobweb, ignoring it, answering only when extreme
necessity compelled him. And he died beloved, revered and mourned by millions
of revolutionary fellow workers -- from the mines of Siberia to California,
in all parts of Europe and America -- and I make bold to say that, though
he may have had many opponents, he had hardly one personal enemy.
His name will endure through the ages, and so also will his work.
 


Contents |
MIA Biography |
Biography Archive |
Marx Engels Archive



==========

## Marx and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848-1849)









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## On the History of the Communist League




On The History of the Communist League by Frederick Engels





Frederick Engels
On The History of the Communist League


First Published: Nov 12-26, 1885 in Sozialdemokrat;
Source: Marx and Engels Selected Works, Volume 3, Progress Publishers, Moscow 1970;
Transcribed by: zodiac@io.org.

London
October 8, 1885
With the sentence of the Cologne Communists in 1852, the curtain falls on the first period of the independent German workers’ movement. Today this period is almost forgotten. Yet it lasted from 1836 to 1852 and, with the spread of German workers abroad, the movement developed in almost all civilized countries. Nor is that all. The present-day international workers’ movement is in substance a direct continuation of the German workers’ movement of that time, which was the first international workers’ movement of all time, and which brought forth many of those who took the leading role in he International Working Men’s Association. And the theoretical principles that the Communist League had inscribed on its banner in the Communist Manifesto of 1847 constitute today the strongest international bond of the entire proletarian movement of both Europe and America. 
Up to now there has been only one source for a coherent history of that movement. This is the so-called Black Book, The Communist Conspiracies of the Nineteenth Century, by Wermuth and Stieber, Erline, two parts, 1853 and 1854. This crude compilation, which bristles with deliberate falsifications, fabricated by two of the most contemptible police scoundrels of our century, today still serves as the final source for all non-communist writings about that period. 
What I am able to give here is only a sketch, and even this only in so far as the League itself is concerned; only what is absolutely necessary to understand the Revelations. I hope that some day I shall have the opportunity to work up the rich material collected by Marx and myself on the history of that glorious period of the youth of the international workers’ movement. 
* In 1836 the most extreme, chiefly proletarian elements of the secret democratic-republican Outlaws’ League, which was founded by German refugees in Paris in 1834, split off and formed the new secret League of the Just. The parent League, in which only sleepy-headed elements à la Jakobus Venedey were left, soon fell asleep altogether; when in 1840 the police scented out a few sections in Germany, it was hardly even a shadow of its former self. The new League, on the contrary, developed comparatively rapidly. Originally it was a German outlier of the French worker-Communism, reminiscent of Babouvism and taking shape in Paris at about this time; community of goods was demanded as the necessary consequence of “equality”. The aims were those of the Parisian secret societies of the time: half propaganda association, half conspiracy, Paris, however, being always regarded as the central point of revolutionary action, although the preparation of occassional putsches in Germany was by no means excluded. But as Paris remained the decisive battleground, the League was at that time actually not much more than the German branch of the French secret societies, especially the Societe des saisons led by Blanqui and Barbes, with which a close connections was maintained. The French went into action on May 12, 1839; the sections of the League marched with them and thus were involved in the common defeat. 
Among the Germans arrested were Karl Schapper and Heinrich Bauer; Louis Philippe’s government contented itself with deporting them after a fairly long imprisonment. Both went to London. Schapper came from Weilburg in Nassau and while a student of forestry at Giessen in 1832 was a member of the conspiracy organized by Georg Buchner; he took part in the storming of the Frankfort constable station on April 3, 1833, escaped abroad and in February 1834 joined Mazzini’s march on Savoy. Of gigantic stature, resolute and energetic, always ready to risk civil existence and life, he was a model of the professional revolutionist that played an important role in the thirties. In spite of a certain sluggishness of thought, he was by no means incapable of profound theoretical understanding, as is proved by his development from “demagogue” to Communist, and he held then all the more rigidly to what he had once come to recognize. Precisely on that account his revolutionary passion sometimes got the better of understanding, but he always afterwards realized his mistake and openly acknowledged it. He was fully a man and what he did for the founding of the German workers’ movement will not be forgotten. 
Heinrich Bauer, from Franconia, was a shoemaker; a lively, alert, witty little fellow, whose little body, however, also contained much shrewdness and determination. 
Arrived in London, where Schapper, who had been a compositor in Paris, now tried to earn his living as a teacher of languages, they both set to work gathering up the broken threads and made London the centre of the League. They were joined over here, if not already earlier in Paris, by Joseph Moll, a watchmaker from Cologne, a medium-sized Hercules — how often did Schapper and he victoriously defend the entrance to a hall against hundreds of onrushing opponents! — a man who was at least the equal of his two comrades in energy and determination, and intellectually superior to both of them. Not only was he a born diplomat, as the success of his numerous trips on various mission proved; he was also more capable of theoretical insight. I came to know all three of them in London in 1843. There were the first revolutionary proletarians whom I met, and however far apart our views were at that time — for I still owned, as against their narrow-minded equalitarian Communism [by equalitarian Communism I understand, as stated, only that Communism which bases itself exclusively or predominantly on the demand for equality], a goodly does of just as narrow-minded philosophical arrogance — I shall never forget the deep impression that these three real men made upon me, who was then still only wanting to become a man. 
In London, as in a lesser degree in Switzerland, they had the benefit of freedoms of association and assembly. As early as February 7, 1840, the legally functioning German Workers’ Educational Association, which still exists, was founded. This Association served the League as a recruiting ground for new members, and since, as always, the Communists were the most active and intelligent members of the Association, it was a matter of course that its leadership lay entirely in the hands of the League. The League soon had several communities, or, as they were then still called, “lodges”, in London. The same obvious tactics were followed in Switzerland and elsewhere. Where workers’ associations could be founded, they were utilized in like manner. Where this was forbidden by law, one joined choral societies, athletic clubs, and the like. Connections were to a large extent maintained by members who were continually travelling back and forth; they also, when required, served as emissaries. In both respects the League obtained lively support through the wisdom of the governments which, by resorting to deportation, converted any objectionable worker — and in nine cases our of ten he was a member of the League — into an emissary. 
The extent to which the restored League was spread was considerable. Notably in Switzerland, Weitling, August Becker (a highly gifted man who, however, like so many Germans, came to grief because of innate instability of character) and others created a strong organization more or less pledged to Weitling’s communist system. This is not the place to criticize the Communism of Weitling. But as regards its significance as the first independent theoretical stirring of the German proletariat, I still today subscribe to Marx’s words in the Paris Vorwarts of 1844:
“Where could the (German) bourgeoisie — including its philosophers and learned scribes — point to a work relating to the emancipation of the bourgeoisie — its political emancipation — comparable to Weitlings’ Guarantees of Harmony and Freedom? If one compares the drab mealy-mouthed mediocrity of German political literature with this immeasurable and brilliant debut of the German workers, if one compares these gigantic children’s shoes of the proletariat with the dwarf proportions of the worn-out political shows of the bourgeoisie, one must prophesy an athlete’s figure for this Cinderella.”
This athlete’s figure confronts us today, although still far from being fully grown. 
Numerous sections existed also in Germany; in the nature of things they were of a transient character, but those coming into existence more than made up for those passing away. Only after seven years, at the end of 1846, did the police discover traces of the League in Berlin (Mentel) and Magdeburg (Beck), without being in a position to follow them further. 
In Paris, Weitling, who was still there in 1840, likewise gathered the scattered elements together again before he left for Switzerland. 
The tailors formed the central force of the League. German tailors were everywhere: in Switzerland, in London, in Paris. In the last-named city, German was so much the prevailing tongue in this trade that I was acquainted there in 1846 with a Norwegian tailor who had travelled directly by sea from Trondhjem to France and in the space of eighteen months had learned hardly a word of French but had acquired an excellent knowledge of German. Two of the Paris communities in 1847 consisted predominantly of tailors, one of cabinetmakers. 
After the centre of gravity had shifted from Paris to London, a new feature grew conspicuous: from being German, the League gradually became international. In the workers’ society there were to be found, besides German and Swiss, also members of all those nationalities for whom German served as the chief means of communication with foreigners, notably, therefore, Scandinavians, Dutch, Hungarians, Czechs, Southern Slavs, and also Russians and Alsatians. In 1847 the regular frequenters included a British grenadier of the Guards in uniform. The society soon called itself the Communist Workers’ Educational Association, and the membership cards bore the inscription “All Men Are Brothers”, in at least twenty languages, even if not without mistakes here and there. Like the open Association, so also the secret League soon took on a more international character; at first in a restricted sense, practically through the varied nationalities of its members, theoretically through the realization that any revolution to be victorious must be a European one. One did not go any further as yet; but the foundations were there. 
Close connections were maintained with the French revolutionists through t he London refugees, comrades-in-arms of May 12, 1839. Similarly with the more radical Poles. The official Polish emigres, as also Mazzini, were, of course, opponents rather than allies. The English Chartists, on account of the specific English character of their movement, were disregarded as not revolutionary. The London leaders of the League came in touch with them only later, through me. 
In other ways, too, the character of the League had altered with events. Although Paris was still — and at that time quite rightly — looked upon as the mother city of the revolution, one had nevertheless emerged from the state of dependence on the Paris conspirators. The spread of the League raised its self-consciousness. It was felt that roots were being struck more and more in the German working class and that these German workers were historically called upon to be the standard-bearers of the workers of the North and East of Europe. In Weitling was to be found a communist theoretician who could be boldly placed at the side of his contemporary French rivals. Finally, the experience of May 12th had taught us that for the time being there was nothing to be gained by attempts at putsches. And if one still continued to explain every event as a sign of the approaching storm, if one still preserved intact the old, semi-conspiratorial rules, that was mainly the fault of the old revolutionary defiance, which had already begun to collide with the sounder views that were gaining headway. 
However, the social doctrine of the League, indefinite as it was, contained a very great defect, but one that had its roots in the conditions themselves. The members, in so far as they were workers at all, were almost exclusively artisans. Even in the big metropolises, the man who exploited them was usually only a small master. The exploitation of tailoring on a large scale, what is now called the manufacture of ready-made clothes, by the conversion of handicraft tailoring into a domestic industry working for a big capitalist, was at that time even in London only just making it appearance. On the one hand, the exploiters of these artisans was a small master; on the other hand, they all hoped ultimately to become small masters themselves. In addition, a mass of inherited guild notions still clung to the German artisan at that time. The greatest honor is due to them, in that they, who were themselves not yet full proletarians but only an appendage of the petty bourgeoisie, an appendage which was passing into the modern proletariat and which did not yet stand in direct opposition to the bourgeoisie, that is, to big capital — in that these artisans were capable of instinctively anticipating their future development and of constituting themselves, even if not yet with full consciousness, the party of the proletariat. But it was also inevitable that their old handicraft prejudices should be a stumbling block to them at every moment, whenever it was a question of criticizing existing society in detail, that is, of investigating economic facts. And I do not believe there was a single man in the whole League at that time who had ever read a book on political economy. But that mattered little; for the time being “equality”, “brotherhood” and “justice” helped them to surmount every theoretical obstacle. 
Meanwhile a second, essentially different Communism was developed alongside that of the League and of Weitling. While I was in Manchester, it was tangibly brought home to me that the economic facts, which have so far played no role or only a contemptible one in the writing of history, are, at least in the modern world, a decisive historical force; that they form the basis of the origination of the present-day class antagonisms; that these class antagonisms, in the countries where they have become fully developed, thanks to large-scale industry, hence especially in England, are in their turn the basis of the formation of political parties and of party struggles, and thus of all political history. Marx had not only arrived at the same view, but had already, in the Deutsche-Französische Jahrbücher (1844), generalized it to the effect that, speaking generally, it is not the state which conditions and regulates the civil society at all, but civil society which conditions and regulates the state, and, consequently, that policy and its history are to be explained from the economic relations and their development, and not vice versa. When I visited Marx in Paris in the summer of 1844, our complete agreement in all theoretical fields became evident and our joint work dates from that time. When, in the spring of 1845, we met again in Brussels, Marx had already fully developed his materialist theory of history in its main features form the above-mentioned basis and we now applied ourselves to the detailed elaboration of the newly-won mode of outlook in the most varied directions. 
This discovery, which revolutionized the science of history and, as we have seen, is essentially the work of Marx — a discovery in which I can claim for myself only a very insignificant share — was, however, of immediate importance for the contemporary workers’ movement. Communism among the French and Germans, Chartism among the English, now no longer appeared as something accidental which could just as well not have occurred. These movements now presented themselves as a movement of the modern oppressed class, the proletariat, as the more or less developed forms of its historically necessary struggle against the ruling class, the bourgeoisie; as forms of the class struggle, but distinguished from all earlier class struggles by this one thing, that the present-day oppressed class the proletariat, cannot achieve its emancipation without at the same time emancipating society as a whole from division into classes and, therefore, from class struggles. And Communism now no longer meant the concoction, by means of the imagination, of an ideal society as perfect as possible, but insight into the nature, the conditions and the consequent general aims of the struggle waged by the proletariat. 
Now, we were by no means of the opinion that the new scientific results should be confided in large tomes exclusively to the “learned” world. Quite the contrary. We were both of us already deeply involved in the political movement, and possessed a certain following in the educated world, especially of Western Germany, and abundant contact with the organized proletariat. It was our duty to provide a scientific foundation for our view, but it was equally important for us to win over the European and in the first place the German proletariat to our conviction. As soon as we had become clear in our own minds, we set about the task. We founded a German workers’ society in Brussels and took over the Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung, which served us as an organ up to the February Revolution. We kept in touch with the revolutionary section of the English Chartists through Julian Harney, the editor of the central organ of the movement, The Northern Star, to which I was a contributor. We entered likewise into a sort of cartel with the Brussels democrats (Marx was vice-president of the Democratic Society) and with the French social-democrats of the Réforme, which I furnished with news of the English and German movements. In short, our connections with the radical and proletarian organizations and press organs were quite what one could wish. 
Our relations with the League of the Just were as follows: The existence of the League was, of course, known to us; in 1843 Schapper had suggested that I join it, which I at that time naturally refused to do. But we not only kept up our continuous correspondence with the Londoners but remained on still closer terms with Dr Ewerbeck, then the leader of the Paris communities. Without going into the League’s internal affairs, we learnt of every important happening. On the other hand, we influenced the theoretical views of the most important members of the League by word of mouth, by letter and through the press. For this purpose we also made us of various lithographed circulars, which we dispatched to our friends and correspondents throughout the world on particular occasions, when it was a question of the internal affairs of the Communist Party in process of formation. In these, the League itself sometimes came to be dealt with. Thus, a young Westphalian student, Hermann Kriege, who went to America, came forward there as an emissary of the League and associated himself with the crazy Harro Harring for the purpose of using the League to turn South America upside down. He founded a paper in which, in the name of the League, he preached an extravagant Communism of love dreaming, based on “love” and overflowing with love. Against this we let fly with a circular that did not fail of its effect. Kriege vanished from the League scene. 
Later, Weitling came to Brussels. But he was no loner the naive young journeyman-tailor who, astonished at his own talents, was trying to clarify in his own mind just what a communist society would look like. He was now the great man, persecuted by the environs on account of his superiority, who scented rivals, secret enemies and traps everywhere — the prophet, driven from country to country, who carried a recipe for the realization of heaven on earth ready-made in his pocket, and who was was possessed with the idea that everybody intended to steal it from him. He had already fallen out with the members of the League in London; and in Brussels, where Marx and his wife welcomed him with almost superhuman forbearance, he also could not get along with anyone. So he soon afterwards went to America to try out his role of prophet there. 
All these circumstance contributed to the quiet revolution that was taking place in the League, and especially among the leaders in London. The inadequacy of the previous conception of Communism, both the simple French equalitarian Communism and that of Weitling, became more and more clear to them. The tracing of Communism back to primitive Christianity introduced by Weitling — no matter how brilliant certain passages to be found in his Gospel of Poor Sinners — had resulted in delivering the movement in Switzerland to a large extent into the hands, first of fools like Albrecht, and then of exploiting fake prophets like Kuhlmann. The “true Socialism” dealt in by a few literary writers — a translation of French socialist phraseology into corrupt Hegelian German, and sentimental love dreaming (see the section on German of “True” Socialism in the Communist Manifesto — that Kriege and the study of the corresponding literature introduced in the League was found soon to disgust the old revolutionaries of the league, if only because of its slobbering feebleness. As against the untenability of the previous theoretical views, and as against the practical aberrations resulting therefrom, it was realized more and more in London that Marx and I were right in our new theory. This understanding was undoubtedly promoted by the fact that among the London leaders there were now two men who were considerably superior to those previously mentioned in capacity for theoretical knowledge: the miniature painter Karl Pfander from Heilbronn and the tailor Georg Eccarius from Thuringia. 
[Engels footnote: Pfander died about eight years ago in London. he was a man of peculiarly fine intelligence, witty, ironical and dialectical. Eccarius, as we know, was later for many years Secretary of the General Council of the International Working Men’s Association, in the General Council of which the following old League members were to be found, among others: Eccarius, Pfander, Lessner, Lochner, Marx and myself. Eccarius subsequently devoted himself exclusively to the English trade union movement.]
It suffices to say that in the spring of 1847 Moll visited Marx in Brussels and immediately afterwards me in Paris, and invited us repeatedly, in the name of his comrades, to enter the League. He reported that they were as much convinced of the general correctness of our mode of outlook as of the necessity of freeing the League from the old conspiratorial traditions and forms. Should we enter, we would be given an opportunity of expounding our critical Communism before a congress of the League in a manifesto, which would then be published as the manifesto of the League; we would likewise be able to contribute our quota towards the replacement of the obsolete League organization by one in keeping with the new times and aims. 
We entertained no doubt that an organization within the German working class was necessary, if only for propaganda purposes, and that this organization, in so far as it would not be merely local in character, could only be a secret one, even outside Germany. Now, there already existed exactly such an organization in the shape of the League. What we previously objected to in this League was now relinquished as erroneous by the representatives of the League themselves; we were even invited to co-operate in the work of reorganization. Could we say no? Certainly not. Therefore, we entered the League; Marx founded a League community in Brussels from among our close friends, while I attended the three Paris communities. 
In the summer of 1847, the first league Congress took place in London, at which W. Wolff represented the Brussels and I the Paris communities. At this congress the reorganization of the League was carried through first of all. Whatever remained of the old mystical names dating back to the conspiratorial period was now abolished; the League now consisted of communities, circles, leading circles, a Central Committee and a Congress, and henceforth called itself the “Communist League”. 
“The aim of the League is the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the rule of the proletariat, the abolition of the old, bourgeois society based on class antagonisms and the foundation of a new society without classes and without private property”
 — thus ran the first article. The organization itself was thoroughly democratic, with elective and always removable boards. This alone barred all hankering after conspiracy, which requires dictatorship, and the League was converted — for ordinary peace times at least — into a pure propaganda society. These new Rules were submitted to the communities for discussion — so democratic was the procedure now followed — then once again debated at the Second Congress and finally adopted by the latter on December 8, 1847. They are to be found reprinted in Wermuth and Stieber, vol.I, p.239, Appendix X. 
The Second Congress took place during the end of November and beginning of December of the same year. Marx also attended this time and expounded the new theory in a fairly long debate — the congress lasted at least ten days. All contradiction and doubt were finally set at rest, the new basic principles were unanimously adopted, and Marx and I were commissioned to draw up the Manifesto. This was done immediately afterwards. A few weeks before the February Revolution it was sent to London to be printed. Since then it has travelled round the world, has been translated into almost all languages and today still serves in numerous countries as a guide for the proletarian movement. In place of the old League motto, “All Men Are Brothers”, appeared the new battle cry, “Working Men of All Countries, Unite!” which openly proclaimed the international character of the struggle. Seventeen years later this battle cry resounded throughout the world as the watchword of the International Working Men’s Association, and today the militant proletariat of all countries has inscribed it in its banner. 
The February Revolution broke out. The London Central Committee functioning hitherto immediately transferred its powers to the Brussels leading circle. But this decision came at a time when an actual state of siege already existed in Brussels, and the Germans in particular could no longer assemble anywhere. We were all of us just on the point of going to Paris, and so the new Central Committee decided likewise to dissolve, to hand over all its powers to Marx and to empower him immediately to constitute a new Central Committee in Paris. Hardly had the five persons who adopted this decision (March 3, 1848) separated, before police forced their way into Marx’s house, arrested him and compelled him to leave for France the following day, which was just where he was wanting to go. 
In Paris we all soon came together again. There the following document was drawn up and signed by all the members of the new Central Committee. It was distributed throughout Germany and many a one can still learn something from it even today:
Demands of the Communist Party in Germany
The whole of Germany shall be declared a single indivisible republic. 
Representatives of the people shall be paid so that workers also can sit in the parliament of the German people.
Universal arming of the people.
The estates of the princes and other feudal estates, all mines, pits, etc., shall be transformed into state property. On these estates, agriculture is to be conducted on a very large scale and with the most modern scientific means for the benefit of all society. 
Mortgages on peasant holdings shall be declared state property; interest on such mortgages shall be paid by the peasants to the state. 
In the districts where tenant farming is developed, land rent or farming dues shall be paid to the state as a tax.
All means of transport: railway, canals, steamships, roads, post, etc., shall be taken over by the state. They are to be converted into state property and put at the disposal of the non-possessing class free of charge. 
Limitation of the right of inheritance.
 Introduction of a steeply graded progressive taxation and abolition of taxes on consumer goods.
Establishment of national workshops. The state shall guarantee a living to all workers and provide for those unable to work.
Universal free elementary education.
It is in the interest of the German proletariat, of the petite Bourgeoisie and peasantry, to work with all possible energy to put the above measures through. For only by their education can the millions in Germany, who up to now have been exploited by a small number of people and whom it will be attempted to keep in further subjection, get their rights and the power that are their due as the producers of all wealth. 
The Committee: Karl Marx, Karl Schapper,  H. Bauer, F. Engels, J. Moll, W. Wolff
At that time the craze for revolutionary legions prevailed in Paris. Spaniards, Italians, Belgians, Dutch, Poles and Germans flocked together in crowds to liberate their respective fatherlands. The German legion was led by Herwegh, Bornsted, Bornstein. Since immediately after the revolution all foreign workers not only lost their jobs but in addition were harassed by the public, the influx into these legions was very great. the new government saw in them a means of getting rid of foreign workers and granted them l'etape du soldat, that is, quarters along their line of march and a marching allowance of 50 centimes per day up to the frontier, whereafter the eloquent Lamartine, the Foreign Minister who was so readily moved to tears, quickly found an opportunity of betraying them to their respective governments. 
We opposed this playing with revolution in the most decisive fashion. To carry an invasion, which was to import the revolution forcibly from outside, into the midst of the ferment then going on in Germany, meant to undermine the revolution in Germany itself, to strengthen the governments and to deliver the legionnaires — Lamartine guaranteed for that — defenceless into the hands of the German troops. When subsequently the revolution was victorious in Vienna and Berlin, the legion became all the more purposeless; but once begun, the game was continued. 
We founded a German communist club, in which we advised the workers to keep away from the legion and to return instead to their homes singly and work there for the movement. Our old friend Flocon, who had a seat in the Provisional Government, obtained for the workers sent by us the same travel facilities as had been granted to the legionnaires. In this way we returned three or four hundred workers to Germany, including the great majority of the League members. 
As could easily be foreseen, the League proved to be much too weak a lever as against the popular mass movement that had now broken out. Three-quarters of the League members who had previously lived abroad had changed their domicile by returning to their homeland; their previous communities were thus to a great extent dissolved and they lost all contact with the League. One part, the more ambitious among them, did not even try to resume this contact, but each one began a small separate movement on his own account in his own locality. Finally, the conditions in each separate petty state, each province and each town were so different that the League would have been incapable of giving more than the most general directives; such directives were, however, much better disseminated through the press. In short, from the moment when the causes which had made the secret League necessary ceased to exist, the secret League as such ceased to mean anything. But this could least of all surprise the persons who had just stripped this same secret League of the last vestige of its conspiratorial character. 
That, however, the League had been an excellent school for revolutionary activity was now demonstrated. On the Rhine, where the Neue Rheinische Zeitung provided a firm centre, in Nassau, in Rhenish Hesse, etc., everywhere members of the League stood at the head of the extreme democratic movement. The same was the case in Hamburg. In South Germany the predominance of petty-bourgeois democracy stood in the way. In Breslau, Wilhelm Wolff was active with great success until the summer of 1848; in addition he received a Silesian mandate as an alternate representative in the Frankfort parliament. Finally, the compositor Stephan Born, who had worked in Brussels and Paris as an active member of the League, founded a Workers’ Brotherhood in Berlin which became fairly widespread and existed until 1850. Born, a very talented young man, who, however, was a bit too much in a hurry to become a political figure, “fraternized” with the most miscellaneous ragtag and bobtail in order to get a crowd together, and was not at all the man who could bring unity into the conflicting tendencies, light into the chaos. Consequently, in the official publications of the association the views represented in the Communist Manifesto were mingled hodge-podge with guild recollections and guild aspirations, fragments of Louis Blanc and Proudhon, protectionism, etc.; in short, they wanted to please everybody [allen alles sein]. In particular, strikes, trade unions and producers’ co-operatives were set going and it was forgotten that above all it was a question of first conquering, by means of political victories, the field in which alone such things could be realized on a lasting basis. When, afterwards, the victories of the reaction made the leaders of the Brotherhood realize the necessity of taking a direct part in the revolutionary struggle, they were naturally left in the lurch by the confused mass which they had grouped around themselves. Born took part in the Dresden uprising in May, 1849 and had a lucky escape. But, in contrast to the great political movement of the proletariat, the Workers’ Brotherhood proved to be a pure Sonderbund [separate league], which to a large extent existed only on paper and played such a subordinate role that the reaction did not find it necessary to suppress it until 1850, and its surviving branches until several years later. Born, whose real name was Buttermilch, has not become a big political figure but a petty Swiss professor, who no longer translates Marx into guild language but the meek Renan into his own fulsome German. 
With June 13, 1849, the defeat of the May insurrections in Germany and the suppression of the Hungarian revolution by the Russians, a great period of the 1848 Revolution came to a close. But the victory of the reaction was as yet by no means final. A reorganziation of the scattered revolutionary forces was required, and hence also of the League. The situation again forbade, as in 1848, any open organization of the proletariat; hence one had to organize again in secret. 
In the autumn of 1849, most of the member of the previous central committees and congresses gathered again in London. The only ones still missing were Schapper, who was jailed in Wiesbaden but came after his acquittal, in the spring of 1850, and Moll, who, after he had accomplished a series of most dangerous missions and agitational journeys — in the end he recruited mounted gunners for the Palatinate artillery right in the midst of the Prussian army in the Rhine Province — joined the Besancon workers’ company of Willich’s corps and was killed by a shot in the head during the encounter at the Murg in front of the Rotenfels Bridge. On the other hand, Willich now entered upon the scene. Willich was one of those sentimental Communists so common in Western Germany since 1845, who on that account alone was instinctively, furtively antagonistic to our critical tendency. More than that, he was entirely the prophet, convinced of his personal mission as the predestined liberator of the German proletariat and as such a direct claimant as much to political as to military dictatorship. Thus, to the primitive Christian Communism previously preached by Weitling was added a kind of communist Islam. However, the propaganda of this new religion was for the first time being restricted to the refugee barracks under Willich’s command. 
Hence, the League was organized afresh; the Address of march 1850 was issued and Heinrich bauer sent as an emissary to Germany. The Address, composed by Marx and myself, is still of interest today, because petite-bourgeois democracy is even now the party which must certainly be the first to come to power in Germany as the savior of society from the communist workers on the occasion of the next European upheaval now soon due (the European revolutions, 1815, 1830, 1848-52, 1870, have occurred at intervals of 15 to 18 years in our century). Much of what is said there is, therefore, still applicable today. Heinrich Bauer’s mission was crowned with complete success. The trusty little shoemaker was a born diplomat. He brought the former members of the League, who had partly become laggards and partly were acting on their own account, back into the active organization, and particularly also the then leaders of the Workers’ Brotherhood. The League began to play the dominant role in the workers’, peasants’ and athletic associations to a far greater extent than before 1848, so that the next quarterly address to the communities, in June 1850, could already report that the student Schurz from Bonn (later on American ex-minister), who was touring Germany in the interest of petty-bourgeois democracy, “had found all fit forces already in the hands of the League”. The League was undoutbedly the only revolutionary organization that had any significance in Germany. 
But what purpose this organization should serve depended very substantially on whether the prospects of a renewed upsurge of the revolution were realized. And in the course of the year 1850 this became more and more improbable, indeed impossible. The industrial crisis of 1847, which had paved the way for the Revolution of 1848, had been overcome; a new, unprecedented period of industrial prosperity had set in; whoever had eyes to see and used them must have clearly realized that the revolutionary storm of 1848 was gradually spending itself. 
“With this general prosperity, in which the productive forces of bourgeois society develop as luxuriantly as is at all possible within bourgeois relationships, there can be no talk of a real revolution. Such a revolution is only possible in the periods when both these factors, the modern productive forces and the bourgeois productive forms, come in collision with each other. The various quarrels in which the representatives of the industrial factions of the continental party of order now indulge and mutually compromise themselves, far from providing the occassion for new revolutions are, on the contrary, possible only because the basis of the relationships is momentarily so secure and, what the reaction does not know, so bourgeois. From it all attempts of the reaction to hold up bourgeois development will rebound just as certainly as all moral indignation and all enthusiastic proclamations of the democrats”. 
Thus Marx and I wrote in the “Revue of May to October 1850” in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Politisch-okonomische Revue, Nos.V and VI, Hamburg, 1850, p.153. 
This cool estimation of the situation, however, was regarded as heresy among many persons, at a time when Ledru-Rollin, Louis Blanc, Mazzini, Kossuth and, among the lesser German lights, Ruge, Kinkel, Gogg and the rest of them crowded in London to form provisional governments of the future not only for their respective fatherlands but for the whole of Europe, and when the only still still necessary was to obtain the requisite money from America as a loan for the revolution to realize at a moment’s notice the European revolution and the various republics which went with it was a matter of course. Can anyone be surprised that a man like Willich was taken in by this, that Schapper, acting on his old revolutionary impulse, also allowed himself to be fooled, and that the majority of the London workers, to a large extent refugees themselves, followed them into the camp of the bourgeois-democratic artificers of revolution? Suffice it to say that the reserve maintained by us was not to the mind of these people; one was to enter into the game of making revolutions. We most decidedly refused to do so. A split ensued; more about this is to be read in the Revelations. Then came the arrest of Nothjung, followed by that of Haupt, in Hamburg. The latter turned traitor by divulging the names of the Cologne Central Committee and being slated as the chief witness in the trial; but his relatives had no desires to be thus disgraced and bundled him off to Rio de Janerio, where he later established himself as a businessman and in recognition of his services was appointed first Prussian and then German Consul General. He is now again in Europe. 
[Engels footnote: Schapper in London at the end of the sixties. Willich took part in the American Civil War with distinction; he became Brigadier-General and was shot in the chest during the battle of Murfreesboro (Tennessee) but recovered and died about ten years ago in America. Of the other persons mentioned above, I will only remark that Heinrich Bauer was lost track of in Australia, and that Weitling and Ewerbeck died in America.]
For a better understanding of the Revelations, I give the list of the Cologne accused:
(1) P. G. Roser, cigarmaker; (2) Heinrich Burgers, who later died a progressive deputy to the Landtag; (3) Peter Nothjung, tailor, who died a few years ago a photographer in Breslau; (4) W. J. Reiff; (5) Dr. Hermann Becker, now chief burgomaster of Cologne and member of the Upper House; (6) Dr. Roland Daniels, physician, who died a few years after the trial as a result of tuberculosis contracted in prison; (7) Karl Otto, chemist; (8) Dr. Abraham Jacoby, now physician in New York; (9) Dr. I. J. Klein, now physician and town councillor in Cologne; (10) Ferdinand Freiligrath, who, however, was at that time already in London; (11) I. L. Ehrhard, clerk; (12) Friedrich Lessner, tailor, now in London.
After a public trail before a jury lasting from October 4 to November 12, 1852, the following were sentenced for attempted high treason: Roser, Burgers and Nothjung to six, Reiff, Otto and Becker to five, and Lessner to three years’ confinement in a fortress; Daniels, Klein, Jacoby and Ehrhard were acquitted. 
With the Cologne trial the first period of the German communist workers’ movement comes to an end. Immediately after the sentence we dissolved our League; a few months later the Willich-Schapper separate league was also laid to eternal rest. 
* A whole generation lies between then and now. At that time Germany was a country of handicraft and of domestic industry based on hand labor; now it is a big industrial country still undergoing continual industrial transformation. At that time one had to seek out one by one the workers who had an understanding of their position as workers and of their historico-economic antagonism to capital, because this antagonism itself was only just beginning to develop. Today the entire German proletariat has to be placed under exceptional laws, merely in order to slow down a little the process of its development to full consciousness of its position as an oppressed class. At that time the few persons whose minds had penetrated to the realization of the historical role of the proletariat had to forgather in secret, to assemble clandestinely in small communities of 3 to 20 persons. Today the German proletariat no longer needs any official organization, either public or secret. The simple self-evident interconnection of like-minded class comrades suffices, without any rules, boards, resolutions or other tangible forms, to shake the whole German Empire to its foundations. Bismarck is the arbiter of Europe beyond the frontiers of Germany, but within them there grows daily more threatening the athletic figure of the German proletariat that Marx foresaw already in 1844, the giant for whom the cramped imperial edifice designed to fit the philistine is even now becoming inadequate and whose mighty stature and broad shoulder are growing until the moment comes when by merely rising from his seat he will shatter the whole structure of the imperial constitution into fragments. And still more. The international movement of the European and American proletariat has become so much strengthened that not merely its first narrow form — the secret League — but even its second, infinitely wider form — the open International Working Men’s Association — has become a fetter for it, and that the simple feeling of solidarity based on the understanding of the identity of class position suffices to create and to hold together one and the same great party of the proletariat among the workers of all countries and tongues. The doctrine which the League represented from 1847 to 1852, and which at that time could be treated by the wise philistines with a shrug of the shoulders as the hallucinations of utter madcaps, as the secret doctrine of a few scattered sectarians, has now innumerable adherents in all civilized countries of the world, among those condemned to the Siberian mines as much as among the gold diggers of California; and the founder of this doctrine, the most hated, most slandered man of his time, Karl Marx, was, when he died, the ever-sought-for and ever-willing counsellor of the proletariat of both the old and the new world. 
 


Communist League Index
Marx/Engels Archive





==========

## The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State







Origins of the Family



Works of Frederick Engels 1884
The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State

Written: March-May, 1884;
First Published: October 1884, in Hottingen-Zurich;
Source: Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume Three;
Translation: The text is essentially the English translation by Alick West published in 1942, but it has been revised against the German text as it appeared in MEW [Marx-Engels Werke] Volume 21, Dietz Verlag 1962, and the spelling of names and other terms has been modernised;
Transcription/Markup: Zodiac/Brian Baggins;
Online Version: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 1993, 1999, 2000. 
Proofed and corrected: Mark Harris 2010; Martin Swayne 2021 (based on a comparison with the Wellred Books 2020 edition)


Table of Contents: 
Introduction
Preface to the First Edition
Preface to the Fourth Edition
Stages of Prehistoric Culture
The Family
The Consanguine Family (The First Stage of the Family) 
The Punaluan Family 
The Pairing Family 
The Monogamous Family
The Iroquois Gens
The Greek Gens [The Rise of Private Property]
The Rise of the Athenian State
The Gens and the State in  Rome
The Gens Among Celts and Germans
The Formation of the State Among the Germans
Barbarism and Civilization
Appendix: A Recently Discovered Case of Group Marriage


Introduction 
After Marx’s death, in
rummaging through Marx’s manuscripts, Engels came upon Marx’s precis of Ancient Society – a book by progressive US
scholar Lewis
Henry Morgan and published in London 1877. The precis was written between
1880-81 and contained Marx’s numerous remarks on Morgan as well as
passages from other sources. 
After reading the precis, Engels set out to write a
special treatise – which he saw as fulfilling Marx’s will. Working
on the book, he used Marx’s precis, and some of Morgan’s factual
material and conclusions. He also made use of many and diverse data gleaned in
his own studies of the history of Greece, Rome, Old Ireland, and the Ancient
Germans. 
It would, of course, become The Origin of the
Family, Private Property and the State – the first edition of which
was published October 1884 in Hottingen-Zurich. 
Engels wrote The Origin of the Family, Private
Property and the State in just two months – beginning toward the end
of March 1884 and completing it by the end of May. It focuses on early human
history, following the disintegration of the primitive community and the
emergence of a class society based on private property. Engels looks into the
origin and essence of the state, and concludes it is bound to wither away
leaving a classless society. 
Engels: “Along with
[the classes] the state will inevitably fall. Society, which will reorganise
production on the basis of a free and equal association of the producers, will
put the whole machinery of state where it will then belong: into the museum of
antiquity, by the side of the spinning-wheel and the bronze axe.” 
In 1890, having gathered new material on the history of
primitive society, Engels set about preparing a new edition of his book. He
studied the latest books on the subject – including those of Russian
historian Maxim Kovalevsky. (The fourth edition, Stuttgart, 1892, was dedicated
to Kovalevsky.) As a result, he introduced a number of changes in his original
text and also considerable insertions. 
In 1894, Engels’s book appeared in Russian
translation. It was the first of Engels’s works published legally in
Russia. Lenin would later describe it as “one of the fundamental works of
modern socialism.” 



Ancient Society by Lewis Henry Morgan, 1877
Study Guide | Original Cover | Marx/Engels Works Archive 




==========

## Preface to the First Edition 1884









Origins of the Family— Preface (1884)



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
Preface to the First Edition, 1884



The following chapters are, in a sense,
the execution of a bequest. No less a man than Karl Marx had made it one of his
future tasks to present the results of Morgan’s researches in the light of the
conclusions of his own — within certain limits, I may say our — materialistic
examination of history, and thus to make clear their full significance. For
Morgan in his own way had discovered afresh in America the materialistic
conception of history discovered by Marx forty years ago, and in his comparison
of barbarism and civilization it had led him, in the main points, to the same
conclusions as Marx. And just as the professional economists in Germany were
for years as busy in plagiarizing Capital as they were persistent in attempting
to kill it by silence, so Morgan's Ancient Society [1] received precisely the same treatment from the
spokesmen of “prehistoric” science in England. My work can only provide a
slight substitute for what my departed friend no longer had the time to do. But
I have the critical notes which he made to his extensive extracts from Morgan,
and as far as possible I reproduce them here. 
According to the materialistic conception, the determining factor in history
is, in the final instance, the production and reproduction of the immediate
essentials of life. This, again, is of a twofold character. On the one side,
the production of the means of existence, of articles of food and clothing,
dwellings, and of the tools necessary for that production; on the other side,
the production of human beings themselves, the propagation of the species. The
social organization under which the people of a particular historical epoch and
a particular country live is determined by both kinds of production: by the
stage of development of labor on the one hand and of the family on the other.

The lower the development of labor and the more limited the amount of its
products, and consequently, the more limited also the wealth of the society,
the more the social order is found to be dominated by kinship groups. However,
within this structure of society based on kinship groups the productivity of
labor increasingly develops, and with it private property and exchange,
differences of wealth, the possibility of utilizing the labor power of others,
and hence the basis of class antagonisms: new social elements, which in the
course of generations strive to adapt the old social order to the new
conditions, until at last their incompatibility brings about a complete
upheaval. In the collision of the newly-developed social classes, the old
society founded on kinship groups is broken up; in its place appears a new
society, with its control centered in the state, the subordinate units of which
are no longer kinship associations, but local associations; a society in which
the system of the family is completely dominated by the system of property, and
in which there now freely develop those class antagonisms and class struggles
that have hitherto formed the content of all written history. 
It is Morgan’s great merit that he has discovered and reconstructed in its
main lines this prehistoric basis of our written history, and that in the
kinship groups of the North American Indians he has found the key to the most
important and hitherto insoluble riddles of earliest Greek, Roman and German
history. His book is not the work of a day. For nearly forty years he wrestled
with his material, until he was completely master of it. But that also makes
his book one of the few epoch-making works of our time. 
In the following presentation, the reader will in general easily distinguish
what comes from Morgan and what I have added. In the historical sections on
Greece and Rome I have not confined myself to Morgan’s evidence, but have added
what was available to me. The sections on the Celts and the Germans are in the
main my work; Morgan had to rely here almost entirely on secondary sources, and
for German conditions — apart from Tacitus — on the worthless and
liberalistic falsifications of Mr. Freeman. The treatment of the economic
aspects, which in Morgan’s book was sufficient for his purpose but quite
inadequate for mine, has been done afresh by myself. And, finally, I am, of
course, responsible for all the conclusions drawn, in so far as Morgan is not
expressly cited. 



Footnotes 


[1] Ancient Society, or
Researches in the Lines of Human Progress from Savagery, through Barbarism to
Civilization, by Lewis H. Morgan, London, Macmillan & Co., 1877. The book
was printed in America and is peculiarly difficult to obtain in London. The
author died some years ago. [For the purposes of this edition, all references
to Ancient Society are from the Charles H. Kerr edition, Chicago. — Ed.] 



Preface (1891) 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## Preface to the Fourth German Edition 1891









Origins of the Family. Preface (1891)



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
Preface to the Fourth Edition, 1891


The earlier large editions of this work have been out of print
now for almost half a year, and for some time the publisher has been asking me
to prepare a new edition. Until now, more urgent work kept me from doing so.
Since the appearance of the first edition seven years have elapsed, during
which our knowledge of the primitive forms of the family has made important
advances. There was, therefore, plenty to do in the way of improvements and
additions; all the more so as the proposed stereotyping of the present text
will make any further alterations impossible for some time. 
I have accordingly submitted the whole text to a careful revision and made a
number of additions which, I hope, take due account of the present state of
knowledge. I also give in the course of this preface a short review of the
development of the history of the family from Bachofen to Morgan; I do so
chiefly because the chauvinistically inclined English anthropologists are still
striving their utmost to kill by silence the revolution which Morgan’s
discoveries have effected in our conception of primitive history, while they
appropriate his results without the slightest compunction. Elsewhere also the
example of England is in some cases followed only too closely. 
My work has been translated into a number of other languages. First,
Italian: L’origine delta famiglia, delta proprieta privata e dello stato,
versions riveduta dall’autore, di Pasquale Martignetti, Benevento, 1885.
Then, Rumanian: Origina famdei, proprietatei private si a statului, traducere
de Joan Nadeide, in the Yassy periodical Contemporanul, September, 1885, to
May, 1886. Further, Danish: Familjens, Privatejendommens og Statens Oprindelse,
Dansk, af Forfattern gennemgaaet Udgave, besorget af Gerson Trier, Kobenhavn,
1888. A French translation by Henri Rave, based on the present German edition,
is on the press. 

Before the beginning of the sixties, one cannot speak of a history of
the family. In this field, the science of history was still completely under
the influence of the five books of Moses. The patriarchal form of the family,
which was there described in greater detail than anywhere else, was not only
assumed without question to be the oldest form, but it was also identified
– minus its polygamy – with the bourgeois family of today, so that
the family had really experienced no historical development at all; at most it
was admitted that in primitive times there might have been a period of sexual
promiscuity. It is true that in addition to the monogamous form of the family,
two other forms were known to exist – polygamy in the Orient and
polyandry in India and Tibet; but these three forms could not be arranged in
any historical order and merely appeared side by side without any connection.
That among some peoples of ancient history, as well as among some savages still
alive today, descent was reckoned, not from the father, but from the mother,
and that the female line was therefore regarded as alone valid; that among many
peoples of the present day in every continent marriage is forbidden within
certain large groups which at that time had not been closely studied –
these facts were indeed known and fresh instances of them were continually
being collected. But nobody knew what to do with them, and even as late as E.
B. Tylor’s Researches into the Early History of Mankind, etc. (1865) they
are listed as mere “curious customs”, side by side with the
prohibition among some savages against touching burning wood with an iron tool
and similar religious mumbo-jumbo. 
The history of the family dates from 1861, from the publication of
Bachofen’s Mutterrecht. [Mother-right, matriarchate – Ed.] In this
work the author advances the following propositions: 
(1) That originally man lived in a state of sexual
promiscuity, to describe which Bachofen uses the mistaken term
“hetaerism”; 
(2) that such promiscuity excludes any certainty of
paternity, and that descent could therefore be reckoned only in the female
line, according to mother-right, and that this was originally the case amongst
all the peoples of antiquity; 
(3) that since women, as mothers, were the only parents of
the younger generation that were known with certainty, they held a position of
such high respect and honor that it became the foundation, in Bachofen’s
conception, of a regular rule of women (gynaecocracy); 
(4) that the transition to monogamy, where the woman belonged
to one man exclusively, involved a violation of a primitive religious law (that
is, actually a violation of the traditional right of the other men to this
woman), and that in order to expiate this violation or to purchase indulgence
for it the woman had to surrender herself for a limited period. 
Bachofen finds the proofs of these assertions in innumerable passages of
ancient classical literature, which he collected with immense industry.
According to him, the development from “hetaerism” to monogamy and
from mother-right to father-right is accomplished, particularly among the
Greeks, as the consequence of an advance in religious conceptions, introducing
into the old hierarchy of the gods, representative of the old outlook, new
divinities, representative of the new outlook, who push the former more and
more into the background. Thus, according to Bachofen, it is not the
development of men’s actual conditions of life, but the religious
reflection of these conditions inside their heads, which has brought about the
historical changes in the social position of the sexes in relation to each
other. In accordance with this view, Bachofen interprets the Oresteia of
Aschylus as the dramatic representation of the conflict between declining
mother-right and the new father-right that arose and triumphed in the heroic
age. For the sake of her paramour, Ægisthus, Clytemnestra slays her husband,
Agamemnon, on his return from the Trojan War; but Orestes, the son of Agamemnon
and herself, avenges his father’s murder by slaying his mother. For this
act he is pursued by the Furies, the demonic guardians of mother-right,
according to which matricide is the gravest and most inexpiable crime. But
Apollo, who by the voice of his oracle had summoned Orestes to this deed, and
Athena, who is called upon to give judgment – the two deities who here
represent the new patriarchal order – take Orestes under their
protection; Athena hears both sides. The whole matter of the dispute is briefly
summed up in the debate which now takes place between Orestes and the Furies.
Orestes contends that Clytemnestra has committed a double crime; she has slain
her husband and thus she has also slain his father. Why should the Furies
pursue him, and not her, seeing that she is by far the more guilty? The answer
is striking: “She was not kin by blood to the man she slew.” 
The murder of a man not related by blood, even if he be the husband of the
murderess, is expiable and does not concern the Furies; their office is solely
to punish murder between blood relations, and of such murders the most grave
and the most inexpiable, according to mother-right, is matricide. Apollo now
comes forward in Orestes’ defense; Athena calls upon the Areopagites
– the Athenian jurors – to vote; the votes for Orestes’
condemnation and for his acquittal are equal; Athena, as president, gives her
vote for Orestes and acquits him. Father-right has triumphed over mother-right,
the “gods of young descent,” as the Furies themselves call them,
have triumphed over the Furies; the latter then finally allow themselves to be
persuaded to take up a new office in the service of the new order. 
This new but undoubtedly correct interpretation of the Oresteia is one of
the best and finest passages in the whole book, but it proves at the same time
that Bachofen believes at least as much as Æschylus did in the Furies, Apollo,
and Athena; for, at bottom, he believes that the overthrow of mother-right by
father-right was a miracle wrought during the Greek heroic age by these
divinities. That such a conception, which makes religion the lever of world
history, must finally end in pure mysticism, is clear. It is therefore a tough
and by no means always a grateful task to plow through Bachofen’s solid
tome. But all that does not lessen his importance as a pioneer. He was the
first to replace the vague phrases about some unknown primitive state of sexual
promiscuity by proofs of the following facts: that abundant traces survive in
old classical literature of a state prior to monogamy among the Greeks and
Asiatics when not only did a man have sexual intercourse with several women,
but a woman with several men, without offending against morality; that this
custom did not disappear without leaving its traces in the limited surrender
which was the price women had to pay for the right to monogamy; that therefore
descent could originally be reckoned only in the female line, from mother to
mother; that far into the period of monogamy, with its certain or at least
acknowledged paternity, the female line was still alone recognized; and that
the original position of the mothers, as the only certain parents of their
children, secured for them, and thus for their whole sex, a higher social
position than women have ever enjoyed since. Bachofen did not put these
statements as clearly as this, for he was hindered by his mysticism. But he
proved them; and in 1861 that was a real revolution. 
Bachofen’s massive volume was written in German, the language of the
nation which at that time interested itself less than any other in the
prehistory of the modern family. Consequently, he remained unknown. His first
successor in the same field appeared in 1865, without ever having heard of
Bachofen. 
This successor was J. F. McLennan, the exact opposite of his predecessor.
Instead of a mystic of genius, we have the dry-as-dust jurist; instead of the
exuberant imagination of a poet, the plausible arguments of a barrister
defending his brief. McLennan finds among many savage, barbarian, and even
civilized peoples of ancient and modern times a form of marriage in which the
bridegroom, alone or with his friends, must carry off the bride from her
relations by a show of force. This custom must be the survival of an earlier
custom when the men of one tribe did in fact carry off their wives by force
from other tribes. What was the origin of this “marriage by
capture”? So long as men could find enough women in their own tribe,
there was no reason whatever for it. We find, however, no less frequently that
among undeveloped peoples there are certain groups (which in 1865 were still
often identified with the tribes themselves) within which marriage is
forbidden, so that the men are obliged to take their wives, and women their
husbands, from outside the group; whereas among other peoples the custom is
that the men of one group must take their wives only from within their own
group. McLennan calls the first peoples “exogamous” and the second
“endogamous”; he then promptly proceeds to construct a rigid
opposition between exogamous and endogamous “tribes.” And although
his own investigations into exogamy force the fact under his nose that in many,
if not in most or even in all, cases, this opposition exists only in his own
imagination, he nevertheless makes it the basis of his whole theory. According
to this theory, exogamous tribes can only obtain their wives from other tribes;
and since in savagery there is a permanent state of war between tribe and
tribe, these wives could only be obtained by capture. McLennan then goes on to
ask: Whence this custom of exogamy? The conception of consanguinity and incest
could not have anything to do with it, for these things only came much later.
But there was another common custom among savages–the custom of killing
female children immediately after birth. This would cause a surplus of men in
each individual tribe, of which the inevitable and immediate consequence would
be that several men possessed a wife in common: polyandry. And this would have
the further consequence that it would be known who was the mother of a child,
but not who its father was: hence relationship only in the female line, with
exclusion of the male line – mother-right. And a second consequence of
the scarcity of women within a tribe – a scarcity which polyandry
mitigated, but did not remove – was precisely this systematic, forcible
abduction of women from other tribes. 
As exogamy and polyandry are referable to one and the same
cause – a want of balance between the sexes–we are forced to regard
all the exogamous races as having originally been polyandrous ... Therefore we
must hold it to be beyond dispute that among exogamous races the first system
of kinship was that which recognized blood-ties through mothers only. 
(McLennan, Studies in Ancient History, 1886. Primitive
Marriage, p. 124) 
It is McLennan’s merit to have directed attention to the general
occurrence and great importance of what he calls exogamy. He did not by any
means discover the existence of exogamous groups; still less did he understand
them. Besides the early, scattered notes of many observers (these were
McLennan’s sources), Latham (Descriptive Ethnology, 1859) had given a
detailed and accurate description of this institution among the Indian Magars,
and had said that it was very widespread and occurred in all parts of the world
– a passage which McLennan himself cites. Morgan, in 1847, in his letters
on the Iroquois (American Review) and in 1851 in The League of the
Iroquois, had already demonstrated the existence of exogamous groups among
this tribe and had given an accurate account of them; whereas McLennan, as we
shall see, wrought greater confusion here with his legalistic mind than
Bachofen wrought in the field of mother-right with his mystical fancies. It is
also a merit of McLennan that he recognized matrilineal descent as the earlier
system, though he was here anticipated by Bachofen, as he later acknowledged.
But McLennan is not clear on this either; he always speaks of “kinship
through females only,” and this term, which is correct for an earlier
stage, he continually applies to later stages of development when descent and
inheritance were indeed still traced exclusively through the female line, but
when kinship on the male side was also recognized and expressed. There you have
the pedantic mind of the jurist, who fixes on a rigid legal term and goes on
applying it unchanged when changed conditions have made it applicable no
longer. 
Apparently McLennan’s theory, plausible though it was, did not seem
any too well established even to its author. At any rate, he himself is struck
by the fact that “it is observable that the form of capture is now most
distinctly marked and impressive just among those races which have male
kinship” (should be “descent in the male line”). (Ibid., p.
140) And again: “It is a curious fact that nowhere now, that we are aware
of, is infanticide a system where exogamy and the earliest form of kinship
co-exist.” (Ibid., p. 146.) Both these facts flatly contradict his method
of explanation, and he can only meet them with new and still more complicated
hypotheses. 
Nevertheless, his theory found great applause and support in England.
McLennan was here generally regarded as the founder of the history of the
family and the leading authority on the subject. However many exceptions and
variations might be found in individual cases, his opposition of exogamous and
endogamous tribes continued to stand as the recognized foundation of the
accepted view, and to act as blinders, obstructing any free survey of the field
under investigation and so making any decisive advance impossible. Against
McLennan’s exaggerated reputation in England – and the English
fashion is copied elsewhere – it becomes a duty to set down the fact that
he has done more harm with his completely mistaken antithesis between exogamous
and endogamous “tribes” than he has done good by his research. 
Facts were now already coming to light in increasing number which did not
fit into his neat framework. McLennan knew only three forms of marriage:
polygyny, polyandry and monogamy. But once attention had been directed to the
question, more and more proofs were found that there existed among undeveloped
peoples forms of marriage in which a number of men possessed a number of women
in common, and Lubbock (The Origin of Civilization, 1870) recognized
this group marriage (“communal marriage”) as a historical fact. 
Immediately afterwards, in 1871, Morgan came forward with new and in many
ways decisive evidence. He had convinced himself that the peculiar system of
consanguinity in force among the Iroquois was common to all the aboriginal
inhabitants of the United States and therefore extended over a whole continent,
although it directly contradicted the degrees of relationship arising out of
the system of marriage as actually practiced by these peoples. He then induced
the Federal government to collect information about the systems of
consanguinity among the other peoples of the world and to send out for this
purpose tables and lists of questions prepared by himself. He discovered from
the replies: (1) that the system of consanguinity of the American Indians was
also in force among numerous peoples in Asia and, in a somewhat modified form,
in Africa and Australia; (2) that its complete explanation was to be found in a
form of group marriage which was just dying out in Hawaii and other
Australasian islands; and (3) that side by side with this form of marriage a
system of consanguinity was in force in the same islands which could only be
explained through a still more primitive, now extinct, form of group marriage.
He published the collected evidence, together with the conclusions he drew from
it, in his Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity, 1871, and thus carried the
debate on to an infinitely wider field. By starting from the systems of
consanguinity and reconstructing from them the corresponding forms of family,
he opened a new line of research and extended our range of vision into the
prehistory of man. If this method proved to be sound, McLennan’s pretty
theories would be completely demolished. 
McLennan defended his theory in a new edition of Primitive Marriage
(Studies in Ancient History, 1876). Whilst he himself constructs a
highly artificial history of the family out of pure hypotheses, he demands from
Lubbock and Morgan not merely proofs for every one of their statements, but
proofs as indisputably valid as if they were to be submitted in evidence in a
Scottish court of law. And this is the man who, from Tacitus’ report on
the close relationship between maternal uncle and sister’s son among the
Germans (Germania, Chap. 20), from Caesar’s report that the
Britons in groups of ten or twelve possessed their wives in common, from all
the other reports of classical authors on community of wives among barbarians,
calmly draws the conclusion that all these peoples lived in a state of
polyandry! One might be listening to a prosecuting counsel who can allow
himself every liberty in arguing his own case, but demands from defending
counsel the most formal, legally valid proof for his every word. 
He maintains that group marriage is pure imagination, and by so doing falls
far behind Bachofen. He declares that Morgan’s systems of consanguinity
are mere codes of conventional politeness, the proof being that the Indians
also address a stranger or a white man as brother or father. One might as well
say that the terms “father,” “mother,”
“brother,” “sister” are mere meaningless forms of
address because Catholic priests and abbesses are addressed as
“father” and “mother,” and because monks and nuns, and
even freemasons and members of English trade unions and associations at their
full sessions are addressed as “brother” and “sister.”
In a word, McLennan’s defense was miserably feeble. 
But on one point he had still not been assailed. The opposition of exogamous
and endogamous “tribes” on which his whole system rested not only
remained unshaken, but was even universally acknowledged as the keystone of the
whole history of the family. McLennan’s attempt to explain this
opposition might be inadequate and in contradiction with his own facts. But the
antithesis itself, the existence of two mutually exclusive types of
self-sufficient and independent tribes, of which the one type took their wives
from within the tribe, while the other type absolutely forbade it – that
was sacred gospel. Compare, for example, Giraud-Teulon’s Origines de
la Famille (1874) and even Lubbock’s Origin of Civilization
(fourth edition, 1882). 
Here Morgan takes the field with his main work, Ancient Society
(1877), the work that underlies the present study. What Morgan had only dimly
guessed in 1871 is now developed in full consciousness. There is no antithesis
between endogamy and exogamy; up to the present, the existence of exogamous
“tribes” has not been demonstrated anywhere. But at the time when
group marriage still prevailed – and in all probability it prevailed
everywhere at some time – the tribe was subdivided into a number of
groups related by blood on the mother’s side, gentes, within which it was
strictly forbidden to marry, so that the men of a gens, though they could take
their wives from within the tribe and generally did so, were compelled to take
them from outside their gens. Thus while each gens was strictly exogamous, the
tribe embracing all the gentes was no less endogamous. Which finally disposed
of the last remains of McLennan’s artificial constructions. 
But Morgan did not rest here. Through the gens of the American Indians, he
was enabled to make his second great advance in his field of research. In this
gens, organized according to mother-right, he discovered the primitive form out
of which had developed the later gens organized according to father-right, the
gens as we find it among the ancient civilized peoples. The Greek and Roman
gens, the old riddle of all historians, now found its explanation in the Indian
gens, and a new foundation was thus laid for the whole of primitive history.

This rediscovery of the primitive matriarchal gens as the earlier stage of
the patriarchal gens of civilized peoples has the same importance for
anthropology as Darwin’s theory of evolution has for biology and
Marx’s theory of surplus value for political economy. It enabled Morgan
to outline for the first time a history of the family in which for the present,
so far as the material now available permits, at least the classic stages of
development in their main outlines are now determined. That this opens a new
epoch in the treatment of primitive history must be clear to everyone. The
matriarchal gens has become the pivot on which the whole science turns; since
its discovery we know where to look and what to look for in our research, and
how to arrange the results. And, consequently, since Morgan’s book,
progress in this field has been made at a far more rapid speed. 
Anthropologists, even in England, now generally appreciate, or rather
appropriate, Morgan’s discoveries. But hardly one of them has the honesty
to admit that it is to Morgan that we owe this revolution in our ideas. In
England they try to kill his book by silence, and dispose of its author with
condescending praise for his earlier achievements; they niggle endlessly over
details and remain obstinately silent about his really great discoveries. The
original edition of Ancient Society is out of print; in America there
is no sale for such things; in England, it seems, the book was systematically
suppressed, and the only edition of this epochmaking work still circulating in
the book trade is – the German translation. 
Why this reserve? It is difficult not to see in it a conspiracy of silence;
for politeness’ sake, our recognized anthropologists generally pack their
writings with quotations and other tokens of camaraderie. Is it, perhaps,
because Morgan is an American, and for the English anthropologists it goes
sorely against the grain that, despite their highly creditable industry in
collecting material, they should be dependent for their general points of view
in the arrangement and grouping of this material, for their ideas in fact, on
two foreigners of genius, Bachofen and Morgan? They might put up with the
German – but the American? Every Englishman turns patriotic when he comes
up against an American, and of this I saw highly entertaining instances in the
United States. Moreover, McLennan was, so to speak, the officially appointed
founder and leader of the English school of anthropology. It was almost a
principle of anthropological etiquette to speak of his artificially constructed
historical series – child-murder, polygyny, marriage by capture,
matriarchal family – in tones only of profoundest respect. The slightest
doubt in the existence of exogamous and endogamous “tribes” of
absolute mutual exclusiveness was considered rank heresy. Morgan had committed
a kind of sacrilege in dissolving all these hallowed dogmas into thin air. Into
the bargain, he had done it in such a way that it only needed saying to carry
immediate conviction; so that the McLennanites, who had hitherto been
helplessly reeling to and fro between exogamy and endogamy, could only beat
their brows and exclaim: “How could we be such fools as not to think of
that for ourselves long ago?” 
As if these crimes had not already left the official school with the option
only of coldly ignoring him, Morgan filled the measure to overflowing by not
merely criticizing civilization, the society of commodity production, the basic
form of present-day society, in a manner reminiscent of Fourier, but also by
speaking of a future transformation of this society in words which Karl Marx
might have used. He had therefore amply merited McLennan’s indignant
reproach that “the historical method is antipathetical to Mr.
Morgan’s mind,” and its echo as late as 1884 from Mr. Professor
Giraud-Teulon of Geneva. In 1874 (Origines de la Famille) this same
gentleman was still groping helplessly in the maze of the McLennanite exogamy,
from which Morgan had to come and rescue him! 

Of the other advances which primitive anthropology owes to Morgan, I do not
need to speak here; they are sufficiently discussed in the course of this
study. The fourteen years which have elapsed since the publication of his chief
work have greatly enriched the material available for the study of the history
of primitive human societies. The anthropologists, travelers and primitive
historians by profession have now been joined by the comparative jurists, who
have contributed either new material or new points of view. As a result, some
of Morgan’s minor hypotheses have been shaken or even disproved. But not
one of the great leading ideas of his work has been ousted by this new
material. The order which he introduced into primitive history still holds in
its main lines today. It is, in fact, winning recognition to the same degree in
which Morgan’s responsibility for the great advance is carefully
concealed. [1] 
Frederick Engels 
London, June 16, 1891 



Footnotes 


[1] On the voyage back from
New York in September, 1888, I met a former member of Congress for the district
of Rochester, who had known Lewis Morgan. Unfortunately, he could not tell me
very much about him. He said that Morgan had lived in Rochester as a private
individual, occupied only with his studies. His brother was a colonel, and had
held a post in the War Department in Washington; it was through him that Morgan
had managed to interest the Government in his researches and to get several of
his works published at public expense. While he was a member of Congress, my
informant had also on more than one occasion used his influence on
Morgan’s behalf. 



Preface (1884) | Chapter One 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## Prehistoric Stages of Culture









Origins of the Family. Chapter 1




Frederick Engels

Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

I. Stages of Prehistoric Culture


MORGAN is the first man who, with expert knowledge, has attempted to
introduce a definite order into the history of primitive man; so long
as no important additional material makes changes necessary, his
classification will undoubtedly remain in force.


Of the three main epochs – savagery, barbarism, and civilization – he
is concerned, of course, only with the first two and the transition to
the third.  He divides both savagery and barbarism into lower, middle,
and upper stages according to the progress made in the production of
food; for, he says:


     Upon their skill in this direction, the whole question of human
     supremacy on the earth depended.  Mankind are the only beings who
     may be said to have gained an absolute control over the
     production of food ... It is accordingly probable that the great
     epochs of human progress have been identified, more or less
     directly, with the enlargement of the sources of subsistence.
     

     [Morgan, op. cit., p. 19. -Ed.]


The development of the family takes a parallel course, but here the
periods have not such striking marks of differentiation.




                             I. Savagery


(a.)  LOWER STAGE.  Childhood of the human race.  Man still lived in
his original habitat, in tropical or subtropical forests, and was
partially at least a tree-dweller, for otherwise his survival among
huge beasts of prey cannot be explained.  Fruit, nuts and roots served
him for food.  The development of articulate speech is the main result
of this period.  Of all the peoples known to history none was still at
this primitive level.  Though this period may have lasted thousands of
years, we have no direct evidence to prove its existence; but once the
evolution of man from the animal kingdom is admitted, such a
transitional stage must necessarily be assumed.[A]


(b.)  MIDDLE STAGE.  Begins with the utilization of fish for food
(including crabs, mussels, and other aquatic animals), and with the use
of fire.  The two are complementary, since fish becomes edible only by
the use of fire.  With this new source of nourishment, men now became
independent of climate and locality; even as savages, they could, by
following the rivers and coasts, spread over most of the earth.  Proof
of these migrations is the distribution over every continent of the
crudely worked, unsharpened flint tools of the earlier Stone Age, known
as “palaeoliths,” all or most of which date from this period.  New
environments, ceaseless exercise of his inventive faculty, and the
ability to produce fire by friction, led man to discover new kinds of
food: farinaceous roots and tubers, for instance, were baked in hot
ashes or in ground ovens.  With the invention of the first weapons,
club and spear, game could sometimes be added to the fare.  But the
tribes which figure in books as living entirely, that is, exclusively,
by hunting never existed in reality; the yield of the hunt was far too
precarious.  At this stage, owing to the continual uncertainty of food
supplies, cannibalism seems to have arisen, and was practiced from now
onwards for a long time.  The Australian aborigines and many of the
Polynesians are still in this middle stage of savagery today.[B]


(c.)  UPPER STAGE.  Begins with the invention of the bow and arrow,
whereby  game became a regular source of food, and hunting a normal
form of  work.  Bow, string, and arrow already constitute a very
complex instrument, whose invention implies long, accumulated
experience and sharpened intelligence, and therefore knowledge of many
other inventions as well.  We find, in fact, that the peoples
acquainted with the bow and arrow but not yet with pottery (from which
Morgan dates the transition to barbarism) are already making some
beginnings towards settlement in villages and have gained some control
over the production of means of subsistence; we find wooden vessels and
utensils, finger-weaving (without looms) with filaments of bark;
plaited baskets of bast or osier; sharpened (neolithic) stone tools. 
With the discovery of fire and the stone ax, dug-out canoes now become
common; beams and planks arc also sometimes used for building houses. 
We find all these advances, for instance, among the Indians of
northwest America, who are acquainted with the bow and arrow but not
with pottery.  The bow and arrow was for savagery what the iron sword
was for barbarism and fire-arms for civilization – the decisive
weapon.[C]




                             2. Barbarism


(a.)  LOWER STAGE.  Dates from the introduction of pottery.  In many
cases it has been proved, and in all it is probable, that the first
pots originated from the habit of covering baskets or wooden vessels
with clay to make them fireproof; in this way it was soon
discovered that the clay mold answered the purpose without any inner
vessel.


Thus far we have been able to follow a general line of development
applicable to all peoples at a given period without distinction of
place.  With the beginning of barbarism, however, we have reached a
stage when the difference in the natural endowments of the two
hemispheres of the earth comes into play.  The characteristic feature
of the period of barbarism is the domestication and breeding of animals
and the cultivation of plants.  Now, the Eastern Hemisphere, the
so-called Old World, possessed nearly all the animals adaptable to
domestication, and all the varieties of cultivable cereals except one;
the Western Hemisphere, America, had no mammals that could be
domesticated except the llama, which, moreover, was only found in one
part of South America, and of all the cultivable cereals only one,
though that was the best, namely, maize.  Owing to these differences in
natural conditions, the population of each hemisphere now goes on its
own way, and different landmarks divide the particular stages in each
of the two cases.


(b.)  MIDDLE STAGE.  Begins in the Eastern Hemisphere with
domestication of animals; in the Western, with the cultivation, by
means of irrigation, of plants for food, and with the use of adobe
(sun-dried) bricks and stone for building.


We will begin with the Western Hemisphere, as here this stage was never
superseded before the European conquest.


At the time when they were discovered, the Indians at the lower stage
of barbarism (comprising all the tribes living east of the Mississippi)
were already practicing some horticulture of maize, and possibly also
of gourds, melons, and other garden plants, from which they obtained a
very considerable part of their food.  They lived in wooden houses in
villages protected by palisades.  The tribes in the northwest,
particularly those in the region of the Columbia River, were still at
the upper stage of savagery and acquainted neither with pottery nor
with any form of horticulture.  The so-called Pueblo Indians of New
Mexico, however, and the Mexicans, Central Americans, and Peruvians at
the time of their conquest were at the middle stage of barbarism.  They
lived in houses like fortresses, made of adobe brick or of stone, and
cultivated maize and other plants, varying according to locality and
climate, in artificially irrigated plots of ground, which supplied
their main source of food; some animals even had also been domesticated
– the turkey and other birds by the Mexicans, the llama by the
Peruvians.  They could also work metals, but not iron; hence they were
still unable to dispense with stone weapons and tools.  The Spanish
conquest then cut short any further independent development.


In the Eastern Hemisphere the middle stage of barbarism began with the
domestication of animals providing milk and meat, but horticulture
seems to have remained unknown far into this period.[D]  It was,
apparently, the domestication and breeding of animals and the formation
of herds of considerable size that led to the differentiation of the
Aryans and Semites from the mass of barbarians.  The European and
Asiatic Aryans still have the same names for cattle, but those for
most of the cultivated plants are already different.


In suitable localities, the keeping of herds led to a pastoral life:
the Semites lived upon the grassy plains of the Euphrates and Tigris,
and the Aryans upon those of India and of the Oxus and Jaxartes, of the
Don and the Dnieper.  It must have been on the borders of such pasture
lands that animals were first domesticated.  To later generations,
consequently, the pastoral tribes appear to have come from regions
which, so far from being the cradle of mankind, were almost
uninhabitable for their savage ancestors and even for man at the lower
stages of barbarism.  But having once accustomed themselves to pastoral
life in the grassy plains of the rivers, these barbarians of the middle
period would never have dreamed of returning willingly to the native
forests of their ancestors.  Even when they were forced further to the
north and west, the Semites and Aryans could not move into the forest
regions of western Asia and of Europe until by cultivation of grain
they had made it possible to pasture and especially to winter their
herds on this less favorable land.  It is more than probable that among
these tribes the cultivation of grain originated from the need for
cattle fodder and only later became important as a human food supply.


The plentiful supply of milk and meat and especially the beneficial
effect of these foods on the growth of the children account perhaps for
the superior development of the Aryan and Semitic races.  It is a fact
 that the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico, who are reduced to an almost
entirely vegetarian diet, have a smaller brain than the Indians at the
lower stage of barbarism, who eat more meat and fish.[E]  In any case,
cannibalism now gradually dies out, surviving only as a religious act
or as a means of working magic, which is here almost the same thing.


(c.)  UPPER STAGE.  Begins with the smelting of iron ore, and passes
into civilization with the invention of alphabetic writing and its use
for literary records.  This stage (as we have seen, only the Eastern
Hemisphere passed through it independently) is richer in advances in
production than all the preceding stages together.  To it belong the
Greeks of the heroic age, the tribes of Italy shortly before the
foundation of Rome, the Germans of Tacitus and the Norsemen of the
Viking age.[F]


Above all, we now first meet the iron plowshare drawn by cattle, which
made large-scale agriculture, the cultivation of fields, possible, and
thus created a practically unrestricted food supply in comparison with
previous conditions.  This led to the clearance of forest land for
tillage and pasture, which in turn was impossible on a large scale
without the iron ax and the iron spade.  Population rapidly increased
in number, and in small areas became dense.  Prior to field
agriculture, conditions must have been very exceptional if they allowed
half a million people to be united under a central organization;
probably such a thing never occurred.

We find the upper stage of barbarism at its highest in the Homeric
poems, particularly in the Iliad.  Fully developed iron tools, the
bellows, the hand-mill, the potter’s wheel, the making of oil and wine,
metal work developing almost into a fine art, the wagon and the
war-chariot, ship-building with beams and planks, the beginnings of
architecture as art, walled cities with towers and battlements, the
Homeric epic and a complete mythology – these are the chief legacy
brought by the Greeks from barbarism into civilization.  When we
compare the descriptions which Caesar and even Tacitus give of the
Germans, who stood at the beginning of the cultural stage from which
the Homeric Greeks were just preparing to make the next advance, we
realize how rich was the development of production within the upper
stage of barbarism.


The sketch which I have given here, following Morgan, of the
development of mankind through savagery and barbarism to the beginnings
of civilization, is already rich enough in new features; what is more,
they cannot be disputed, since they are drawn directly from the process
of production.  Yet my sketch will seem flat and feeble compared with
the picture to be unrolled at the end of our travels; only then will
the transition from barbarism to civilization stand out in full light
and in all its striking contrasts.  For the time being, Morgan’s
division may be summarized thus: 


Savagery – the period in which man’s appropriation of products in their natural state predominates; the products of human art are
    chiefly instruments which assist this appropriation.  


Barbarism – the period during which man learns to breed domestic
    animals and to practice agriculture, and acquires methods of
    increasing the supply of natural products by human activity. 


Civilization – the period in which man learns a more advanced
    application of work to the products of nature, the period of
    industry proper and of art.




Preface | Chapter 2



Editorial Footnotes

The intent of these footnotes are both to help the modern reader critically assess this work in face of recent scientific evidence and to show how effective Engels' dialectical method was that many of his conclusions remain true to this day. The following chapters do not have editorial footnotes because they are not needed as much as they are in this chapter (and this editor is not as knowledgable on those other subjects!). It should be noted that Engels predominant focus on European cultures is due to his lack of data on other cultures. These notes were written by MIA volunteer Brian Baggins (July, 2000).


A
While written in the late nineteenth century, these characteristics are descriptive of the first hominin genus: australopithecus who came into existence ~4 million years ago on the continent of Africa, and became extinct ~2 million years ago. They primarily were dependent on fruits, roots, etc. but likely supplemented this as scavengers.

B
This stage is a reasonable facsimile of homo erectus. Collection of their own food was predominant, the use of fire is likely, they hunted animals to some extent, and most importantly these practices allowed for the migration of humanity: settling much of Europe, the Middle East, and Asia.

There are however two significant mistakes. Australian Aborigines and Polynesians were not in a "middle stage of savagery. This was a false characterization used by Europeans to justify the colonization of those people. Similarly, cannibalism is an accusation often made to justify exploitation, and its existence is extremely rare.  

C
This stage is descriptive of homo sapiens, i.e. modern human beings, who first emerged ~200,000 years ago, and who originated in Africa. At around the same time, homo erectus went extinct. 

D
Current estimates are that domestication of animals occurred in 11,000 BCE, while agriculture began around 9,500 BCE. 

E
The theory that brain size correlates to intelligence was discredited by the end of the 19th century. This theory was used to justify both gender and race inequities for over a century. Modern theories about intelligence relating to physical characteristics, including size, are highly nuanced.  


F
This is inaccurate. The Mesopotamian (3500-1000 B.C.E.), Egyptian (3000-500 B.C.E.), Harrapan (2500-1000 B.C.E.), & Chinese (2000 B.C.E.  1800 C.E.) civilizations long preceded the Europeans in this stage: the Greeks were the first in Europe at around 500 B.C.E. Further, societies throughout the western hemisphere (Mesoamerica) developed their own writing and metallurgy. Morgan and Engels failed to recognize that the majority of humans on earth reached this final stage before European colonization. 



Origins of the Family Index





==========

## The Family









Origins of the Family-- Chapter II



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
II. The Family

The Consanguine Family
The First Stage of the Family

The Punaluan Family

The Pairing Family

The Monogamous Family




MORGAN, who spent a great part of his
life among the Iroquois Indians – settled to this day in New York State
– and was adopted into one of their tribes (the Senecas), found in use
among them a system of consanguinity which was in contradiction to their actual
family relationships. There prevailed among them a form of monogamy easily
terminable on both sides, which Morgan calls the “pairing family.”
The issue of the married pair was therefore known and recognized by everybody:
there could be no doubt about whom to call father, mother, son, daughter,
brother, sister. But these names were actually used quite differently. The
Iroquois calls not only his own children his sons and daughters, but also the
children of his brothers; and they call him father. The children of his
sisters, however, he calls his nephews and nieces, and they call him their
uncle. The Iroquois woman, on the other hand, calls her sisters’
children, as well as her own, her sons and daughters, and they call her mother.
But her brothers’ children she calls her nephews and nieces, and she is
known as their aunt. Similarly, the children of brothers call one another
brother and sister, and so do the children of sisters. A woman's own children
and the children of her brother, on the other hand, call one another cousins.
And these are not mere empty names, but expressions of actual conceptions of
nearness and remoteness, of equality and difference in the degrees of
consanguinity: these conceptions serve as the foundation of a fully elaborated
system of consanguinity through which several hundred different relationships
of one individual can be expressed. What is more, this system is not only in
full force among all American Indians (no exception has been found up to the
present), but also retains its validity almost unchanged among the aborigines
of India, the Dravidian tribes in the Deccan and the Gaura tribes in Hindustan.
To this day the Tamils of southern India and the Iroquois Seneca Indians in New
York State still express more than two hundred degrees of consanguinity in the
same manner. And among these tribes of India, as among all the American
Indians, the actual relationships arising out of the existing form of the
family contradict the system of consanguinity. 
How is this to be explained? In view of the decisive part played by
consanguinity in the social structure of all savage and barbarian peoples, the
importance of a system so widespread cannot be dismissed with phrases. When a
system is general throughout America and also exists in Asia among peoples of a
quite different race, when numerous instances of it are found with greater or
less variation in every part of Africa and Australia, then that system has to
be historically explained, not talked out of existence, as McLennan, for
example, tried to do. The names of father, child, brother, sister are no mere
complimentary forms of address; they involve quite definite and very serious
mutual obligations which together make up an essential part of the social
constitution of the peoples in question. 
The explanation was found. In the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii) there still
existed in the first half of the nineteenth century a form of family in which
the fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, sons and daughters, uncles and
aunts, nephews and nieces were exactly what is required by the American and old
Indian system of consanguinity. But now comes a strange thing. Once again, the
system of consanguinity in force in Hawaii did not correspond to the actual
form of the Hawaiian family. For according to the Hawaiian system of
consanguinity all children of brothers and sisters are without exception
brothers and sisters of one another and are considered to be the common
children not only of their mother and her sisters or of their father and his
brothers, but of all the brothers and sisters of both their parents without
distinction. While, therefore, the American system of consanguinity presupposes
a more primitive form of the family which has disappeared in America, but still
actually exists in Hawaii, the Hawaiian system of consanguinity, on the other
hand, points to a still earlier form of the family which, though we can nowhere
prove it to be still in existence, nevertheless must have existed; for
otherwise the corresponding system of consanguinity could never have arisen.

The family [says Morgan] represents an active principle. It is
never stationary, but advances from a lower to a higher form as society
advances from a lower to a higher condition ... Systems of consanguinity, on
the contrary, are passive; recording the progress made by the family at long
intervals apart, and only changing radically when the family has radically
changed. 
[Morgan, op. cit., p. 444. – Ed.] 
“And,” adds Marx, “the same is true of the political,
juridical, religious, and philosophical systems in general.” While the
family undergoes living changes, the system of consanguinity ossifies; while
the system survives by force of custom, the family outgrows it. But just as
Cuvier could deduce from the marsupial bone of an animal skeleton found near
Paris that it belonged to a marsupial animal and that extinct marsupial animals
once lived there, so with the same certainty we can deduce from the historical
survival of a system of consanguinity that an extinct form of family once
existed which corresponded to it. 
The systems of consanguinity and the forms of the family we have just
mentioned differ from those of today in the fact that every child has more than
one father and mother. In the American system of consanguinity, to which the
Hawaiian family corresponds, brother and sister cannot be the father and mother
of the same child; but the Hawaiian system of consanguinity, on the contrary,
presupposes a family in which this was the rule. Here we find ourselves among
forms of family which directly contradict those hitherto generally assumed to
be alone valid. The traditional view recognizes only monogamy, with, in
addition, polygamy on the part of individual men, and at the very most
polyandry on the part of individual women; being the view of moralizing
philistines, it conceals the fact that in practice these barriers raised by
official society are quietly and calmly ignored. The study of primitive
history, however, reveals conditions where the men live in polygamy and their
wives in polyandry at the same time, and their common children are therefore
considered common to them all – and these conditions in their turn
undergo a long series of changes before they finally end in monogamy. The trend
of these changes is to narrow more and more the circle of people comprised
within the common bond of marriage, which was originally very wide, until at
last it includes only the single pair, the dominant form of marriage today. 

Reconstructing thus the past history of the family, Morgan, in agreement
with most of his colleagues, arrives at a primitive stage when unrestricted
sexual freedom prevailed within the tribe, every woman belonging equally to
every man and every man to every woman. Since the eighteenth century there had
been talk of such a primitive state, but only in general phrases. Bachofen
– and this is one of his great merits – was the first to take the
existence of such a state seriously and to search for its traces in historical
and religious survivals. Today we know that the traces he found do not lead
back to a social stage of promiscuous sexual intercourse, but to a much later
form – namely, group marriage. The primitive social stage of promiscuity,
if it ever existed, belongs to such a remote epoch that we can hardly expect to
prove its existence directly by discovering its social fossils among backward
savages. Bachofen's merit consists in having brought this question to the
forefront for examination. [1] 
Lately it has become fashionable to deny the existence of this initial stage
in human sexual life. Humanity must be spared this “shame.” It is
pointed out that all direct proof of such a stage is lacking, and particular
appeal is made to the evidence from the rest of the animal world; for, even
among animals, according to the numerous facts collected by Letourneau
(L'évolution du mariage et de la famille, 1888), complete promiscuity in
sexual intercourse marks a low stage of development. But the only conclusion I
can draw from all these facts, so far as man and his primitive conditions of
life are concerned, is that they prove nothing whatever. That vertebrates mate
together for a considerable period is sufficiently explained by physiological
causes – in the case of birds, for example, by the female’s need of
help during the brooding period; examples of faithful monogamy among birds
prove nothing about man, for the simple reason that men are not descended from
birds. And if strict monogamy is the height of all virtue, then the palm must
go to the tapeworm, which has a complete set of male and female sexual organs
in each of its 50-200 proglottides, or sections, and spends its whole life
copulating in all its sections with itself. Confining ourselves to mammals,
however, we find all forms of sexual life – promiscuity, indications of
group marriage, polygyny, monogamy. Polyandry alone is lacking – it took
human beings to achieve that. Even our nearest relations, the quadrumana,
exhibit every possible variation in the grouping of males and females; and if
we narrow it down still more and consider only the four anthropoid apes, all
that Letourneau has to say about them is that they are sometimes monogamous,
sometimes polygamous, while Saussure, quoted by Giraud-Teulon, maintains that
they are monogamous. The more recent assertions of the monogamous habits of the
anthropoid apes which are cited by Westermarck (The History of Human
Marriage, London 1891), are also very far from proving anything. In short,
our evidence is such that honest Letourneau admits: “Among mammals there
is no strict relation between the degree of intellectual development and the
form of sexual life.” And Espinas (Des sociétés animates, 1877),
says in so many words: 
The herd is the highest social group which we can observe
among animals. It is composed, so it appears, of families, but from the start
the family and the herd are in conflict with one another and develop in inverse
proportion. 
As the above shows, we know practically nothing definite about the family
and other social groupings of the anthropoid apes; the evidence is flatly
contradictory. Which is not to be wondered at. The evidence with regard to
savage human tribes is contradictory enough, requiring very critical
examination and sifting; and ape societies are far more difficult to observe
than human. For the present, therefore, we must reject any conclusion drawn
from such completely unreliable reports. 
The sentence quoted from Espinas, however, provides a better starting point.
Among the higher animals the herd and the family are not complementary to one
another, but antagonistic. Espinas shows very well how the jealousy of the
males during the mating season loosens the ties of every social herd or
temporarily breaks it up. 
When the family bond is close and exclusive, herds form only
in exceptional cases. When on the other hand free sexual intercourse or
polygamy prevails, the herd comes into being almost spontaneously ... Before a
herd can be formed, family ties must be loosened and the individual must have
become free again. This is the reason why organized flocks are so rarely found
among birds ... We find more or less organized societies among mammals,
however, precisely because here the individual is not merged in the family ...
In its first growth, therefore, the common feeling of the herd has no greater
enemy than the common feeling of the family. We state it without hesitation:
only by absorbing families which had undergone a radical change could a social
form higher than the family have developed; at the same time, these families
were thereby enabled later to constitute themselves afresh under infinitely
more favorable circumstances. 
[Espinas, op. cit., quoted by Giraud-Teulon, Origines du
mariage et de la famille,
1884, pp. 518-20]. 
Here we see that animal societies are, after all, of some value for drawing
conclusions about human societies; but the value is only negative. So far as
our evidence goes, the higher vertebrates know only two forms of family –
polygyny or separate couples; each form allows only one adult male, only one
husband. The jealousy of the male, which both consolidates and isolates the
family, sets the animal family in opposition to the herd. The jealousy of the
males prevents the herd, the higher social form, from coming into existence, or
weakens its cohesion, or breaks it up during the mating period; at best, it
attests its development. This alone is sufficient proof that animal families
and primitive human society are incompatible, and that when primitive men were
working their way up from the animal creation, they either had no family at all
or a form that does not occur among animals. In small numbers, an animal so
defenseless as evolving man might struggle along even in conditions of
isolation, with no higher social grouping than the single male and female pair,
such as Westermarck, following the reports of hunters, attributes to the
gorillas and the chimpanzees. For man's development beyond the level of the
animals, for the achievement of the greatest advance nature can show, something
more was needed: the power of defense lacking to the individual had to be made
good by the united strength and co-operation of the herd. To explain the
transition to humanity from conditions such as those in which the anthropoid
apes live today would be quite impossible; it looks much more as if these apes
had strayed off the line of evolution and were gradually dying out or at least
degenerating. That alone is sufficient ground for rejecting all attempts based
on parallels drawn between forms of family and those of primitive man. Mutual
toleration among the adult males, freedom from jealousy, was the first
condition for the formation of those larger, permanent groups in which alone
animals could become men. And what, in fact, do we find to be the oldest and
most primitive form of family whose historical existence we can indisputably
prove and which in one or two parts of the world we can still study today?
Group marriage, the form of family in which whole groups of men and whole
groups of women mutually possess one another, and which leaves little room for
jealousy. And at a later stage of development we find the exceptional form of
polyandry, which positively revolts every jealous instinct and is therefore
unknown among animals. But as all known forms of group marriage are accompanied
by such peculiarly complicated regulations that they necessarily point to
earlier and simpler forms of sexual relations, and therefore in the last resort
to a period of promiscuous intercourse corresponding to the transition from the
animal to the human, the references to animal marriages only bring us back to
the very point from which we were to be led away for good and all. 
What, then, does promiscuous sexual intercourse really mean? It means the
absence of prohibitions and restrictions which are or have been in force. We
have already seen the barrier of jealousy go down. If there is one thing
certain, it is that the feeling of jealousy develops relatively late. The same
is true of the conception of incest. Not only were brother and sister
originally man and wife; sexual intercourse between parents and children is
still permitted among many peoples today. Bancroft (The Native Races of the
Pacific States of North America, 1875, Vol. I), testifies to it among the
Kadiaks on the Behring Straits, the Kadiaks near Alaska, and the Tinneh in the
interior of British North America; Letourneau compiled reports of it among the
Chippewa Indians, the Cucus in Chile, the Caribs, the Karens in Burma; to say
nothing of the stories told by the old Greeks and Romans about the Parthians,
Persians, Scythians, Huns, and so on. Before incest was invented – for
incest is an invention, and a very valuable one, too – sexual intercourse
between parents and children did not arouse any more repulsion than sexual
intercourse between other persons of different generations, and that occurs
today even in the most philistine countries without exciting any great horror;
even “old maids” of over sixty, if they are rich enough, sometimes
marry young men in their thirties. But if we consider the most primitive known
forms of family apart from their conceptions of incest – conceptions
which are totally different from ours and frequently in direct contradiction to
them-then the form of sexual intercourse can only be described as promiscuous
– promiscuous in so far as the restrictions later established by custom
did not yet exist. But in everyday practice that by no means necessarily
implies general mixed mating. Temporary pairings of one man with one woman were
not in any way excluded, just as in the cases of group marriages today the
majority of relationships are of this character. And when Westermarck, the
latest writer to deny the existence of such a primitive state, applies the term
“marriage” to every relationship in which the two sexes remain
mated until the birth of the offspring, we must point out that this kind of
marriage can very well occur under the conditions of promiscuous intercourse
without contradicting the principle of promiscuity – the absence of any
restriction imposed by custom on sexual intercourse. Westermarck, however,
takes the standpoint that promiscuity “involves a suppression of
individual inclinations,” and that therefore “the most genuine form
of it is prostitution.” In my opinion, any understanding of primitive
society is impossible to people who only see it as a brothel. We will return to
this point when discussing group marriage. 
According to Morgan, from this primitive state of promiscuous intercourse
there developed, probably very early: 
 

1. The Consanguine Family, The First Stage of the Family 

Here the marriage groups are separated according to generations: all the
grandfathers and grandmothers within the limits of the family are all husbands
and wives of one another; so are also their children, the fathers and mothers;
the latter’s children will form a third circle of common husbands and
wives; and their children, the great-grandchildren of the first group, will
form a fourth. In this form of marriage, therefore, only ancestors and progeny,
and parents and children, are excluded from the rights and duties (as we should
say) of marriage with one another. Brothers and sisters, male and female
cousins of the first, second, and more remote degrees, are all brothers and
sisters of one another, and precisely for that reason they are all husbands and
wives of one another. At this stage the relationship of brother and sister also
includes as a matter of course the practice of sexual intercourse with one
another. [2] In its typical form, such a family would
consist of the descendants of a single pair, the descendants of these
descendants in each generation being again brothers and sisters, and therefore
husbands and wives, of one another. [3] 
The consanguine family is extinct. Even the most primitive peoples known to
history provide no demonstrable instance of it. But that it must have existed,
we are compelled to admit: for the Hawaiian system of consanguinity still
prevalent today throughout the whole of Polynesia expresses degrees of
consanguinity which could only arise in this form of family; and the whole
subsequent development of the family presupposes the existence of the
consanguine family as a necessary preparatory stage. 



Footnotes 


[1] Bachofen proves how
little he understood his own discovery, or rather his guess, by using the term
"hetaerism" to describe this primitive state. For the Greeks, when they
introduced the word, hetaerism meant intercourse of men, unmarried or living in
monogamy, with unmarried women, it always presupposes a definite form of
marriage outside which this intercourse takes place and includes at least the
possibility of prostitution. The word was never used in any other sense, and it
is in this sense that I use it with Morgan. Bachofen everywhere introduces into
his extremely important discoveries the most incredible mystifications through
his notion that in their historical development the relations between men and
women had their origin in men's contemporary religious conceptions, not in
their actual conditions of life. 

[2] In a letter written in
the spring of 1882, Marx expresses himself in the strongest terms about the
complete misrepresentation of primitive times in Wager's text to the
Nibelangen: “ Have such things been heard, that brother embraced
sister as a bride?” To Wagner and his “ lecherous
gods” who, quite in the modern manner, spice their love affairs with
a little incest, Marx replies: “ In primitive times the sister was
the wife, and that was moral.”  


[3] NOTE in Fourth edition:
A French friend of mine who is an admirer of Wagner is not in agreement with
this note. He observes that already in the Elder Edda, on which Wagner based
his story, in the Oegisdrekka, Loki makes the reproach to Freya: In the
sight of the gods thou didst embrace thine own brother." Marriage between
brother and sister, he argues, was therefore forbidden already at that time.
The Oegisdrekka is the expression of a time when belief in the old myths had
completely broken down; it is purely a satire on the gods, in the style of
Lucian. If Loki as Mephisto makes such a reproach to Freya, it tells rather
against Wagner. Loki also says some lines later to Niordhr: “ With
thy sister didst thou breed son.” (vidh systur thinni gaztu slikan
mög) Niordhr is not, indeed, an Asa, but a Vana, and says in the Ynglinga saga
that marriages between brothers and sisters are usual in Vanaland, which was
not the case among the Asas. This would seem to show that the Vanas were more
ancient gods the Asas. At any rate, Niordhr lives among the OEgisdrekka is
rather a proof that at the time when the Norse sagas of the gods arose,
marriages between brothers and sisters, at any rate among the gods, did not yet
excite any horror. If one wants to find excuses for Wagner, it would perhaps be
better to cite Goethe instead of the Edda, for in his ballad of the God and the
Bayadere Goethe commits a similar mistake in regard to the religious surrender
of women, which he makes far too similar to modern prostitution. 



Chapter One | Chapter Two (Part II) 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## The Iroquois Gens









Origins of the Family-- Chapter 3



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 

III.
The Iroquois Gens 




We now come to another discovery made by Morgan, which is at
least as important as the reconstruction of the family in its primitive form
from the systems of consanguinity. The proof that the kinship organizations
designated by animal names in a tribe of American Indians are essentially
identical with the genea of the Greeks and the gentes of the Romans; that the
American is the original form and the Greek and Roman forms are later and
derivative; that the whole social organization of the primitive Greeks and
Romans into gens, phratry, and tribe finds its faithful parallel in that of the
American Indians; that the gens is an institution common to all barbarians
until their entry into civilization and even afterwards (so far as our sources
go up to the present) – this proof has cleared up at one stroke the most
difficult questions in the most ancient periods of Greek and Roman history,
providing us at the same time with an unsuspected wealth of information about
the fundamental features of social constitution in primitive times –
before the introduction of the state. Simple as the matter seems once it is
understood, Morgan only made his discovery quite recently. In his previous
work, published in 1871, [1] he had
not yet penetrated this secret, at whose subsequent revelation the English
anthropologists, usually so self-confident, became for a time as quiet as mice.


The Latin word gens, which Morgan uses as a general term for such kinship
organizations, comes, like its Greek equivalent, genos, from the common Aryan
root gan (in German, where, following the law [2] Aryan g is regularly replaced by k, kan), which means
to beget. Gens, Genos, Sanscrit jánas, Gothic kuni (following the same law as
above), Old Norse and Anglo-Saxon kyn, English kin, Middle High German künne,
all signify lineage, descent. Gens in Latin and genos in Greek are, however,
used specifically to denote the form of kinship organization which prides
itself on its common descent (in this case from a common ancestral father) and
is bound together by social and religious institutions into a distinct
community, though to all our historians its origin and character have hitherto
remained obscure. 
We have already seen, in connection with the punaluan family, what is the composition of a
gens in its original form. It consists of all the persons who in punaluan
marriage, according to the conceptions necessarily prevailing under it, form
the recognized descendants of one particular ancestral mother, the founder of
the gens. In this form of family, as paternity is uncertain, only the female
line counts. Since brothers may not marry their sisters but only women of
different descent, the children begotten by them with these alien women cannot,
according to mother-right, belong to the father's gens. Therefore only the
offspring of the daughters in each generation remain within the kinship
organization; the offspring of the sons go into the gentes of their mothers.
What becomes of this consanguine group when it has constituted itself a
separate group, distinct from similar groups within the tribe? 
As the classic form of this original gens, Morgan takes the gens among the
Iroquois, and especially in the Seneca tribe. In this tribe there are eight
gentes, named after animals: (1) Wolf, (2) Bear, (3) Turtle, (4) Beaver, (5)
Deer, (6) Snipe, (7) Heron, (8) Hawk. In every gens the following customs are
observed: 
1. The gens elects its sachem
(head of the gens in peace) and its chief (leader in war). The sachem had to be
chosen from among the members of the gens, and his office was hereditary within
the gens, in the sense that it had to be filled immediately as often as a
vacancy occurred; the military leader could be chosen from outside the gens,
and for a time the office might even be vacant. A son was never chosen to
succeed his father as sachem, since mother-right prevailed among the Iroquois
and the son consequently belonged to a different gens; but the office might and
often did pass to a brother of the previous sachem or to his sister's son. All
voted in the elections, both men and women. The election, however, still
required the confirmation of the seven remaining gentes, and only then was the
new sachem ceremonially invested with his office by the common council of the
whole Iroquois confederacy. The significance of this will appear later. The
authority of the sachem within the gens was paternal, and purely moral in
character; he had no means of coercion. By virtue of his office he was also a
member of the tribal council of the Senecas and also of the federal council of
all the Iroquois. The war-chief could only give orders on military expeditions.

2. The gens deposes the sachem
and war-chief at will. This also is done by men and women jointly. After a
sachem or chief had been deposed, they became simple braves, private persons,
like the other members. The tribal council also had the power to depose
sachems, even against the will of the gens. 
3. No member is permitted to
marry within the gens. This is the fundamental law of the gens, the bond which
holds it together. It is the negative expression of the very positive blood
relationship, by virtue of which the individuals it comprises become a gens. By
his discovery of this simple fact Morgan has revealed for the first time the
nature of the gens. How little the gens was understood before is obvious from
the earlier reports about savages and barbarians, in which the various bodies
out of which the gentile organization is composed are ignorantly and
indiscriminately referred to as tribe, clan, thum, and so forth, and then
sometimes designated as bodies within which marriage is prohibited. Thus was
created the hopeless confusion which gave Mr. McLennan his chance to appear as
Napoleon, establishing order by his decree: All tribes are divided into those
within which marriage is prohibited (exogamous) and those within which it is
permitted (endogamous). Having now made the muddle complete, he could give
himself up to the profoundest inquiries as to which of his two absurd classes
was the older exogamy or endogamy. All this nonsense promptly stopped of itself
with the discovery of the gens and of its basis in consanguinity, involving the
exclusion of its members from intermarriage with one another. It goes without
saying that at the stage at which we find the Iroquois the prohibition of
marriage within the gens was stringently observed. 
4. The property of deceased
persons passed to the other members of the gens; it had to remain in the gens.
As an Iroquois had only things of little value to leave, the inheritance was
shared by his nearest gentile relations; in the case of a man, by his own
brothers and sisters and maternal uncle; in the case of a woman, by her
children and own sisters, but not by her brothers. For this reason man and wife
could not inherit from one another, nor children from their father. 
5. The members of the gens owed
each other help, protection, and especially assistance in avenging injury by
strangers. The individual looked for his security to the protection of the
gens, and could rely upon receiving it; to wrong him was to wrong his whole
gens. From the bonds of blood uniting the gens sprang the obligation of blood
revenge, which the Iroquois unconditionally recognized. If any person from
outside the gens killed a gentile member, the obligation of blood revenge
rested on the entire gens of the slain man. First, mediation was tried; the
gens of the slayer sat in council, and made proposals of settlement to the
council of the gens of the slain, usually offering expressions of regret and
presents of considerable value. If these were accepted, the matter was disposed
of. In the contrary case, the wronged gens appointed one or more avengers,
whose duty it was to pursue and kill the slayer. If this was accomplished, the
gens of the slayer had no ground of complaint; accounts were even and closed.

6. The gens has special names or
classes of names, which may not be used by any other gens in the whole tribe,
so that the name of the individual indicates the gens to which he belongs. A
gentile name confers of itself gentile rights. 
7. The gens can adopt strangers
and thereby admit them into the whole tribe. Thus among the Senecas the
prisoners of war who were not killed became through adoption into a gens
members of the tribe, receiving full gentile and tribal rights. The adoption
took place on the proposal of individual members of the gens; if a man adopted,
he accepted the stranger as brother or sister; if a woman, as son or daughter.
The adoption had to be confirmed by ceremonial acceptance into the tribe.
Frequently a gens which was exceptionally reduced in numbers was replenished by
mass adoption from another gens, with its consent. Among the Iroquois the
ceremony of adoption into the gens was performed at a public council of the
tribe, and therefore was actually a religious rite. 
8. Special religious ceremonies
can hardly be found among the Indian gentes; the religious rites of the Indians
are, however, more or less connected with the gens. At the six yearly religious
festivals of the Iroquois the sachems and war-chiefs of the different gentes
were included ex officio among the “Keepers of the Faith” and had
priestly functions. 
9. The gens has a common burial
place. Among the Iroquois of New York State, who are hedged in on all sides by
white people, this has disappeared, but it existed formerly. It exists still
among other Indians – for example, among the Tuscaroras, who are closely
related to the Iroquois; although they are Christians, each gens has a separate
row in the cemetery; the mother is therefore buried in the same row as her
children, but not the father. And among the Iroquois also the whole gens of the
deceased attends the burial, prepares the grave, the funeral addresses, etc.

10. The gens has a council: the
democratic assembly of all male and female adult gentiles, all with equal
votes. This council elected sachems, war-chiefs and also the other "Keepers of
the Faith," and deposed them; it took decisions regarding blood revenge or
payment of atonement for murdered gentiles; it adopted strangers into the gens.
In short, it was the sovereign power in the gens. Such were the rights and
privileges of a typical Indian gens. 

All the members of an Iroquois gens were personally free, and
they were bound to defend each other's freedom; they were equal in privileges
and in personal rights, the sachem and chiefs claiming no superiority; and they
were a brotherhood bound together by the ties of kin. Liberty, equality, and
fraternity, though never formulated, were cardinal principles of the gens.
These facts are material, because the gens was the unit of a social and
governmental system, the foundation upon which Indian society was organized ...
It serves to explain that sense of independence and personal dignity
universally an attribute of Indian character. [3] 
The Indians of the whole of North America at the time of its discovery were
organized in gentes under mother-right. The gentes had disappeared only in some
tribes, as among the Dakotas; in others, as among the Ojibwas and the Omahas,
they were organized according to father-right. 
Among very many Indian tribes with more than five or six gentes, we find
every three, four, or more gentes united in a special group, which Morgan,
rendering the Indian name faithfully by its Greek equivalent, calls a "phratry"
(brotherhood). Thus the Senecas have two phratries: the first comprises gentes
1 to 4, the second gentes 5 to 8. Closer investigation shows that these
phratries generally represent the original gentes into which the tribe first
split up; for since marriage was prohibited within the gens, there had to be at
least two gentes in any tribe to enable it to exist independently. 
In the measure in which the tribe increased, each gens divided again into
two or more gentes, each of which now appears as a separate gens, while the
original gens, which includes all the daughter gentes, continues as the
phratry. Among the Senecas and most other Indians, the gentes within one
phratry are brother gentes to one another, while those in the other phratry are
their cousin gentes-terms which in the American system of consanguinity have,
as we have seen, a very real and expressive meaning. Originally no Seneca was
allowed to marry within his phratry, but this restriction has long since become
obsolete and is now confined to the gens. According to Senecan tradition, the
Bear and the Deer were the two original gentes, from which the others branched
off. After this new institution had once taken firm root, it was modified as
required; if the gentes in one phratry died out, entire gentes were sometimes
transferred into it from other phratries to make the numbers even. Hence we
find gentes of the same name grouped in different phratries in different
tribes. 
Among the Iroquois, the functions of the phratry are partly social, partly
religious. 
(1) In the ball game one phratry
plays against another. Each phratry puts forward its best players, while the
other members, grouped according to phratries, look on and bet against one
another on the victory of their players. 
(2) In the tribal council the
sachems and the war-chiefs of each phratry sit together, the two groups facing
one another; each speaker addresses the representatives of each phratry as a
separate body. 
(3) If a murder had been
committed in the tribe, and the slayer and the slain belonged to different
phratries, the injured gens often appealed to its brother gentes; these held a
council of the phratry and appealed in a body to the other phratry that it also
should assemble its council to effect a settlement. Here the phratry reappears
as the original gens, and with greater prospect of success than the weaker
single gens, its offspring. 
(4) At the death of prominent
persons the opposite phratry saw to the interment and the burial ceremonies,
while the phratry of the dead person attended as mourners. If a sachem died,
the opposite phratry reported to the federal council of the Iroquois that the
office was vacant. 
(5) The council of the phratry
also played a part in the election of a sachem. That the election would be
confirmed by the brother gentes was more or less taken for granted, but the
gentes of the opposite phratry might raise an objection. In this case the
council of the opposite phratry was assembled; if it maintained the objection,
the election was void. 
(6) The Iroquois formerly had
special religious mysteries, called medicine lodges by the white men. Among the
Senecas, these mysteries were celebrated by two religious brotherhoods, into
which new members were admitted by formal initiation; there was one such
brotherhood in each of the two phratries. 
(7) If, as is almost certain, the
four lineages occupying the four quarters of Tlascala at the time of the
conquest were four phratries, we here have proof that the phratries were also
military units, like the phratries among the Greeks and similar kinship
organizations among the Germans; these four lineages went into battle as
separate groups, each with its own uniform and flag, and under its own leader.

As several gentes make up a phratry, so in the classic form
several phratries make up a tribe; in some cases, when tribes have been much
weakened, the intermediate form, the phratry, is absent. What distinguishes an
Indian tribe in America? 
1. Its own territory and name. In
addition to its actual place of settlement, every tribe further possessed
considerable territory for hunting and lashing. Beyond that lay a broad strip
of neutral land reaching to the territory of the neighboring tribe; it was
smaller between tribes related in language, larger between tribes not so
related. It is the same as the boundary forest of the Germans, the waste made
by Caesar's Suevi around their territory, the isarnholt (in Danish, jarnved,
limes Danicus) between Danes and Germans, the Sachsenwald (Saxon wood) and
branibor (Slav, "protecting wood") between Germans and Slavs, from which
Brandenburg takes its name. The territory delimited by these uncertain
boundaries was the common land of the tribe, recognized as such by neighboring
tribes and defended by the tribe itself against attacks. In most cases the
uncertainty of the boundaries only became a practical disadvantage when there
had been a great increase in population. The names of the tribes seem generally
to have arisen by chance rather than to have been deliberately chosen; in the
course of time it often happened that a tribe was called by another name among
the neighboring tribes than that which it used itself, just as the Germans were
first called Germans by the Celts. 
2. A distinct dialect peculiar to the tribe
alone. Tribe and dialect are substantially coextensive; the formation
through segmentation of new tribes and dialects was still proceeding in America
until quite recently, and most probably has not entirely stopped even today.
When two weakened tribes have merged into one, the exceptional case occurs of
two closely related dialects being spoken in the same tribe. The average
strength of American tribes is under 2,000 members; the Cherokees, however,
number about 26,000, the greatest number of Indians in the United States
speaking the same dialect. 
3. The right to install into office the
Sachems and war-chiefs elected by the Gentes and the right to depose
them, even against the will of their gens. As these sachems and
war-chiefs are members of the council of the tribe, these rights of the tribe
in regard to them explain themselves. Where a confederacy of tribes had been
formed, with all the tribes represented in a federal council, these rights were
transferred to the latter. 

4. The possession of common religious
conceptions (mythology) and ceremonies. “After the fashion of
barbarians the American Indians were a religious people.” [4] Their mythology has not yet been
studied at all critically. They already embodied their religious ideas-spirits
of every kind-in human form; but the lower stage of barbarism, which they had
reached, still knows no plastic representations, so-called idols. Their
religion is a cult of nature and of elemental forces, in process of development
to polytheism. The various tribes had their regular festivals, with definite
rites, especially dances and games. Dancing particularly was an essential part
of all religious ceremonies; each tribe held its own celebration separately.

5. A tribal council for the common affairs of
the tribe. It was composed of all the sachems and war-chiefs of the
different gentes, who were genuinely representative because they could be
deposed at any time. It held its deliberations in public, surrounded by the
other members of the tribe, who had the right to join freely in the discussion
and to make their views heard. The decision rested with the council. As a rule,
everyone was given a hearing who asked for it; the women could also have their
views expressed by a speaker of their own choice. Among the Iroquois the final
decision had to be unanimous, as was also the case in regard to many decisions
of the German mark communities. The tribal council was responsible especially
for the handling of relations with other tribes; it received and sent
embassies, declared war and made peace. If war broke out, it was generally
carried on by volunteers. In principle, every tribe was considered to be in a
state of war with every other tribe with which it had not expressly concluded a
treaty of peace. Military expeditions against such enemies were generally
organized by prominent individual warriors; they held a war-dance, and whoever
joined in the dance announced thereby his participation in the expedition. The
column was at once formed, and started off. The defense of the tribal territory
when attacked was also generally carried out by volunteers. The departure and
return of such columns were always an occasion of public festivities. The
consent of the tribal council was not required for such expeditions, and was
neither asked nor given. They find their exact counterpart in the private war
expeditions of the German retinues described by Tacitus, only with the
difference that among the Germans the retinues have already acquired a more
permanent character, forming a firm core already organized in peacetime to
which the other volunteers are attached in event of war. These war parties are
seldom large; the most important expeditions of the Indians, even to great
distances, were undertaken with insignificant forces. If several such parties
united for operations on a large scale, each was under the orders only of its
own leader. Unity in the plan of campaign was secured well or ill by a council
of these leaders. It is the same manner of warfare as we find described by
Ammianus Marcellinus among the Alemanni on the Upper Rhine in the fourth
century. 
6. Among some tribes we find a head chief,
whose powers, however, are very slight. He is one of the sachems, and in
situations demanding swift action he has to take provisional measures, until
the council can assemble and make a definite decision. His function represents
the first feeble attempt at the creation of an official with executive power,
though generally nothing more came of it; as we shall see, the executive
official developed in most cases, if not in all, out of the chief military
commander. 
The great majority of the American Indians did not advance to any higher
form of association than the tribe. Living in small tribes, separated from one
another by wide tracts between their frontiers, weakened by incessant wars,
they occupied an immense territory with few people. Here and there alliances
between related tribes came into being in the emergency of the moment and broke
up when the emergency had passed. But in certain districts tribes which were
originally related and had then been dispersed, joined together again in
permanent federations, thus taking the first step towards the formation of
nations. In the United States we find the most developed form of such a
federation among the Iroquois. Emigrating from their homes west of the
Mississippi, where they probably formed a branch of the great Dakota family,
they settled after long wanderings in what is now the State of New York. They
were divided into five tribes: Senecas, Cayugas, Onondagas, Oneidas and
Mohawks. They subsisted on fish, game, and the products of a crude
horticulture, and lived in villages, which were generally protected by a
stockade. Never more than twenty thousand strong, they had a number of gentes
common to all the five tribes, spoke closely related dialects of the same
language, and occupied a continuous stretch of territory which was divided up
among the five tribes. As they had newly conquered this territory, these tribes
were naturally accustomed to stand together against the Inhabitants they had
driven out. From this developed, at the beginning of the fifteenth century at
latest, a regular “everlasting league,” a sworn confederacy, which
in the consciousness of its new strength immediately assumed an aggressive
character, and at the height of its power, about 1675, conquered wide stretches
of the surrounding country, either expelling the inhabitants or making them pay
tribute. The Iroquois confederacy represents the most advanced social
organization achieved by any Indians still at the lower stage of barbarism
(excluding, therefore, the Mexicans, New Mexicans and Peruvians). 
The main provisions of the confederacy were as follows: 
1. Perpetual federation of the
five consanguineous tribes on the basis of complete equality and independence
in all internal matters of the tribe. This bond of kin represented the real
basis of the confederacy. Of the five tribes, three were known as father tribes
and were brother tribes to one another; the other two were known as son tribes,
and were likewise brother tribes to one another. Three gentes, the oldest,
still had their living representatives in all five tribes, and another three in
three tribes; the members of each of these gentes were all brothers of one
another throughout all the five tribes. Their common language, in which there
were only variations of dialect, was the expression and the proof of their
common descent. 
2. The organ of the confederacy
was federal council of fifty sachems, all equal in rank and authority; the
decisions of this council were final in all matters relating to the
confederacy. 
3. The fifty sachems were
distributed among the tribes and gentes at the foundation of the confederacy to
hold the new offices specially created for federal purposes. They were elected
by the respective gentes whenever a vacancy occurred and could be deposed by
the gentes at any time; but the right of investing them with their office
belonged to the federal council. 
4. These federal sachems were
also sachems in their respective tribes, and had a seat and a vote in the
tribal council. 
5. All decisions of the federal
council had to be unanimous. 
6. Voting was by tribes, so that
for a decision to be valid every tribe and all members of the council in every
tribe had to signify their agreement. 
7. Each of the five tribal
councils could convene the federal council, but it could not convene itself.

8. The meetings of the council
were held in the presence of the assembled people; every Iroquois could speak;
the council alone decided. 
9. The confederacy had no
official head or chief executive officer. 
10. On the other hand, the
council had two principal war-chiefs, with equal powers and equal authority
(the two "kings" of the Spartans, the two consuls in Rome). 


That was the whole public constitution under which the Iroquois
lived for over four hundred years and are still living today. I have described
it fully, following Morgan, because here we have the opportunity of studying
the organization of a society which still has no state. The state presupposes a
special public power separated from the body of the people, and Maurer, who
with a true instinct recognizes that the constitution of the German mark is a
purely social institution, differing essentially from the state, though later
providing a great part of its basis, consequently investigates in all his
writings the gradual growth of the public power out of, and side by side with,
the primitive constitutions of marks, villages, homesteads, and towns. Among
the North American Indians we see how an originally homogeneous tribe gradually
spreads over a huge continent; how through division tribes become nations,
entire groups of tribes; how the languages change until they not only become
unintelligible to other tribes, but also lose almost every trace of their
original identity; how at the same time within the tribes each gens splits up
into several gentes, how the old mother gentes are preserved as phratries,
while the names of these oldest gentes nevertheless remain the same in widely
distant tribes that have long been separated-the Wolf and the Bear are still
gentile names among a majority of all Indian tribes. And the constitution
described above applies in the main to them all, except that many of them never
advanced as far as the confederacy of related tribes. 
But once the gens is given as the social unit, we also see how the whole
constitution of gentes, phratries, and tribes is almost necessarily bound to
develop from this unit, because the development is natural. Gens, phratry, and
tribe are all groups of different degrees of consanguinity, each self-contained
and ordering its own affairs, but each supplementing the other. And the affairs
which fall within their sphere comprise all the public affairs of barbarians of
the lower stage. When we find a people with the gens as their social unit, we
may therefore also look for an organization of the tribe similar to that here
described; and when there are adequate sources, as in the case of the Greeks
and the Romans, we shall not only find it, but we shall also be able to
convince ourselves that where the sources fail us, comparison with the American
social constitution helps us over the most difficult doubts and riddles. 
And a wonderful constitution it is, this gentile constitution, in all its
childlike simplicity! No soldiers, no gendarmes or police, no nobles, kings,
regents, prefects, or judges, no prisons, no lawsuits – and everything takes
its orderly course. All quarrels and disputes are settled by the whole of the
community affected, by the gens or the tribe, or by the gentes among
themselves; only as an extreme and exceptional measure is blood revenge
threatened-and our capital punishment is nothing but blood revenge in a
civilized form, with all the advantages and drawbacks of civilization. Although
there were many more matters to be settled in common than today – the household
is maintained by a number of families in common, and is communistic, the land
belongs to the tribe, only the small gardens are allotted provisionally to the
households – yet there is no need for even a trace of our complicated
administrative apparatus with all its ramifications. The decisions are taken by
those concerned, and in most cases everything has been already settled by the
custom of centuries. There cannot be any poor or needy – the communal household
and the gens know their responsibilities towards the old, the sick, and those
disabled in war. All are equal and free – the women included. There is no place
yet for slaves, nor, as a rule, for the subjugation of other tribes. When,
about the year 1651, the Iroquois had conquered the Eries and the
“Neutral Nation,” they offered to accept them into the confederacy
on equal terms; it was only after the defeated tribes had refused that they
were driven from their territory. And what men and women such a society breeds
is proved by the admiration inspired in all white people who have come into
contact with unspoiled Indians, by the personal dignity, uprightness, strength
of character, and courage of these barbarians. 
We have seen examples of this courage quite recently in Africa. The Zulus a
few years ago and the Nubians a few months ago – both of them tribes in
which gentile institutions have not yet died out – did what no European
army can do. Armed only with lances and spears, without firearms, under a hail
of bullets from the breech-loaders of the English infantry – acknowledged the
best in the world at fighting in close order – they advanced right up to
the bayonets and more than once threw the lines into disorder and even broke
them, in spite of the enormous inequality of weapons and in spite of the fact
that they have no military service and know nothing of drill. Their powers of
endurance and performance are shown by the complaint of the English that a
Kaffir travels farther and faster in twenty-four hours than a horse. His
smallest muscle stands out hard and firm like whipcord, says an English
painter. 
That is what men and society were before the division into classes. And when
we compare their position with that of the overwhelming majority of civilized
men today, an enormous gulf separates the present-day proletarian and small
peasant from the free member of the old gentile society. 

That is the one side. But we must not forget that this organization was
doomed. It did not go beyond the tribe. The confederacy of tribes already marks
the beginning of its collapse, as will soon be apparent, and was already
apparent in the attempts at subjugation by the Iroquois. Outside the tribe was
outside the law. Wherever there was not an explicit treaty of peace, tribe was
at war with tribe, and wars were waged with the cruelty which distinguishes man
from other animals, and which was only mitigated later by self-interest. The
gentile constitution in its best days, as we saw it in America, presupposed an
extremely undeveloped state of production and therefore an extremely sparse
population over a wide area. Man’s attitude to nature was therefore one
of almost complete subjection to a strange incomprehensible power, as is
reflected in his childish religious conceptions. Man was bounded by his tribe,
both in relation to strangers from outside the tribe and to himself; the tribe,
the gens, and their institutions were sacred and inviolable, a higher power
established by nature, to which the individual subjected himself
unconditionally in feeling, thought, and action. However impressive the people
of this epoch appear to us, they are completely undifferentiated from one
another; as Marx says, they are still attached to the navel string of the
primitive community. [5] The power
of this primitive community had to be broken, and it was broken. But it was
broken by influences which from the very start appear as a degradation, a fall
from the simple moral greatness of the old gentile society. The lowest
interests – base greed, brutal appetites, sordid avarice, selfish robbery
of the common wealth – inaugurate the new, civilized, class society. It
is by the vilest means – theft, violence, fraud, treason – that the
old classless gentile society is undermined and overthrown. And the new society
itself, during all the two and a half thousand years of its existence, has
never been anything else but the development of the small minority at the
expense of the great exploited and oppressed majority; today it is so more than
ever before. 



Footnotes 


[1] Systems of Consanguinity
and Affinity of the Human Family, Smithsonian Publications, 1871.-Ed. 


[2] Engels refers here to
Grimm's law of the shifting of consonants in the Indo-European languages.-Ed.



[3] Morgan, Ancient
Society, pp. 85-86.-Ed. 


[4] Ibid., p. 117 -Ed. 


[5] “Those ancient
social organisms of production are, as compared with bourgeois society,
extremely simple and transparent. But they are founded either on the immature
development of man individually, who has not yet severed the umbilical cord
that unified him with his fellow men in a primitive tribal community, or upon
direct relations of domination and subjection.” – (Karl Marx, Capital Vol. I, p. 51, New York.) Ed. 



Chapter Two (IV) | Chapter Four 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## The Gens and the State in Rome









Origins of the Family - Chapter VI



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
VI. The Gens and the State in Rome



According to the legendary account of the foundation of Rome,
the first settlement was established by a number of Latin gentes [1] (one hundred, says the legend), who
were united in a tribe; these were soon joined by a Sabellian tribe, also said
to have numbered a hundred gentes, and lastly by a third tribe of mixed
elements, again said to have been composed of a hundred gentes. The whole
account reveals at the first glance that very little was still primitive here
except the gens, and that even it was in some cases only an offshoot from a
mother gens still existing in its original home. The tribes clearly bear the
mark of their artificial composition, even though they are generally composed
out of related elements and after the pattern of the old tribe, which was not
made but grew; it is, however, not an impossibility that the core of each of
the three tribes was a genuine old tribe. The intermediate group, the phratry,
consisted of ten gentes and was called a curia; there were therefore thirty
curiae. 
The Roman gens is recognized to be the same institution as the Greek gens;
and since the Greek gens is a further development of the social unit whose
original form is found among the American Indians, this, of course, holds true
of the Roman gens also. Here therefore we can be more brief. 
The Roman gens, at least in the earliest times of Rome, had the following
constitution: 
1. Mutual right of inheritance
among gentile members; the property remained within the gens. Since
father-right already prevailed in the Roman gens as in the Greek, descendants
in the female line were excluded. According to the Law of the Twelve Tables,
the oldest written Roman law known to us, the children, as natural heirs, had
the first title to the estate; in default of children, then the agnates
(descendants in the male line); in default of agnates, the gentiles. In all
cases the property remained within the gens. Here we see gentile custom
gradually being penetrated by the new legal provisions springing from increased
wealth and monogamy: the original equal right of inheritance of all members of
the gens is first restricted in practice to the agnates – probably very early, as
already mentioned – finally, to the children and their issue in the male line;
in the Twelve Tables this appears, of course, in the reverse order. 
2. Possession of a common burial
place. On their immigration to Rome from Regilli, the patrician gens of the
Claudii received a piece of land for their own use and also a common burial
place in the town. Even in the time of Augustus, the head of Varus, who had
fallen in the battle of the Teutoburg Forest, was brought to Rome and interred
in the gentilitius tumulus (mound of the gens); the gens (Quinctilia) therefore still had its own
burial mound. 
3. Common religious rites. These,
the sacra gentilitia, are well known. 
4. Obligation not to marry within
the gens. This seems never to have become written law in Rome, but the custom
persisted. Of all the countless Roman married couples whose names have been
preserved, there is not one where husband and wife have the same gentile name.
The law of inheritance also proves the observance of this rule. The woman loses
her agnatic rights on marriage and leaves her gens; neither she nor her
children can inherit from her father or his brothers, because otherwise the
inheritance would be lost to the father’s gens. There is no sense in this
rule unless a woman may not marry a member of her own gens. 
5. Common land. In primitive
times the gens had always owned common land, ever since the tribal land began
to be divided up. Among the Latin tribes, we find the land partly in the
possession of the tribe, partly of the gens, and partly of the households,
which at that time can hardly have been single families. Romulus is said to
have made the first allotments of land to individuals, about two and one-half
acres (two jugera) to a person. But later we still find land owned by the
gentes, to say nothing of the state land, round which the whole internal
history of the republic centers. 
6. Obligation of mutual
protection and help among members of the gens. Only vestiges remain in written
history; from the very start the Roman state made its superior power so
manifest that the right of protection against injury passed into its hands.
When Appius Claudius was arrested, the whole of his gens, even those who were
his personal enemies, put on mourning. At the time of the second Punic war the
gentes joined together to ransom their members who had been taken prisoner; the
senate prohibited them from doing so. 
7. Right to bear the gentile
name. Persisted till the time of the emperors; freedmen were allowed to use the
gentile name of their former master, but without gentile rights. 
8. Right to adopt strangers into
the gens. This was done through adoption into a family (as among the Indians),
which carried with it acceptance into the gens. 
9. The right to elect the chief
and to depose him is nowhere mentioned. But since in the earliest days of Rome
all offices were filled by election or nomination, from the elected king
downwards, and since the priests of the curiae were also elected by the curiae
themselves, we may assume the same procedure for the presidents (principes) of
the gentes – however firmly established the election from one and the same family
within the gens may have already become. 
Such were the rights of a Roman gens. Apart from the already completed
transition to father-right, they are the perfect counterpart of the rights and
duties in an Iroquois gens; here again “the Iroquois shows through
unmistakably” (p. 90). 
The confusion that still exists today, even among our leading historians, on
the subject of the Roman gens, may be illustrated by one example. In his paper
on Roman family names in the period of the Republic and of Augustus
(Romische Forschungen, Berlin, 1864, Vol. I, pp. 8-11) Mommsen writes:

The gentile name belongs to all the male members of the gens,
excluding, of course, the slaves, but including adopted and protected persons;
it belongs also to the women ... The tribe [as Mommsen here translates gens]
is... a communal entity, derived from common lineage (real, supposed or even
pretended) and united by communal festivities, burial rites and laws of
inheritance; to it all personally free individuals, and therefore all women
also, may and must belong. But it is difficult to determine what gentile name
was borne by married women. So long as the woman may only marry a member of her
own gens, this problem does not arise; and there is evidence that for a long
period it was more difficult for women to marry outside than inside the gens;
for instance, so late as the sixth century [B.C.] the right of gentis enuptio
(marriage outside the gens) was a personal privilege, conceded as a reward ...
But when such marriages outside the tribe took place, the wife, in earliest
times, must thereby have gone over to her husband's tribe. Nothing is more
certain than that the woman, in the old religious marriage, enters completely
into the legal and sacramental bonds of her husband's community and leaves her
own. Everyone knows that the married woman forfeits the right of inheritance
and bequest in relation to members of her own gens but shares rights of
inheritance with her husband and children and the members of their gens. And if
she is adopted by her husband and taken into his family, how can she remain
apart from his gens? 
Mommsen therefore maintains that the Roman women who belonged to a gens had
originally been permitted to marry only within the gens, that the gens had
therefore been endogamous, not exogamous. This view, which is in contradiction
to all the evidence from other peoples, rests chiefly, if not exclusively, on
one much disputed passage from Livy (Book XXXIX, Ch. 19), according to which
the senate in the year 568 after the foundation of the city, or 186 B.C.,
decreed: “Uti Feceniae Hispallae datio, deminutio, gentis enuptio, tutoris optio item esset quasi ei vir testamento dedisset; utique ei ingenuo nubere liceret, neu quid ei qui eam duxisset ob id fraudi ignominiaeve esset”
– that Fecenia Hispala shall have the right to dispose of her property,
to decrease it, to marry outside the gens, and to choose for herself a
guardian, exactly as if her (deceased) husband had conferred this right on her
by testament; that she may marry a freeman, and that the man who takes her to
wife shall not be considered to have committed a wrongful or shameful act
thereby. 
Without a doubt, Fecenia, a freedwoman, is here granted the right to marry
outside the gens. And equally without a doubt the husband possessed the right,
according to this passage, to bequeath to his wife by will the right to marry
outside the gens after his death. But outside which gens? 
If the woman had to marry within her gens, as Mommsen assumes, she remained
within this gens also after her marriage. But in the first place the endogamous
character of the gens which is here asserted is precisely what has to be
proved. And, secondly, if the wife had to marry within the gens, then, of
course, so had the man, for otherwise he could not get a wife. So we reach the
position that the man could bequeath to his wife by will a right which he
himself, and for himself, did not possess; we arrive at a legal absurdity.
Mommsen also feels this, and hence makes the assumption: “For a lawful
marriage outside the gens, it was probably necessary to have the consent, not
only of the chief, but of all members of the gens.” That is a very bold
assumption in the first place, and, secondly, it contradicts the clear wording
of the passage. The senate grants her this right in the place of her husband;
it grants her expressly neither more nor less than her husband could have
granted her, but what it grants her is an absolute right, conditional upon no
other restriction. Thus it is provided that if she makes use of this right, her
new husband also shall not suffer any disability. The senate even directs the
present and future consuls and praetors to see to it that no injurious
consequences to her follow. Mommsen’s assumption therefore seems to be
completely inadmissible. 
Or assume that the woman married a man from another gens, but herself
remained in the gens into which she had been born. Then, according to the above
passage, the man would have had the right to allow his wife to marry outside
her own gens. That is, he would have had the right to make dispositions in the
affairs of a gens to which he did not even belong. The thing is so patently
absurd that we need waste no more words on it. 
Hence there only remains the assumption that in her first marriage the woman
married a man from another gens, and thereby immediately entered the gens of
her husband, which Mommsen himself actually admits to have been the practice
when the woman married outside her gens. Then everything at once becomes clear.
Severed from her old gens by her marriage and accepted into the gentile group
of her husband, the woman occupies a peculiar position in her new gens. She is,
indeed, a member of the gens, but not related by blood. By the mere manner of
her acceptance as a gentile member, she is entirely excluded from the
prohibition against marrying within the gens, for she has just married into it;
further, she is accepted as one of the married members of the gens, and on her
husband’s death inherits from his property, the property of a gentile
member. What is more natural than that this property should remain within the
gens and that she should therefore be obliged to marry a member of her
husband’s gens and nobody else? And if an exception is to be made, who is
so competent to give her the necessary authorization as the man who has
bequeathed her this property, her first husband? At the moment when he
bequeaths to her a part of his property and at the same time allows her to
transfer it into another gens through marriage or in consequence of marriage,
this property still belongs to him and he is therefore literally disposing of
his own property. As regards the woman herself and her relation to her
husband's gens, it was he who brought her into the gens by a free act of will -
the marriage; hence it also seems natural that he should be the proper person
to authorize her to leave this gens by a second marriage. In a word, the matter
appears simple and natural as soon as we abandon the extraordinary conception
of the endogamous Roman gens and regard it, with Morgan, as originally
exogamous. 
There still remains one last assumption which has also found adherents, and
probably the most numerous. On this view, the passage only means that
“freed servants (libertae) could not without special permission e gente
enubere (marry out of the gens) or perform any of the acts, which, involving
loss of rights (capitis deminutio minima), would have resulted in the liberta
leaving the gens.” (Lange, Römische Altertumer, Berlin 1856, I,
195, where Huschke is cited in connection with our passage from Livy.) If this
supposition is correct, the passage then proves nothing at all about the
position of free Roman women, and there can be even less question of any
obligation resting on them to marry within the gens. 
The expression enuptio gentis only occurs in this one passage and
nowhere else in the whole of Latin literature; the word enubere, to marry
outside, only occurs three times, also in Livy, and then not in reference to
the gens. The fantastic notion that Roman women were only allowed to marry
within their gens owes its existence solely to this one passage. But it cannot
possibly be maintained. For either the passage refers to special restrictions
for freedwomen, in which case it proves nothing about free women (ingenuae), or
it applies also to free women; and then it proves, on the contrary, that the
woman married as a rule outside her gens, but on her marriage entered into the
gens of her husband; which contradicts Mommsen and supports Morgan. 
Almost three centuries after the foundation of Rome, the gentile groups were
still so strong that a patrician gens, that of the Fabii, was able to undertake
an independent campaign, with the permission of the senate, against the
neighboring town of Veii; three hundred and six Fabii are said to have set out
and to have been killed to a man, in an ambush; according to the story, only
one boy who had remained behind survived to propagate the gens. 
As we have said, ten gentes formed a phratry, which among the Romans was
called a curia and had more important public functions than the Greek phratry.
Every curia had its own religious rites, shrines and priests; the latter, as a
body, formed one of the Roman priestly colleges. Ten curiae formed a tribe,
which probably, like the rest of the Latin tribes, originally had an elected
president-military leader and high priest. The three tribes together formed the
Roman people, the Populus Romanus. 

Thus no one could belong to the Roman people unless he was a member of a
gens and through it of a curia and a tribe. The first constitution of the Roman
people was as follows: Public affairs were managed in the first instance by the
senate, which, as Niebuhr first rightly saw, was composed of the presidents of
the three hundred gentes; it was because they were the elders of the gens that
they were called fathers, patres, and their body, the senate (council of the
elders, from senex, old). Here again the custom of electing always from the
same family in the gens brought into being the first hereditary nobility; these
families called themselves “patricians,” and claimed for themselves
exclusive right of entry into the senate and tenure of all other offices. The
acquiescence of the people in this claim, in course of time, and its
transformation into an actual right, appear in legend as the story that Romulus
conferred the patriciate and its privileges on the first senators and their
descendants. The senate, like the Athenian boulè, made final decisions in many
matters and held preparatory discussions on those of greater importance,
particularly new laws. With regard to these, the decision rested with the
assembly of the people, called the comitia curiata (assembly of the curiae).
The people assembled together, grouped in curiae, each curia probably grouped
in gentes; each of the thirty curiae had one vote in the final decision. The
assembly of the curiae accepted or rejected all laws, elected all higher
officials, including the rex (so-called king), declared war (the senate,
however, concluded peace), and, as supreme court, decided, on the appeal of the
parties concerned, all cases involving death sentence on a Roman citizen.
Lastly, besides the senate and the assembly of the people, there was the rex,
who corresponded exactly to the Greek basileus and was not at all the almost
absolute king which Mommsen made him out to be. [2] He also was military leader,
high priest, and president of certain courts. He had no civil authority
whatever, nor any power over the life, liberty, or property of citizens, except
such as derived from his disciplinary powers as military leader or his
executive powers as president of a court. The office of rex was not hereditary;
on the contrary, he was first elected by the assembly of the curiae, probably
on the nomination of his predecessor, and then at a second meeting solemnly
installed in office. That he could also be deposed is shown by the fate of
Tarquinius Superbus. 
Like the Greeks of the heroic age, the Romans in the age of the so-called
kings lived in a military democracy founded on gentes, phratries, and tribes
and developed out of them. Even if the curiae and tribes were to a certain
extent artificial groups, they were formed after the genuine, primitive models
of the society out of which they had arisen and by which they were still
surrounded on all sides. Even if the primitive patrician nobility had already
gained ground, even if the reges were endeavoring gradually to extend their
power, it does not change the original, fundamental character of the
constitution, and that alone matters. 
Meanwhile, Rome and the Roman territory, which had been enlarged by
conquest, increased in population, partly through immigration, partly through
the addition of inhabitants of the subjugated, chiefly Latin, districts. All
these new citizens of the state (we leave aside the question of the clients)
stood outside the old gentes, curiae, and tribes, and therefore formed no part
of the populus Romanus, the real Roman people. They were personally free, could
own property in land, and had to pay taxes and do military service. But they
could not hold any office, nor take part in the assembly of the curiae, nor
share in the allotment of conquered state lands. They formed the class that was
excluded from all public rights, the plebs. Owing to their continually
increasing numbers, their military training and their possession of arms, they
became a powerful threat to the old populus, which now rigidly barred any
addition to its own ranks from outside. Further, landed property seems to have
been fairly equally divided between populus and plebs, while the commercial and
industrial wealth, though not as yet much developed, was probably for the most
part in the hands of the plebs. 
The great obscurity which envelops the completely legendary primitive
history of Rome – an obscurity considerably deepened by the rationalistically
pragmatical interpretations and accounts given of the subject by later authors
with legalistic minds – makes it impossible to say anything definite about the
time, course, or occasion of the revolution which made an end of the old
gentile constitution. All that is certain is that its cause lay in the
struggles between plebs and populus. 
The new constitution, which was attributed to the rex Servius Tullius and
followed the Greek model, particularly that of Solon, created a new assembly of
the people, in which populus and plebeians without distinction were included or
excluded according to whether they performed military service or not. The whole
male population liable to bear arms was divided on a property basis into six
classes. The lower limit in each of the five classes was: (1) 100,000 asses;
(2) 75,000 asses; (3) 50,000 asses; (4) 25,000 asses; (5) 11,000 asses;
according to Dureau de la Malle, the equivalent to about 14,000; 10,500; 7,000;
3,600; and 1,570 marks respectively. The sixth class, the proletarians,
consisted of those with less property than the lower class and those exempt
from military service and taxes. In the new popular assembly of the centuries
(comitia centuriata) the citizens appeared in military formation, arranged by
companies in their centuries of a hundred men, each century having one vote.
Now the first class put eighty centuries in the field, the second twenty-two,
the third twenty, the fourth twenty-two, the fifth thirty, and the sixth also
on century for the sake of appearances. In addition, there was the cavalry,
drawn from the wealthiest men, with eighteen centuries; total, 193;
ninety-seven votes were thus required for a clear majority. But the cavalry and
the first class alone had together ninety-eight votes, an therefore the
majority; if they were agreed, they did not ask the others; they made their
decision, and it stood. 
This new assembly of the centuries now took over all political rights of the
former assembly of the curiae, with the exception of a few nominal privileges.
The curiae and the gentes of which they were composed were thus degraded, as in
Athens, to mere private and religious associations and continued to vegetate as
such for a long period while the assembly of the curiae soon became completely
dormant. In order that the three old tribes of kinship should also be excluded
from the state, four local tribes were instituted, each of which inhabited one
quarter of the city and possessed a number of political rights. 
Thus in Rome also, even before the abolition of the so-called monarchy, the
old order of society based on personal ties of blood was destroyed and in its
place was set up a new and complete state constitution based on territorial
division and difference of wealth. Here the public power consisted of the body
of citizens liable to military service, in opposition not only to the slaves,
but also to those excluded from service in the army and from possession of
arms, the so-called proletarians. 
The banishment of the last rex, Tarquinius Superbus, who usurped real
monarchic power, and the replacement of the office of rex by two military
leaders (consuls) with equal powers (as among the Iroquois) was simply a
further development of this new constitution. Within this new constitution, the
whole history of the Roman Republic runs its course, with all the struggles
between patricians and plebeians for admission to office and share in the state
lands, and the final merging of the patrician nobility in the new class of the
great land and money owners, who, gradually swallowing up all the land of the
peasants ruined by military service, employed slave labor to cultivate the
enormous estates thus formed, depopulated Italy and so threw open the door, not
only to the emperors, but also to their successors, the German barbarians. 



Footnotes 


[1] As gentes is here the
Latin word used by the Romans, it is printed in italics to distinguish it from
the general term "gens" used throughout the book – Ed. 


[2] The Latin rex is the
same as the Celtic-Irish righ (tribal chief) and the Gothic reiks; that reiks
signified head of the gens or tribe, as did also originally the German word
Furst (meaning "first" – cf. English first and Danish forste), is shown
by the fact that already in the fourth century the Goths had a special word for
the later "king," the military leader of the whole people: thiudans. In
Ulfilas’ translation of the Bible, Artaxerxes and Herod are never called
reiks, but thiudans, and the empire of the Emperor Tiberius is not called
reiki, but thiudinassus. In the name of the Gothic thiodans or, as we
inaccurately translate, "king," Thiudareik (Theodorich, i.e. Dietrich), both
titles coalesce. 



Chapter Five | Chapter Seven 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## The Gens among the Celts and Germans









Origins of the Family-- Chapter VII



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
VII. The Gens among Celts and Germans


Space does not allow us to consider the gentile institutions
still existing in greater or lesser degree of purity among the most various
savage and barbarian peoples, nor the traces of these institutions in the
ancient history of the civilized peoples of Asia. The institutions or their
traces are found everywhere. A few examples will be enough. Before the gens had
been recognized, the man who took the greatest pains to misunderstand it,
McLennan himself, proved its existence, and in the main accurately described
it, among the Kalmucks, Circassians, Samoyeds and three Indian peoples: the
Warali, Magars and Munniporees. Recently it has been discovered and described
by M. Kovalevsky among the Pshavs, Shevsurs, Svanets and other Caucasian
tribes. Here we will only give some short notes on the occurrence of the gens
among Celts and Germans. 
The oldest Celtic laws which have been preserved show the gens still fully
alive: in Ireland, after being forcibly broken up by the English, it still
lives today in the consciousness of the people, as an instinct at any rate; in
Scotland it was still in full strength in the middle of the eighteenth century,
and here again it succumbed only to the weapons, laws, and courts of the
English. 
The old Welsh laws, which were recorded in writing several centuries before
the English conquest, at the latest in the eleventh century, still show common
tillage of the soil by whole villages, even if only as an exceptional relic of
a once general custom; each family had five acres for its own cultivation; a
piece of land was cultivated collectively as well and the yield shared. In view
of the analogy of Ireland and Scotland, it cannot be doubted that these village
communities represent gentes or subdivisions of gentes, even though further
examination of the Welsh laws, which I cannot undertake for lack of time (my
notes date from 1869), should not provide direct proof. But what is directly
proved by the Welsh sources and by the Irish is that among the Celts in the
eleventh century pairing marriage had not by any means been displaced by
monogamy. 
In Wales a marriage only became indissoluble, or rather it only ceased to be
terminable by notification, after seven years had elapsed. If the time was
short of seven years by only three nights, husband and wife could separate.
They then shared out their property between them; the woman divided and the man
chose. The furniture was divided according to fixed and very humorous rules. If
it was the man who dissolved the marriage, he had to give the woman back her
dowry and some other things; if it was the woman, she received less. Of the
children the man took two and the woman one, the middle child. If after the
separation the woman took another husband and the first husband came to fetch
her back again, she had to follow him even if she had already one foot in her
new marriage bed. If, on the other hand, the man and woman had been together
for seven years, they were husband and wife, even without any previous formal
marriage. Chastity of girls before marriage was not at all strictly observed,
nor was it demanded; the provisions in this respect are of an extremely
frivolous character and not at all in keeping with bourgeois morality. If a
woman committed adultery, the husband had the right to beat her (this was one
of the three occasions when he was allowed to do so; otherwise he was
punished), but not then to demand any other satisfaction, since “for the
one offense there shall be either atonement or vengeance, but not both.”
The grounds on which the wife could demand divorce without losing any of her
claims in the subsequent settlement were very comprehensive; if the husband had
bad breath, it was enough. The money which had to be paid to the chief of the
tribe or king to buy off his right of the first night (gobr merch, whence the
medieval name, marcheta; French marquette), plays a large part in the code of
laws. The women had the right to vote in the assemblies of the people. When we
add that the evidence shows similar conditions in Ireland; that there, also,
temporary marriages were quite usual and that at the separation very favorable
and exactly defined conditions were assured to the woman, including even
compensation for her domestic services; that in Ireland there was a
“first wife” as well as other wives, and that in the division of an
inheritance no distinction was made between children born in wedlock or outside
it – we then have a picture of pairing marriage in comparison with which the
form of marriage observed in North America appears strict. This is not
surprising in the eleventh century among a people who even so late as
Caesar’s time were still living in group marriage. 

The existence of the Irish gens (sept; the tribe was called clainne, clan) is
confirmed and described not only by the old legal codes, but also by the
English jurists of the seventeenth century who were sent over to transform the
clan lands into domains of the English crown. Until then, the land had been the
common property of the clan or gens, in so far as the chieftains had not
already converted it into their private domains. When a member of the gens died
and a household consequently came to an end, the gentile chief (the English
jurists called him caput cognationis) made a new division of the whole
territory among the remaining households. This must have been done, broadly
speaking, according to the rules in force in Germany. Forty or fifty years ago
village fields were very numerous, and even today a few of these rundales, as
they are called, may still be found. The peasants of a rundale, now individual
tenants on the soil that had been the common property of the gens till it was
seized by the English conquerors, pay rent for their respective piece of land,
but put all their shares in arable and meadowland together, which they then
divide according to position and quality into Gewanne, as they are called on
the Moselle, each receiving a share in each Gewann; moorland and pasture-land
are used in common. Only fifty years ago new divisions were still made from
time to time, sometimes annually. The field-map of such a village looks exactly
like that of a German Gehöferschaft [peasant community] on the Moselle or in
the Mittelwald. The gens also lives on in the “factions.” The Irish
peasants often divide themselves into parties based apparently on perfectly
absurd or meaningless distinctions; to the English they are quite
incomprehensible and seem to have no other purpose than the favorite ceremony
of two factions hammering one another. They are artificial revivals, modern
substitutes for the dispersed gentes, manifesting in their own peculiar manner
the persistence of the inherited gentile instinct. In some districts the
members of the gens still live pretty much together on the old territory; in
the ’thirties the great majority of the inhabitants of County Monaghan
still had only four family names, that is, they were descended from four gentes
or clans. [1] 
In Scotland the decay of the gentile organization dates from the suppression
of the rising of 1745. The precise function of the Scottish clan in this
organization still awaits investigation; but that the clan is a gentile body is
beyond doubt. In Walter Scott's novels the Highland clan lives before our eyes.
It is, says Morgan: 
... an excellent type of the gens in organization and in
spirit, and an extraordinary illustration of the power of the gentile life over
its members ... We find in their feuds and blood revenge, in their localization
by gentes, in their use of lands in common, in the fidelity of the clansman to
his chief and of the members of the clan to each other, the usual and
persistent features of gentile society ... Descent was in the male line, the
children of the males remaining members of the clan, while the children of its
female members belonged to the clans of their respective fathers." 
[Morgan, op. cit., pp. 368-369. – Ed.] 
But that formerly mother-right prevailed in Scotland is proved by the fact
that, according to Bede, in the royal family of the Picts succession was in the
female line. Among the Scots, as among the Welsh, a relic even of the punaluan
family persisted into the Middle Ages in the form of the right of the first
night, which the head of the clan or the king, as last representative of the
former community of husbands, had the right to exercise with every bride,
unless it was compounded for money. 

That the Germans were organized in gentes until the time of the migrations
is beyond all doubt. They can have occupied the territory between the Danube,
Rhine, Vistula, and the northern seas only a few centuries before our era; the
Cimbri and Teutons were then still in full migration, and the Suevi did not
find any permanent habitation until Caesar's time. Caesar expressly states of
them that they had settled in gentes and kindreds (gentibus cognationtbusque),
and in the mouth of a Roman of the Julian gens the word gentibus has a
definite meaning which cannot be argued away. The same was true of all the
Germans; they seem still to have settled by gentes even in the provinces they
conquered from the Romans. The code of laws of the Alemanni confirms that the
people settled by kindreds (genealogiae) in the conquered territory
south of the Danube; genealogia is used in exactly the same sense as
Markgenossenschaft or Dorfgenossenschaft [Mark or village
community – Ed.] later. Kovalevsky has recently put forward the
view that these genealogia are the large household communities among which the
land was divided, and from which the village community only developed later.
This would then probably also apply to the fara, with which expression the
Burgundians and the Lombards – that is, a Gothic and a Herminonian or
High German tribe – designated nearly, if not exactly, the same thing as
the genealogiae in the Alemannian code of laws. Whether it is really a gens or
a household community must be settled by further research. 
The records of language leave us in doubt whether all the Germans had a
common expression for gens, and what that expression was. Etymologically, the
Gothic kuni, Middle High German kunne, corresponds to the Greek genos and the
Latin gens, and is used in the same sense. The fact that the term for woman
comes from the same root – Greek gyne, Slav zena, Gothic qvino, Old Norse
kona, kuna – points back to the time of mother-right. Among the Lombards
and Burgundians we find, as already mentioned, the term fara, which Grimm
derives from an imaginary root fisan, to beget. I should prefer to go back to
the more obvious derivation from faran (fahren), to travel or wander; fara
would then denote a section of the migrating people which remained permanently
together and almost as a matter of course would be composed of relatives. In
the several centuries of migration, first to the east and then to the west, the
expression came to be transferred to the kinship group itself. There are,
further, the Gothic sibia, Anglo-Saxon sib, Old High German sippia, sima,
kindred. Old Norse only has the plural sifiar, relatives; the singular only
occurs as the name of a goddess, Sif. Lastly, still another expression occurs
in the Hildebrandslied, where Hildebrand asks Hadubrand: “Who is thy
father among the men of the people ... or of what kin art thou?“ (eddo huêlîhes cnuosles du sîs). In as far as there was a common German name for the
gens, it was probably the Gothic kuni that was used; this is rendered probable,
not only by its identity with the corresponding expression in the related
languages, but also by the fact that from it is derived the word kuning, König
(king), which originally denotes the head of a gens or of a tribe. Sibia,
kindred, does not seem to call for consideration; at any rate, sifiar in Old
Norse denotes not only blood relations, but also relations by marriage; thus it
includes the members of at least two gentes, and hence sif itself cannot have
been the term for the gens. 
As among the Mexicans and Greeks, so also among the Germans, the order of
battle, both the cavalry squadrons and the wedge formations of the infantry,
was drawn up by gentes. Tacitus’ use of the vague expression “by
families and kindreds” is to be explained through the fact that in his
time the gens in Rome had long ceased to be a living body. 

A further passage in Tacitus is decisive. It states that the maternal uncle
looks upon his nephew as his own son, and that some even regard the bond of
blood between the maternal uncle and the nephew as more sacred and close than
that between father and son, so that when hostages are demanded the sister's
son is considered a better security than the natural son of the man whom it is
desired to bind. Here we have living evidence, described as particularly
characteristic of the Germans, of the matriarchal, and therefore primitive,
gens. [2]
If a member of such a gens gave his own son as a pledge of his oath and the son
then paid the penalty of death for his father's breach of faith, the father had
to answer for that to himself. But if it was a sister's son who was sacrificed,
then the most sacred law of the gens was violated. The member of the gens who
was nearest of kin to the boy or youth, and more than all others was bound to
protect him, was guilty of his death; either he should not have pledged him or
he should have kept the agreement. Even if we had no other trace of gentile
organization among the Germans, this one passage would suffice. 
Still more decisive, because it comes about eight hundred years later, is a
passage from the Old Norse poem of the twilight of the gods and the end of the
world, the Völuspà. In this "vision of the seeress," into which Christian
elements are also interwoven, as Bang and Bugge have now proved, the
description of the period of universal degeneration and corruption leading up
to the great catastrophe contains the following passage: 
Broedhr munu berjask ok at bonum verdask,
munu systrungar sifjum spilla. 
“Brothers will make war upon one another and become one
another’s murderers, the children of sisters will break kinship.”
Systrungar means the son of the mother’s sister, and that these
sisters’ sons should betray the blood-bond between them is regarded by
the poet as an even greater crime than that of fratricide. The force of the
climax is in the word systrungar, which emphasizes the kinship on the
mother“s side; if the word had been syskina-börn, brothers' or sisters'
children, or syskinasynir, brothers' or sisters' sons, the second line would
not have been a climax to the first, but would merely have weakened the effect.
Hence even in the time of the Vikings, when the Völuspà was composed, the
memory of mother-right had not yet been obliterated in Scandinavia. 
In the time of Tacitus, however, mother-right had already given way to
father-right, at least among the Germans with whose customs he was more
familiar. The children inherited from the father; if there were no children,
the brothers, and the uncles on the father's and the mother's side. The fact
that the mother’s brother was allowed to inherit is connected with the
survivals of mother-right already mentioned, and again proves how new
father-right still was among the Germans at that time. Traces of mother-right
are also found until late in the Middle Ages. Apparently even at that time
people still did not have any great trust in fatherhood, especially in the case
of serfs. When, therefore, a feudal lord demanded from a town the return of a
fugitive serf, it was required – for example, in Augsburg, Basle and
Kaiserslautern – that the accused person's status as serf should be sworn
to by six of his nearest blood relations, and that they should all be relations
on the mother’s side. (Maurer, Städteverfassung, I, p. 381.) 
Another relic of mother-right, which was still only in process of dying out,
was the respect of the Germans for the female sex, which to the Romans was
almost incomprehensible. Young girls of noble family were considered the most
binding hostages in treaties with the Germans. The thought that their wives and
daughters might be taken captive and carried into slavery was terrible to them
and more than anything else fired their courage in battle; they saw in a woman
something holy and prophetic, and listened to her advice even in the most
important matters. Veleda, the priestess of the Bructerians on the River Lippe,
was the very soul of the whole Batavian rising in which Civilis, at the head of
the Germans and Belgae, shook the foundations of Roman rule in Gaul. In the
home, the woman seems to have held undisputed sway, though, together with the
old people and the children, she also had to do all the work, while the man
hunted, drank, or idled about. That, at least, is what Tacitus says; but as he
does not say who tilled the fields, and definitely declares that the serfs only
paid tribute, but did not have to render labor dues, the bulk of the adult men
must have had to do what little work the cultivation of the land required. The
form of marriage, as already said, was a pairing marriage which was gradually
approaching monogamy. It was not yet strict monogamy, as polygamy was permitted
for the leading members of the tribe. In general, strict chastity was required
of the girls (in contrast to the Celts), and Tacitus also speaks with special
warmth of the sacredness of the marriage tie among the Germans. Adultery by the
woman is the only ground for divorce mentioned by him. But there are many gaps
here in his report, and it is also only too apparent that he is holding up a
mirror of virtue before the dissipated Romans. One thing is certain: if the
Germans were such paragons of virtue in their forests, it only required slight
contact with the outside world to bring them down to the level of the average
man in the rest of Europe. Amidst the Roman world, the last trace of moral
austerity disappeared far more rapidly even than the German language. For
proof, it is enough to read Gregory of Tours. That in the German primeval
forests there could be no such voluptuous abandonment to all the refinements of
sensuality as in Rome is obvious; the superiority of the Germans to the Roman
world in this respect also is sufficiently great, and there is no need to endow
them with an ideal continence in things of the flesh, such as has never yet
been practiced by an entire nation. 
Also derived from the gentile organization is the obligation to inherit the
enmities as well as the friendships of the father or the relatives; likewise
the Wergeld, the fine for idling or injuring, in place of blood
revenge. The Wergeld, which only a generation ago was regarded as a
specifically German institution, has now been shown to be general among
hundreds of peoples as a milder form of the blood revenge originating out of
the gentile organization. We find it, for example, among the American Indians,
who also regard hospitality as an obligation. Tacitus’ description of
hospitality as practiced among the Germans (Germania, Ch. XXI) is identical
almost to the details with that given by Morgan of his Indians. 
The endless, burning controversy as to whether the Germans of Tacitus’
time had already definitely divided the land or not, and how the relevant
passages are to be interpreted, now belongs to the past. No more words need be
wasted in this dispute, since it has been established that among almost all
peoples the cultivated land was tilled collectively by the gens, and later by
communistic household communities such as were still found by Caesar among the
Suevi, and that after this stage the land was allotted to individual families
with periodical repartitions, which are shown to have survived as a local
custom in Germany down to our day. If in the one hundred and fifty years
between Caesar and Tacitus the Germans had changed from the collective
cultivation of the land expressly attributed by Caesar to the Suevi (they had
no divided or private fields whatever, he says) to individual cultivation with
annual repartition of the land, that is surely progress enough. The transition
from that stage to complete private property in land during such a short period
and without any outside interference is a sheer impossibility. What I read in
Tacitus is simply what he says in his own dry words: they change (or divide
afresh) the cultivated land every year, and there is enough common land left
over. It is the stage of agriculture and property relations in regard to the
land which exactly corresponds to the gentile constitution of the Germans at
that time. 
I leave the preceding paragraph unchanged as it stood in the former
editions. Meanwhile the question has taken another turn. Since Kovalevsky has
shown (cf. pages 51-52) that the patriarchal household community was a very
common, if not universal, intermediate form between the matriarchal communistic
family and the modern isolated family, it is no longer a question of whether
property in land is communal or private, which was the point at issue between
Maurer and Waitz, but a question of the form of the communal property. There is
no doubt at all that the Suevi in Caesar's time not only owned the land in
common, but also cultivated it in common for the common benefit. Whether the
economic unit was the gens or the household community or a communistic kinship
group intermediate between the two; or whether all three groups occurred
according to the conditions of the soil – these questions will be in
dispute for a long time to come. Kovalevsky maintains, however, that the
conditions described by Tacitus presuppose the existence, not of the mark or
village community, but of the household community and that the village
community only develops out of the latter much later, as a result of the
increase in population. 
According to this view, the settlements of the Germans in the territory of
which they were already in possession at the time of the Romans, and also in
the territory which they later took from the Romans, were not composed of
villages but of large household communities, which included several
generations, cultivated an amount of land proportionate to the number of their
members, and had common use with their neighbors of the surrounding waste. The
passage in Tacitus about changing the cultivated land would then have to be
taken in an agronomic sense: the community cultivated a different piece of land
every year, and allowed the land cultivated the previous year to lie fallow or
run completely to waste; the population being scanty, there was always enough
waste left over to make any disputes about land unnecessary. Only in the course
of centuries, when the number of members in the household communities had
increased so much that a common economy was no longer possible under the
existing conditions of production did the communities dissolve. The arable and
meadow lands which had hitherto been common were divided in the manner familiar
to us, first temporarily and then permanently, among the single households
which were now coming into being, while forest, pasture land, and water
remained common. 
In the case of Russia this development seems to be a proved historical fact.
With regard to Germany, and, secondarily, the other Germanic countries, it
cannot be denied that in many ways this view provides a better explanation of
the sources and an easier solution to difficulties than that held hitherto,
which takes the village community back to the time of Tacitus. On the whole,
the oldest documents, such as the Codex Laureshamensis, can be explained much
better in terms of the household community than of the village community. On
the other hand, this view raises new difficulties and new questions, which have
still to be solved. They can only be settled by new investigations; but I
cannot deny that in the case also of Germany, Scandinavia and England there is
very great probability in favor of the intermediate form of the household
community. 
While in Caesar’s time the Germans had only just taken up or were
still looking for settled abodes, in Tacitus’ time they already had a
full century of settled life behind them; correspondingly, the progress in the
production of the necessities of life is unmistakable. They live in log-houses;
their clothing is still very much that of primitive people of the forests:
coarse woolen mantles, skins; for women and notable people underclothing of
linen. Their food is milk, meat, wild fruits, and, as Pliny adds, oatmeal
porridge (still the Celtic national food in Ireland and Scotland). Their wealth
consists in cattle and horses, but of inferior breed; the cows are small, poor
in build and without horns; the horses are ponies, with very little speed.
Money was used rarely and in small amounts; it was exclusively Roman. They did
not work gold or silver, nor did they value it. Iron was rare, and, at least,
among the tribes on the Rhine and the Danube, seems to have been almost
entirely imported, not mined. Runic writing (imitated from the Greek or Latin
letters) was a purely secret form of writing, used only for religious magic.
Human sacrifices were still offered. In short, we here see a people which had
just raised itself from the middle to the upper stage of barbarism. But whereas
the tribes living immediately on the Roman frontiers were hindered in the
development of an independent metal and textile industry by the facility with
which Roman products could be imported, such industry undoubtedly did develop
in the northeast, on the Baltic. The fragments of weapons found in the
Schleswig marshes – long iron sword, coat of mail, silver helmet, and so
forth, together with Roman coins of the end of the second century – and
the German metal objects distributed by the migrations, show quite a pronounced
character of their own, even when they derive from an originally Roman model.
Emigration into the civilized Roman world put an end to this native industry
everywhere except in England. With what uniformity this industry arose and
developed, can be seen, for example, in the bronze brooches; those found in
Burgundy, Rumania and on the Sea of Azov might have come out of the same
workshop as those found in England and Sweden, and are just as certainly of
Germanic origin. 
The constitution also corresponds to the upper stage of barbarism. According
to Tacitus, there was generally a council of chiefs (principes), which
decided minor matters, but prepared more important questions for decision by
the assembly of the people; at the lower stage of barbarism, so far as we have
knowledge of it, as among the Americans, this assembly of the people still
comprises only the members of the gens, not yet of the tribe or of the
confederacy of tribes. The chiefs (principes) are still sharply
distinguished from the military leaders (duces) just as they are among
the Iroquois; they already subsist partially on gifts of cattle, corn, etc.,
from the members of the tribe; as in America, they are generally elected from
the same family. The transition to father-right favored, as in Greece and Rome,
the gradual transformation of election into hereditary succession, and hence
the rise of a noble family in each gens. This old so-called tribal nobility
disappeared for the most part during the migrations or soon afterwards. The
military leaders were chosen without regard to their descent, solely according
to their ability. They had little power and had to rely on the force of
example. Tacitus expressly states that the actual disciplinary authority in the
army lay with the priests. The real power was in the hands of the assembly of
the people. The king or the chief of the tribe presides; the people decide:
“No” by murmurs; “Yes” by acclamation and clash of
weapons. The assembly of the people is at the same time an assembly of justice;
here complaints are brought forward and decided and sentences of death passed,
the only capital crimes being cowardice, treason against the people, and
unnatural lust. Also in the gentes and other subdivisions of the tribe all the
members sit in judgment under the presidency of the chief, who, as in all the
early German courts, can only have guided the proceedings and put questions;
the actual verdict was always given among Germans everywhere by the whole
community. 
Confederacies of tribes had grown up since the time of Caesar; some of them
already had kings; the supreme military commander was already aiming at the
position of tyrant, as among the Greeks and Romans, and sometimes secured it.
But these fortunate usurpers were not by any means absolute rulers; they were,
however, already beginning to break the fetters of the gentile constitution.
Whereas freed slaves usually occupied a subordinate position, since they could
not belong to any gens, as favorites of the new kings they often won rank,
riches and honors. The same thing happened after the conquest of the Roman
Empire by these military leaders, who now became kings of great countries.
Among the Franks, slaves and freedmen of the king played a leading part first
at the court and then in the state; the new nobility was to a great extent
descended from them. 
One institution particularly favored the rise of kingship: the retinues. We
have already seen among the American Indians how, side by side with the gentile
constitution, private associations were formed to carry on wars independently.
Among the Germans, these private associations had already become permanent. A
military leader who had made himself a name gathered around him a band of young
men eager for booty, whom he pledged to personal loyalty, giving the same
pledge to them. The leader provided their keep, gave them gifts, and organized
them on a hierarchic basis; a bodyguard and a standing troop for smaller
expeditions and a regular corps of officers for operations on a larger scale.
Weak as these retinues must have been, and as we in fact find them to be later
– for example, under Odoacer in Italy – they were nevertheless the
beginnings of the decay of the old freedom of the people and showed themselves
to be such during and after the migrations. For in the first place they favored
the rise of monarchic power. In the second place, as Tacitus already notes,
they could only be kept together by continual wars and plundering expeditions.
Plunder became an end in itself. If the leader of the retinue found nothing to
do in the neighborhood, he set out with his men to other peoples where there
was war and the prospect of booty. The German mercenaries who fought in great
numbers under the Roman standard even against Germans were partly mobilized
through these retinues. They already represent the first form of the system of
Landsknechte, the shame and curse of the Germans. When the Roman Empire had
been conquered, these retinues of the kings formed the second main stock, after
the unfree and the Roman courtiers, from which the later nobility was drawn.

In general, then, the constitution of those German tribes which had combined
into peoples was the same as had developed among the Greeks of the Heroic Age
and the Romans of the so-called time of the kings: assembly of the people,
council of the chiefs of the gentes, military leader, who is already striving
for real monarchic power. It was the highest form of constitution which the
gentile order could achieve; it was the model constitution of the upper stage
of barbarism. If society passed beyond the limits within which this
constitution was adequate, that meant the end of the gentile order; it was
broken up and the state took its place. 

Footnotes


[1] During a few days spent
in Ireland, I realized afresh to what an extent the country people still live
in the conceptions of the gentile period. The landed proprietor, whose tenant
the farmer is, is still regarded by the latter as a kind of chief of the clan,
whose duty it is to manage the land in the interests of all, while the farmer
pays tribute in the form of rent, but has a claim upon him for assistance in
times of necessity. Similarly, everyone who is well off is considered under an
obligation to assist his poorer neighbors when they fall on hard times. Such
help is not charity; it is what the poorer member of the clan is entitled to
receive from the wealthier member or the chief. One can understand the
complaints of the political economists and jurists about the impossibility of
making the Irish peasant grasp the idea of modern bourgeois property; the
Irishman simply cannot get it into his head that there can be property with
rights but no duties. But one can also understand that when Irishmen with these
naive gentile conceptions suddenly find themselves in one of the big English or
American towns among a population with completely different ideas of morality
and justice, they easily become completely confused about both morality and
justice and lose all their bearings, with the result that masses of them become
demoralized. (Note to the Fourth Edition.) 


[2] The peculiar closeness
of the bond between maternal uncle and nephew, which derives from the time of
mother-right and is found among many peoples, is only recognized by the Greeks
in their mythology of the heroic age. According to Diodorus, IV, 34, Meleager
slays the sons of Thestius, the brothers of his mother Althma. She regards this
deed as such an inexpiable crime that she curses the murderer, her own son, and
prays for his death. “The gods heard her wishes,” the story says, “and put an
end to Meleager’s life.” Also according to Diodorus (IV, 44), the Argonauts
land in Thrace under Heracles and there find that Phincus, at the instigation
of his new wife, is shamefully ill-treating the two sons born to him by his
former wife, the Boread Cleopatra, whom he has put away. But among the
Argonauts there are also Boreads, brothers of Cleopatra, therefore maternal
uncles of the maltreated boys. They at once take up their nephews’ cause, free
them, and kill their guards. 



Chapter Six | Chapter
Eight 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## The Formation of the State among the Germans









Origins of the Family-- Chapter VIII



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
VIII. The Formation of the State among Germans



According to Tacitus, the Germans were a very numerous people.
Caesar gives us an approximate idea of the strength of the separate German
peoples; he places the number of the Usipetans and the Tencterans who appeared
on the left bank of the Rhine at 180,000, women and children included. That is
about 100,000 to one people, [1] already considerably more than, for
instance, the total number of the Iroquois in their prime, when, no more than
20,000 strong, they were the terror of the whole country from the Great Lakes
to the Ohio and the Potomac. On the map, if we try to group the better known
peoples settled near the Rhine according to the evidence of the reports, a
single people occupies the space of a Prussian government district that is,
about 10,000 square kilometers or 182 geographical square miles. [About 4,000 square miles – Ed.] Now, the Germania
Magna of the Romans, which reached as far as the Vistula, had an area of
500,000 square kilometers in round figures. Reckoning the average number of
each people at 100,000, the total population of Germania Magna would work out
at 5,000,000 – a considerable figure for a barbarian group of peoples, but,
compared with our conditions ten persons to the square kilometer, or about 550
to the geographical square mile – extremely low. But that by no means exhausts
the number of the Germans then living. We know that all along the Carpathians
and down to the south of the Danube there were German peoples descended from
Gothic tribes, such as the Bastarnians, Peucinians and others, who were so
numerous that Pliny classes them together as the fifth main tribe of the
Germans. As early as 180 B.C. they make their appearance as mercenaries in the
service of the Macedonian King Perseus, and in the first years of Augustus,
still advancing, they almost reached Adrianople. If we estimate these at only
1,000,000, the probable total number of the Germans at the beginning of our era
must have been at least 6,000,000. 
After permanent settlements had been founded in Germany, the population must
have grown with increasing rapidity; the advances in industry we mentioned are
in themselves proof of this. The objects found in the Schleswig marshes date
from the third century, according to the Roman coins discovered with them. At
this time, therefore, there was already a developed metal and textile industry
on the Baltic, brisk traffic with the Roman Empire and a certain degree of
luxury among the more wealthy – all signs of denser population. But also
at this time begins the general attack by the Germans along the whole line of
the Rhine, the Roman wall and the Danube, from the North Sea to the Black Sea
– direct proof of the continual growth and outward thrust of the
population. For three centuries the fight went on, during which the whole main
body of the Gothic peoples (with the exception of the Scandinavian Goths and
the Burgundians) thrust south-east, forming the left wing on the long front of
attack, while in the center the High Germans (Hermionians) pushed forward down
the upper Danube, and on the right wing the Ischovonians, now called Franks,
advanced along the Rhine; the Ingoevonians carried out the conquest of Britain.
By the end of the fifth century an exhausted and bleeding Roman Empire lay
helpless before the invading Germans. 
In earlier chapters we were standing at the cradle of ancient Greek and
Roman civilization. Now we stand at its grave. Rome had driven the leveling
plane of its world rule over all the countries of the Mediterranean basin, and
that for centuries. Except when Greek offered resistance, all natural languages
had been forced to yield to a debased Latin; there were no more national
differences, no more Gauls, Iberians, Ligurians, Noricans; all had become
Romans. Roman administration and Roman law had everywhere broken up the old
kinship groups, and with them the last vestige of local and national
independence. The half-baked culture of Rome provided no substitute; it
expressed no nationality, only the lack of nationality. The elements of new
nations were present everywhere; the Latin dialects of the various provinces
were becoming increasingly differentiated; the natural boundaries which once
had made Italy, Gaul, Spain, Africa independent territories, were still there
and still made themselves felt. But the strength was not there to fuse these
elements into new nations; there was no longer a sign anywhere of capacity for
development, or power of resistance, to say nothing of creative energy. The
enormous mass of humanity in the whole enormous territory was held together by
one bond only: the Roman state; and the Roman state had become in the course of
time their worst enemy and oppressor. The provinces had annihilated Rome; Rome
itself had become a provincial town like the rest – privileged, but no
longer the ruler, no longer the hub of the world empire, not even the seat of
the emperors or sub-emperors, who now lived in Constantinople, Treves, Milan.
The Roman state had become a huge, complicated machine, exclusively for
bleeding its subjects, Taxes, state imposts and tributes of every kind pressed
the mass of the people always deeper into poverty; the pressure was intensified
until the exactions of governors, tax-collectors, and armies made it
unbearable. That was what the Roman state had achieved with its world rule. It
gave as the justification of its existence that it maintained order within the
empire and protected it against the barbarians without. But its order was worse
than the worst disorder, and the citizens whom it claimed to protect against
the barbarians longed for the barbarians to deliver them. 
Social conditions were no less desperate. Already in the last years of the
republic the policy of Roman rule had been ruthlessly to exploit the provinces;
the empire, far from abolishing this exploitation, had organized it. The more
the empire declined, the higher rose the taxes and levies, the more shamelessly
the officials robbed and extorted. The Romans had always been too occupied in
ruling other nations to become proficient in trade and industry; it was only as
usurers that they beat all who came before or after. What commerce had already
existed and still survived was now ruined by official extortion; it struggled
on only in the eastern, Greek part of the empire, which lies outside the
present study. General impoverishment; decline of commerce, handicrafts and
art; fall in the population; decay of the towns; relapse of agriculture to a
lower level-such was the final result of Roman world rule. 
Agriculture, always the decisive branch of production throughout the ancient
world, was now more so than ever. In Italy, the enormous estates (latifundia)
which, since the end of the republic, occupied almost the whole country, had
been exploited in two different ways. They had been used either as pastures,
the population being displaced by sheep and cattle, which could be tended by a
few slaves, or as country estates (villae), where large-scale horticulture was
carried on with masses of slaves, partly as a luxury for the owner, partly for
sale in the town markets. The great grazing farms had kept going and had
probably even extended; the country estates and their gardens had been ruined
through the impoverishment of their owners and the decay of the towns. The
system of latifundia run by slave labor no longer paid; but at that time no
other form of large-scale agriculture was possible. Small production had again
become the only profitable form. One country estate after another was cut up
into small lots, which were handed over either to tenants, who paid a fixed sum
and had hereditary rights, or to partiarii, stewards rather than tenants, who
received a sixth or even only a ninth of the year's product in return for their
labor. For the most part, however, these small lots of land were given out to
coloni, who paid for them a definite yearly amount, were tied to the soil and
could be sold together with their lot. True, they were not slaves, but neither
were they free; they could not marry free persons, and their marriages with one
another were not regarded as full marriages, but, like those of slaves, as mere
concubinage (contubernium). They were the forerunners of the medieval serfs.


The slavery of classical times had outlived itself. Whether employed on the
land in large-scale agriculture or in manufacture in the towns, it no longer
yielded any satisfactory return – the market for its products was no
longer there. But the small-scale agriculture and the small handicraft
production to which the enormous production of the empire in its prosperous
days was now shrunk had no room for numbers of slaves. Only for the domestic
and luxury slaves of the wealthy was there still a place in society. But though
it was dying out, slavery was still common enough to make all productive labor
appear to be work for slaves, unworthy of free Romans – and everybody was
a free Roman now. Hence, on the one side, increasing manumissions of the
superfluous slaves who were now a burden; on the other hand, a growth in some
parts in the numbers of the coloni, and in other parts of the declassed freemen
(like the “poor whites” in the ex-slave states of America).
Christianity is completely innocent of the gradual dying out of ancient
slavery; it was itself actively involved in the system for centuries under the
Roman Empire, and never interfered later with slave-trading by Christians: not
with the Germans in the north, or with the Venetians in the Mediterranean, or
with the later trade in Negroes. [2] Slavery no longer paid; it was for that
reason it died out. But in dying it left behind its poisoned sting – the
stigma attaching to the productive labor of freemen. This was the blind alley
from which the Roman world had no way out: slavery was economically impossible,
the labor of freemen was morally ostracized. The one could be the basic form of
social production no longer; the other, not yet. Nothing could help here except
a complete revolution. 
Things were no better in the provinces. We have most material about Gaul.
Here there was still a free small peasantry in addition to coloni. In order to
be secured against oppression by officials, judges, and usurers, these peasants
often placed themselves under the protection, the patronage, of a powerful
person; and it was not only individuals who did so, but whole communities, so
that in the fourth century the emperors frequently prohibited the practice. But
what help was this protection to those who sought it? Their patron made it a
condition that they should transfer to him the rights of ownership in their
pieces of land, in return for which he guaranteed them the use of the land for
their lifetime – a trick which the Holy Church took note of and in the
ninth and tenth centuries lustily imitated, to the increase of God’s
glory and its own lands. At this time, it is true, about the year 475, Bishop
Salvianus of Marseilles still inveighs indignantly against such theft. He
relates that oppression by Roman officials and great landlords had become so
heavy that many “Romans” fled into districts already occupied by
the barbarians, and that the Roman citizens settled there feared nothing so
much as a return to Roman rule. That parents owing to their poverty often sold
their children into slavery at this time is proved by a decree prohibiting the
practice. 
In return for liberating the Romans from their own state, the German
barbarians took from them two-thirds of all the land and divided it among
themselves. The division was made according to the gentile constitution. The
conquerors being relatively few in number, large tracts of land were left
undivided, as the property partly of the whole people, partly of the individual
tribes and gentes. Within each gens the arable and meadow land was distributed
by lot in equal portions among the individual households. We do not know
whether reallotments of the land were repeatedly carried out at this time, but
in any event they were soon discontinued in the Roman provinces and the
individual lots became alienable private property, allodium. Woods and
pastures remained undivided for common use; the provisions regulating their
common use, and the manner in which the divided land was to be cultivated, were
settled in accordance with ancient custom and by the decision of the whole
community. The longer the gens remained settled in its village and the more the
Germans and the Romans gradually merged, the more the bond of union lost its
character of kinship and became territorial. The gens was lost in the mark
community, in which, however, traces of its origin in the kinship of its
members are often enough still visible. Thus, at least in those countries where
the mark community maintained itself – northern France, England, Germany and
Scandinavia – the gentile constitution changed imperceptibly into a local
constitution and thus became capable of incorporation into the state. But it
nevertheless retained that primitive democratic character which distinguishes
the whole gentile constitution, and thus even in its later enforced
degeneration and up to the most recent times it kept something of the gentile
constitution alive, to be a weapon in the hands of the oppressed. 
This weakening of the bond of blood in the gens followed from the
degeneration of the organs of kinship also in the tribe and in the entire
people as a result of their conquests. As we know, rule over subjugated peoples
is incompatible with the gentile constitution. Here we can see this on a large
scale. The German peoples, now masters of the Roman provinces, had to organize
what they had conquered. But they could neither absorb the mass of Romans into
the gentile bodies nor govern them through these bodies. At the head of the
Roman local governing bodies, many of which continued for the time being to
function, had to be placed a substitute for the Roman state, and this
substitute could only be another state. The organs of the gentile constitution
had to be transformed into state organs, and that very rapidly, for the situation
was urgent. But the immediate representative of the conquering people was their
military leader. To secure the conquered territory against attack from within
and without, it was necessary to strengthen his power. The moment had come to
transform the military leadership into kingship: the transformation was made.

Let us take the country of the Franks. Here the victorious Salian people had
come into complete possession, not only of the extensive Roman state domains,
but also of the very large tracts of land which had not been distributed among
the larger and smaller district and mark communities, in particular all the
larger forest areas. On his transformation from a plain military chief into the
real sovereign of a country, the first thing which the king of the Franks did
was to transform this property of the people into crown lands, to steal it from
the people and to give it, outright or in fief, to his retainers. This retinue,
which originally consisted of his personal following of warriors and of the
other lesser military leaders, was presently increased not only by Romans
– Romanized Gauls, whose education, knowledge of writing, familiarity
with the spoken Romance language of the country and the written Latin language,
as well as with the country's laws, soon made them indispensable to him, but
also by slaves, serfs and freedmen, who composed his court and from whom he
chose his favorites. All these received their portions of the people's land, at
first generally in the form of gifts, later of benefices, usually conferred, to
begin with, for the king's lifetime. Thus, at the expense of the people the
foundation of a new nobility was laid. 
And that was not all. The wide extent of the kingdom could not be governed
with the means provided by the old gentile constitution; the council of chiefs,
even if it had not long since become obsolete, would have been unable to meet,
and it was soon displaced by the permanent retinue of the king; the old
assembly of the people continued to exist in name, but it also increasingly
became a mere assembly of military leaders subordinate to the king, and of the
new rising nobility. By the incessant civil wars and wars of conquest (the
latter were particularly frequent under Charlemagne), the free land-owning
peasants, the mass of the Frankish people, were reduced to the same state of
exhaustion and penury as the Roman peasants in the last years of the Republic.
Though they had originally constituted the whole army and still remained its
backbone after the conquest of France, by the beginning of the ninth century
they were so impoverished that hardly one man in five could go to the wars. The
army of free peasants raised directly by the king was replaced by an army
composed of the serving-men of the new nobles, including bondsmen, descendants
of men who in earlier times had known no master save the king and still earlier
no master at all, not even a king. The internal wars under Charlemagne's
successors, the weakness of the authority of the crown, and the corresponding
excesses of the nobles (including the counts instituted by Charlemagne, who
were now striving to make their office hereditary), had already brought ruin on
the Frankish peasantry, and the ruin was finally completed by the invasions of
the Norsemen. Fifty years after the death of Charlemagne, the Empire of the
Franks lay as defenseless at the feet of the Norsemen as the Roman Empire, four
hundred years earlier, had lain at the feet of the Franks. 
Not only was there the same impotence against enemies from without, but
there was almost the same social order or rather disorder within. The free
Frankish peasants were in a plight similar to their predecessors, the Roman
coloni. Plundered, and ruined by wars, they had been forced to put themselves
under the protection of the new nobles or of the Church, the crown being too
weak to protect them. But they had to pay dearly for it. Like the Gallic
peasants earlier, they had to transfer their rights of property in land to
their protecting lord and received the land back from him in tenancies of
various and changing forms, but always only in return for services and dues.
Once in this position of dependence, they gradually lost their personal freedom
also; after a few generations most of them were already serfs. How rapid was
the disappearance of the free peasantry is shown by Irminon’s records of
the monastic possessions of the Abbey of Saint Germain des Prés, at that time
near, now in, Paris. On the huge holdings of this Abbey, which were scattered
in the surrounding country, there lived in Charlemagne’s time 2,788
households, whose members were almost without exception Franks with German
names. They included 2,080 coloni, 35 lites [semi-free
peasants – Ed.], 220 slaves, and only eight freehold tenants! The
godless practice, as Salvianus had called it, by which the protecting lord had
the peasant’s land transferred to himself as his own property, and only
gave it back to the peasant for use during life, was now commonly employed by
the Church against the peasants. The forced services now imposed with
increasing frequency had had their prototype as much in the Roman angariae,
compulsory labor for the state, as in the services provided by members of the
German marks for bridge and road-making and other common purposes. To all
appearances, therefore, after four hundred years, the mass of the people were
back again where they had started. 
But that only proved two things: first, that the social stratification and
the distribution of property in the declining Roman Empire completely
correspond to the level of agricultural and industrial production at that time,
and had therefore been inevitable; secondly, that this level of production had
neither risen nor fallen significantly during the following four centuries and
had therefore with equal necessity again produced the same distribution of
property and the same classes in the population. In the last centuries of the
Roman Empire the town had lost its former supremacy over the country, and in
the first centuries of German rule it had not regained it. This implies a low
level of development both in agriculture and industry. This general situation
necessarily produces big ruling landowners and a dependent small peasantry. How
impossible it was to graft onto such a society either the Roman system of
latifundia worked by slave-labor or the newer large-scale agriculture worked by
forced services is proved by Charlemagne's experiments with the famous imperial
country estates (villae). These experiments were gigantic in scope, but they
left scarcely a trace. They were continued only by the monasteries, and only
for them were they fruitful. But the monasteries were abnormal social bodies,
founded on celibacy; they could produce exceptional results, but for that very
reason necessarily continued to be exceptional themselves. 
And yet progress was made during these four hundred years. Though at the end
we find almost the same main classes as at the beginning, the human beings who
formed these classes were different. Ancient slavery had gone, and so had the
pauper freemen who despised work as only fit for slaves. Between the Roman
colonus and the new bondsman had stood the free Frankish peasant. The “useless
memories and aimless strife” of decadent Roman culture were dead and buried.
The social classes of the ninth century had been formed, not in the rottenness
of a decaying civilization, but in the birth-pangs of a new civilization.
Compared with their Roman predecessors, the new breed, whether masters or
servants, was a breed of men. The relation of powerful landowners and subject
peasants which had meant for the ancient world the final ruin, from which there
was no escape, was for them the starting-point of a new development. And,
further, however unproductive these four centuries appear, one great product
they did leave: the modern nationalities, the new forms and structures through
which west European humanity was to make coming history. The Germans had, in
fact, given Europe new life, and therefore the break-up of the states in the
Germanic period ended, not in subjugation by the Norsemen and Saracens, but in
the further development of the system of benefices and protection into
feudalism, and in such an enormous increase of the population that scarcely two
centuries later the severe blood-letting of the Crusades was borne without
injury. 
But what was the mysterious magic by which the Germans breathed new life
into a dying Europe? Was it some miraculous power innate in the Germanic race,
such as our chauvinist historians romance about? Not a bit of it. The Germans,
especially at that time, were a highly gifted Aryan tribe, and in the full
vigor of development. It was not, however, their specific national qualities
which rejuvenated Europe, but simply – their barbarism, their gentile
constitution. 
Their individual ability and courage, their sense of freedom, their
democratic instinct which in everything of public concern felt itself
concerned; in a word, all the qualities which had been lost to the Romans and
were alone capable of forming new states and making new nationalities grow out
of the slime of the Roman world-what else were they than the characteristics of
the barbarian of the upper stage, fruits of his gentile constitution? 
If they recast the ancient form of monogamy, moderated the supremacy of the
man in the family, and gave the woman a higher position than the classical
world had ever known, what made them capable of doing so if not their
barbarism, their gentile customs, their living heritage from the time of
mother-right? 
If in at least three of the most important countries, Germany, northern
France and England, they carried over into the feudal state a genuine piece of
gentile constitution, in the form of mark communities, thus giving the
oppressed class, the peasants, even under the harshest medieval serfdom, a
local center of solidarity and a means of resistance such as neither the slaves
of classical times nor the modern proletariat found ready to their hand – to
what was this due, if not to their barbarism, their purely barbarian method of
settlement in kinship groups? 
Lastly: they were able to develop and make universal the milder form of
servitude they had practiced in their own country, which even in the Roman
Empire increasingly displaced slavery; a form of servitude which, as Fourier
first stressed, gives to the bondsmen the means of their gradual liberation as
a class (“fournit aux cultivateurs des moyens d'affranchissement collectif et
progressif”); a form of servitude which thus stands high above slavery, where
the only possibility is the immediate release, without any transitional stage,
of individual slaves (abolition of slavery by successful rebellion is unknown
to antiquity), whereas the medieval serfs gradually won their liberation as a
class. And to what do we owe this if not to their barbarism, thanks to which
they had not yet reached the stage of fully developed slavery, neither the
labor slavery of the classical world nor the domestic slavery of the Orient?

All the vigorous and creative life which the Germans infused into the Roman
world was barbarism. Only barbarians are able to rejuvenate a world in the
throes of collapsing civilization. And precisely the highest stage of
barbarism, to which and in which the Germans worked their way upwards before
the migrations, was the most favorable for this process. That explains
everything. 



Footnotes 


[1] The number assumed here
is confirmed by a statement of Diodorus about the Celts of Gaul: “In Gaul dwell
many peoples of varying strength. Among those that are greatest the number is
about 200,000, among the smallest, 50,000” (Diodorus Siculus, V, 75). On an
average, therefore, 125,000; it can undoubtedly be assumed that, owing to their
higher stage of development, the single peoples among the Gauls were rather
larger than among the Germans. 


[2] According to Bishop
Liutprand of Cremona, in the tenth century the chief industry of Verdun –
in the Holy German Empire, observe – was the manufacture of eunuchs, who
were exported at great profit to Spain for the Moorish harems. 



Chapter Seven | Chapter Nine 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## Barbarism and Civilisation









Origins of the Family - Chapter IX



Frederick Engels 
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State 
IX. Barbarism and Civilization


We have now traced the dissolution of the gentile constitution
in the three great instances of the Greeks, the Romans, and the Germans. In
conclusion, let us examine the general economic conditions which already
undermined the gentile organization of society at the upper stage of barbarism
and with the coming of civilization overthrew it completely. Here we shall need
Marx's Capital as much as Morgan’s book. 
Arising in the middle stage of savagery, further developed during its upper
stage, the gens reaches its most flourishing period, so far as our sources
enable us to judge, during the lower stage of barbarism. We begin therefore
with this stage. 
Here – the American Indians must serve as our example – we find
the gentile constitution fully formed. The tribe is now grouped in several
gentes, generally two. With the increase in population, each of these original
gentes splits up into several daughter gentes, their mother gens now appearing
as the phratry. The tribe itself breaks up into several tribes, in each of
which we find again, for the most part, the old gentes. The related tribes, at
least in some cases, are united in a confederacy. This simple organization
suffices completely for the social conditions out of which it sprang. It is
nothing more than the grouping natural to those conditions, and it is capable
of settling all conflicts that can arise within a society so organized. War
settles external conflicts; it may end with the annihilation of the tribe, but
never with its subjugation. It is the greatness, but also the limitation, of
the gentile constitution that it has no place for ruler and ruled. Within the
tribe there is as yet no difference between rights and duties; the question
whether participation in public affairs, in blood revenge or atonement, is a
right or a duty, does not exist for the Indian; it would seem to him just as
absurd as the question whether it was a right or a duty to sleep, eat, or hunt.
A division of the tribe or of the gens into different classes was equally
impossible. And that brings us to the examination of the economic basis of
these conditions. 

The population is extremely sparse; it is dense only at the tribe’s
place of settlement, around which lie in a wide circle first the hunting
grounds and then the protective belt of neutral forest, which separates the
tribe from others. The division of labor is purely primitive, between the sexes
only. The man fights in the wars, goes hunting and fishing, procures the raw
materials of food and the tools necessary for doing so. The woman looks after
the house and the preparation of food and clothing, cooks, weaves, sews. They
are each master in their own sphere: the man in the forest, the woman in the
house. Each is owner of the instruments which he or she makes and uses: the man
of the weapons, the hunting and fishing implements, the woman of the household
gear. The housekeeping is communal among several and often many families. [1] What is made
and used in common is common property – the house, the garden, the long-boat.
Here therefore, and here alone, there still exists in actual fact that
“property created by the owner’s labor” which in civilized
society is an ideal fiction of the jurists and economists, the last lying legal
pretense by which modern capitalist property still bolsters itself up. 
But humanity did not everywhere remain at this stage. In Asia they found
animals which could be tamed and, when once tamed, bred. The wild buffalo-cow
had to be hunted; the tame buffalo-cow gave a calf yearly and milk as well. A
number of the most advanced tribes – the Aryans, Semites, perhaps already
also the Turanians – now made their chief work first the taming of
cattle, later their breeding and tending only. Pastoral tribes separated
themselves from the mass of the rest of the barbarians: the first great social
division of labor. The pastoral tribes produced not only more necessities of
life than the other barbarians, but different ones. They possessed the
advantage over them of having not only milk, milk products and greater supplies
of meat, but also skins, wool, goat-hair, and spun and woven fabrics, which
became more common as the amount of raw material increased. Thus for the first
time regular exchange became possible. At the earlier stages only occasional
exchanges can take place; particular skill in the making of weapons and tools
may lead to a temporary division of labor. Thus in many places undoubted
remains of workshops for the making of stone tools have been found, dating from
the later Stone Age. The artists who here perfected their skill probably worked
for the whole community, as each special handicraftsman still does in the
gentile communities in India. In no case could exchange arise at this stage
except within the tribe itself, and then only as an exceptional event. But now,
with the differentiation of pastoral tribes, we find all the conditions ripe
for exchange between branches of different tribes and its development into a
regular established institution. Originally tribes exchanged with tribe through
the respective chiefs of the gentes; but as the herds began to pass into
private ownership, exchange between individuals became more common, and,
finally, the only form. Now the chief article which the pastoral tribes
exchanged with their neighbors was cattle; cattle became the commodity by which
all other commodities were valued and which was everywhere willingly taken in
exchange for them – in short, cattle acquired a money function and
already at this stage did the work of money. With such necessity and speed,
even at the very beginning of commodity exchange, did the need for a money
commodity develop. 
Horticulture, probably unknown to Asiatic barbarians of the lower stage, was
being practiced by them in the middle stage at the latest, as the forerunner of
agriculture. In the climate of the Turanian plateau, pastoral life is
impossible without supplies of fodder for the long and severe winter. Here,
therefore, it was essential that land should be put under grass and corn
cultivated. The same is true of the steppes north of the Black Sea. But when
once corn had been grown for the cattle, it also soon became food for men. The
cultivated land still remained tribal property; at first it was allotted to the
gens, later by the gens to the household communities and finally to individuals
for use. The users may have had certain rights of possession, but nothing more.

Of the industrial achievements of this stage, two are particularly
important. The first is the loom, the second the smelting of metal ores and the
working of metals. Copper and tin and their alloy, bronze, were by far the most
important. Bronze provided serviceable tools and weapons, though it could not
displace stone tools; only iron could do that, and the method of obtaining iron
was not yet understood. Gold and silver were beginning to be used for ornament
and decoration, and must already have acquired a high value as compared with
copper and bronze. 
The increase of production in all branches – cattle-raising,
agriculture, domestic handicrafts – gave human labor-power the capacity
to produce a larger product than was necessary for its maintenance. At the same
time it increased the daily amount of work to be done by each member of the
gens, household community or single family. It was now desirable to bring in
new labor forces. War provided them; prisoners of war were turned into slaves.
With its increase of the productivity of labor, and therefore of wealth, and
its extension of the field of production, the first great social division of
labor was bound, in the general historical conditions prevailing, to bring
slavery in its train. From the first great social division of labor arose the
first great cleavage of society into two classes: masters and slaves,
exploiters and exploited. 
As to how and when the herds passed out of the common possession of the
tribe or the gens into the ownership of individual heads of families, we know
nothing at present. But in the main it must have occurred during this stage.
With the herds and the other new riches, a revolution came over the family. To
procure the necessities of life had always been the business of the man; he
produced and owned the means of doing so. The herds were the new means of
producing these necessities; the taming of the animals in the first instance
and their later tending were the man’s work. To him, therefore, belonged
the cattle, and to him the commodities and the slaves received in exchange for
cattle. All the surplus which the acquisition of the necessities of life now
yielded fell to the man; the woman shared in its enjoyment, but had no part in
its ownership. The “savage” warrior and hunter had been content to
take second place in the house, after the woman; the “gentler”
shepherd, in the arrogance of his wealth, pushed himself forward into the first
place and the woman down into the second. And she could not complain. The
division of labor within the family had regulated the division of property
between the man and the woman. That division of labor had remained the same;
and yet it now turned the previous domestic relation upside down, simply
because the division of labor outside the family had changed. The same cause
which had ensured to the woman her previous supremacy in the house – that
her activity was confined to domestic labor – this same cause now ensured
the man's supremacy in the house: the domestic labor of the woman no longer
counted beside the acquisition of the necessities of life by the man; the
latter was everything, the former an unimportant extra. We can already see from
this that to emancipate woman and make her the equal of the man is and remains
an impossibility so long as the woman is shut out from social productive labor
and restricted to private domestic labor. The emancipation of woman will only
be possible when woman can take part in production on a large, social scale,
and domestic work no longer claims anything but an insignificant amount of her
time. And only now has that become possible through modern large-scale
industry, which does not merely permit of the employment of female labor over a
wide range, but positively demands it, while it also tends towards ending
private domestic labor by changing it more and more into a public industry. 
The man now being actually supreme in the house, the last barrier to his
absolute supremacy had fallen. This autocracy was confirmed and perpetuated by
the overthrow of mother-right, the introduction of father-right, and the
gradual transition of the pairing marriage into monogamy. But this tore a
breach in the old gentile order; the single family became a power, and its rise
was a menace to the gens. 
The next step leads us to the upper stage of barbarism, the period when all
civilized peoples have their Heroic Age: the age of the iron sword, but also of
the iron plowshare and ax. Iron was now at the service of man, the last and
most important of all the raw materials which played a historically
revolutionary role – until the potato. Iron brought the tillage of large
areas, the clearing of wide tracts of virgin forest; iron gave to the
handicraftsman tools so hard and sharp that no stone, no other known metal
could resist them. All this came gradually; the first iron was often even
softer than bronze. Hence stone weapons only disappeared slowly; not merely in
the Hildebrandslied, but even as late as Hastings in 1066, 
stone axes were still used for fighting. But progress could not now be stopped;
it went forward with fewer checks and greater speed. The town, with its houses
of stone or brick, encircled by stone walls, towers and ramparts, became the
central seat of the tribe or the confederacy of tribes – an enormous
architectural advance, but also a sign of growing danger and need for
protection. Wealth increased rapidly, but as the wealth of individuals. The
products of weaving, metal-work and the other handicrafts, which were becoming
more and more differentiated, displayed growing variety and skill. In addition
to corn, leguminous plants and fruit, agriculture now provided wine and oil,
the preparation of which had been learned. Such manifold activities were no
longer within the scope of one and the same individual; the second great
division of labor took place: handicraft separated from agriculture. The
continuous increase of production and simultaneously of the productivity of
labor heightened the value of human labor-power. Slavery, which during the
preceding period was still in its beginnings and sporadic, now becomes an
essential constituent part of the social system; slaves no longer merely help
with production – they are driven by dozens to work in the fields and the
workshops. With the splitting up of production into the two great main
branches, agriculture and handicrafts, arises production directly for exchange,
commodity production; with it came commerce, not only in the interior and on
the tribal boundaries, but also already overseas. All this, however, was still
very undeveloped; the precious metals were beginning to be the predominant and
general money commodity, but still uncoined, exchanging simply by their naked
weight. 
The distinction of rich and poor appears beside that of freemen and slaves –
with the new division of labor, a new cleavage of society into classes. The
inequalities of property among the individual heads of families break up the
old communal household communities wherever they had still managed to survive,
and with them the common cultivation of the soil by and for these communities.
The cultivated land is allotted for use to single families, at first
temporarily, later permanently. The transition to full private property is
gradually accomplished, parallel with the transition of the pairing marriage
into monogamy. The single family is becoming the economic unit of society. 
The denser population necessitates closer consolidation both for internal
and external action. The confederacy of related tribes becomes everywhere a
necessity, and soon also their fusion, involving the fusion of the separate
tribal territories into one territory of the nation. The military leader of the
people – rex, basileus, thiudans – becomes an indispensable, permanent
official. The assembly of the people takes form, wherever it did not already
exist. Military leader, council, assembly of the people are the organs of
gentile society developed into military democracy – military, since war
and organization for war have now become regular functions of national life.
Their neighbors' wealth excites the greed of peoples who already see in the
acquisition of wealth one of the main aims of life. They are barbarians: they
think it more easy and in fact more honorable to get riches by pillage than by
work. War, formerly waged only in revenge for injuries or to extend territory
that had grown too small, is now waged simply for plunder and becomes a regular
industry. Not without reason the bristling battlements stand menacingly about
the new fortified towns; in the moat at their foot yawns the grave of the
gentile constitution, and already they rear their towers into civilization.
Similarly in the interior. The wars of plunder increase the power of the
supreme military leader and the subordinate commanders; the customary election
of their successors from the same families is gradually transformed, especially
after the introduction of father-right, into a right of hereditary succession,
first tolerated, then claimed, finally usurped; the foundation of the
hereditary monarchy and the hereditary nobility is laid. Thus the organs of the
gentile constitution gradually tear themselves loose from their roots in the
people, in gens, phratry, tribe, and the whole gentile constitution changes
into its opposite: from an organization of tribes for the free ordering of
their own affairs it becomes an organization for the plundering and oppression
of their neighbors; and correspondingly its organs change from instruments of
the will of the people into independent organs for the domination and
oppression of the people. That, however, would never have been possible if the
greed for riches had not split the members of the gens into rich and poor, if
“the property differences within one and the same gens had not
transformed its unity of interest into antagonism between its members”
(Marx), if the extension of slavery had not already begun to make working for a
living seem fit only for slaves and more dishonorable than pillage. 

We have now reached the threshold of civilization. Civilization opens with a
new advance in the division of labor. At the lowest stage of barbarism men
produced only directly for their own needs; any acts of exchange were isolated
occurrences, the object of exchange merely some fortuitous surplus. In the
middle stage of barbarism we already find among the pastoral peoples a
possession in the form of cattle which, once the herd has attained a certain
size, regularly produces a surplus over and above the tribe’s own
requirements, leading to a division of labor between pastoral peoples and
backward tribes without herds, and hence to the existence of two different
levels of production side by side with one another and the conditions necessary
for regular exchange. The upper stage of barbarism brings us the further
division of labor between agriculture and handicrafts, hence the production of
a continually increasing portion of the products of labor directly for
exchange, so that exchange between individual producers assumes the importance
of a vital social function. Civilization consolidates and intensifies all these
existing divisions of labor, particularly by sharpening the opposition between
town and country (the town may economically dominate the country, as in
antiquity, or the country the town, as in the middle ages), and it adds a third
division of labor, peculiar to itself and of decisive importance: it creates a
class which no longer concerns itself with production, but only with the
exchange of the products – the merchants. Hitherto whenever classes had
begun to form, it had always been exclusively in the field of production; the
persons engaged in production were separated into those who directed and those
who executed, or else into large-scale and small-scale producers. Now for the
first time a class appears which, without in any way participating in
production, captures the direction of production as a whole and economically
subjugates the producers; which makes itself into an indispensable middleman
between any two producers and exploits them both. Under the pretext that they
save the producers the trouble and risk of exchange, extend the sale of their
products to distant markets and are therefore the most useful class of the
population, a class of parasites comes into being, “genuine social
ichneumons,” who, as a reward for their actually very insignificant
services, skim all the cream off production at home and abroad, rapidly amass
enormous wealth and correspondingly social influence, and for that reason
receive under civilization ever higher honors and ever greater control of
production, until at last they also bring forth a product of their own –
the periodical trade crises. 
At our stage of development, however, the young merchants had not even begun
to dream of the great destiny awaiting them. But they were growing and making
themselves indispensable, which was quite sufficient. And with the formation of
the merchant class came also the development of metallic money, the minted
coin, a new instrument for the domination of the non-producer over the producer
and his production. The commodity of commodities had been discovered, that
which holds all other commodities hidden in itself, the magic power which can
change at will into everything desirable and desired. The man who had it ruled
the world of production–and who had more of it than anybody else? The
merchant. The worship of money was safe in his hands. He took good care to make
it clear that, in face of money, all commodities, and hence all producers of
commodities, must prostrate themselves in adoration in the dust. He proved
practically that all other forms of wealth fade into mere semblance beside this
incarnation of wealth as such. Never again has the power of money shown itself
in such primitive brutality and violence as during these days of its youth.
After commodities had begun to sell for money, loans and advances in money came
also, and with them interest and usury. No legislation of later times so
utterly and ruthlessly delivers over the debtor to the usurious creditor as the
legislation of ancient Athens and ancient Rome–and in both cities it
arose spontaneously, as customary law, without any compulsion other than the
economic. 
Alongside wealth in commodities and slaves, alongside wealth in money, there
now appeared wealth in land also. The individuals’ rights of possession
in the pieces of land originally allotted to them by gens or tribe had now
become so established that the land was their hereditary property. Recently
they had striven above all to secure their freedom against the rights of the
gentile community over these lands, since these rights had become for them a
fetter. They got rid of the fetter – but soon afterwards of their new
landed property also. Full, free ownership of the land meant not only power,
uncurtailed and unlimited, to possess the land; it meant also the power to
alienate it. As long as the land belonged to the gens, no such power could
exist. But when the new landed proprietor shook off once and for all the
fetters laid upon him by the prior right of gens and tribe, he also cut the
ties which had hitherto inseparably attached him to the land. Money, invented
at the same time as private property in land, showed him what that meant. Land
could now become a commodity; it could be sold and pledged. Scarcely had
private property in land been introduced than the mortgage was already invented
(see Athens). As hetaerism and prostitution dog the heels of monogamy, so from
now onwards mortgage dogs the heels of private land ownership. You asked for
full, free alienable ownership of the land and now you have got it –
“tu l'as voulu, Georges Dandin.” [It's your
fault, Georges Dandin, from Molière’s play].

With trade expansion, money and usury, private property in land and
mortgages, the concentration and centralization of wealth in the hands of a
small class rapidly advanced, accompanied by an increasing impoverishment of
the masses and an increasing mass of impoverishment. The new aristocracy of
wealth, in so far as it had not been identical from the outset with the old
hereditary aristocracy, pushed it permanently into the background (in Athens,
in Rome, among the Germans). And simultaneous with this division of the
citizens into classes according to wealth there was an enormous increase,
particularly in Greece, in the number of slaves, [2] whose forced labor was the foundation on which the
superstructure of the entire society was reared. 
Let us now see what had become of the gentile constitution in this social
upheaval. Confronted by the new forces in whose growth it had had no share, the
gentile constitution was helpless. The necessary condition for its existence
was that the members of a gens or at least of a tribe were settled together in
the same territory and were its sole inhabitants. That had long ceased to be
the case. Every territory now had a heterogeneous population belonging to the
most varied gentes and tribes; everywhere slaves, protected persons and aliens
lived side by side with citizens. The settled conditions of life which had only
been achieved towards the end of the middle stage of barbarism were broken up
by the repeated shifting and changing of residence under the pressure of trade,
alteration of occupation and changes in the ownership of the land. The members
of the gentile bodies could no longer meet to look after their common concerns;
only unimportant matters, like the religious festivals, were still
perfunctorily attended to. In addition to the needs and interests with which
the gentile bodies were intended and fitted to deal, the upheaval in productive
relations and the resulting change in the social structure had given rise to
new needs and interests, which were not only alien to the old gentile order,
but ran directly counter to it at every point. The interests of the groups of
handicraftsmen which had arisen with the division of labor, the special needs
of the town as opposed to the country, called for new organs. But each of these
groups was composed of people of the most diverse gentes, phratries, and
tribes, and even included aliens. Such organs had therefore to be formed
outside the gentile constitution, alongside of it, and hence in opposition to
it. And this conflict of interests was at work within every gentile body,
appearing in its most extreme form in the association of rich and poor, usurers
and debtors, in the same gens and the same tribe. Further, there was the new
mass of population outside the gentile bodies, which, as in Rome, was able to
become a power in the land and at the same time was too numerous to be
gradually absorbed into the kinship groups and tribes. In relation to this
mass, the gentile bodies stood opposed as closed, privileged corporations; the
primitive natural democracy had changed into a malign aristocracy. Lastly, the
gentile constitution had grown out of a society which knew no internal
contradictions, and it was only adapted to such a society. It possessed no
means of coercion except public opinion. But here was a society which by all
its economic conditions of life had been forced to split itself into freemen
and slaves, into the exploiting rich and the exploited poor; a society which
not only could never again reconcile these contradictions, but was compelled
always to intensify them. Such a society could only exist either in the
continuous open fight of these classes against one another, or else under the
rule of a third power, which, apparently standing above the warring classes,
suppressed their open conflict and allowed the class struggle to be fought out
at most in the economic field, in so-called legal form. The gentile
constitution was finished. It had been shattered by the division of labor and
its result, the cleavage of society into classes. It was replaced by the state.



The three main forms in which the state arises on the ruins of the gentile
constitution have been examined in detail above. Athens provides the purest,
classic form; here the state springs directly and mainly out of the class
oppositions which develop within gentile society itself. In Rome, gentile
society becomes a closed aristocracy in the midst of the numerous plebs who
stand outside it, and have duties but no rights; the victory of plebs breaks up
the old constitution based on kinship, and erects on its ruins the state, into
which both the gentile aristocracy and the plebs are soon completely absorbed.
Lastly, in the case of the German conquerors of the Roman Empire, the state
springs directly out of the conquest of large foreign territories, which the
gentile constitution provides no means of governing. But because this conquest
involves neither a serious struggle with the original population nor a more
advanced division of labor; because conquerors and conquered are almost on the
same level of economic development, and the economic basis of society remains
therefore as before–for these reasons the gentile constitution is able to
survive for many centuries in the altered, territorial form of the mark
constitution and even for a time to rejuvenate itself in a feebler shape in the
later noble and patrician families, and indeed in peasant families, as in
Ditmarschen. [3] 
The state is therefore by no means a power imposed on society from without;
just as little is it “the reality of the moral idea,” “the
image and the reality of reason,” as Hegel maintains. Rather, it is a
product of society at a particular stage of development; it is the admission
that this society has involved itself in insoluble self-contradiction and is
cleft into irreconcilable antagonisms which it is powerless to exorcise. But in
order that these antagonisms, classes with conflicting economic interests,
shall not consume themselves and society in fruitless struggle, a power,
apparently standing above society, has become necessary to moderate the
conflict and keep it within the bounds of “order”; and this power,
arisen out of society, but placing itself above it and increasingly alienating
itself from it, is the state. 
In contrast to the old gentile organization, the state is distinguished
firstly by the grouping of its members on a territorial basis. The old gentile
bodies, formed and held together by ties of blood, had, as we have seen, become
inadequate largely because they presupposed that the gentile members were bound
to one particular locality, whereas this had long ago ceased to be the case.
The territory was still there, but the people had become mobile. The
territorial division was therefore taken as the starting point and the system
introduced by which citizens exercised their public rights and duties where
they took up residence, without regard to gens or tribe. This organization of
the citizens of the state according to domicile is common to all states. To us,
therefore, this organization seems natural; but, as we have seen, hard and
protracted struggles were necessary before it was able in Athens and Rome to
displace the old organization founded on kinship. 
The second distinguishing characteristic is the institution of a public
force which is no longer immediately identical with the people’s own
organization of themselves as an armed power. This special public force is
needed because a self-acting armed organization of the people has become
impossible since their cleavage into classes. The slaves also belong to the
population: as against the 365,000 slaves, the 90,000 Athenian citizens
constitute only a privileged class. The people’s army of the Athenian
democracy confronted the slaves as an aristocratic public force, and kept them
in check; but to keep the citizens in check as well, a police-force was needed,
as described above. This public force exists in every state; it consists not
merely of armed men, but also of material appendages, prisons and coercive
institutions of all kinds, of which gentile society knew nothing. It may be
very insignificant, practically negligible, in societies with still undeveloped
class antagonisms and living in remote areas, as at times and in places in the
United States of America. But it becomes stronger in proportion as the class
antagonisms within the state become sharper and as adjoining states grow larger
and more populous. It is enough to look at Europe today, where class struggle
and rivalry in conquest have brought the public power to a pitch that it
threatens to devour the whole of society and even the state itself. 
In order to maintain this public power, contributions from the state
citizens are necessary – taxes. These were completely unknown to gentile
society. We know more than enough about them today. With advancing
civilization, even taxes are not sufficient; the state draws drafts on the
future, contracts loans – state debts. Our old Europe can tell a tale about
these, too. 
In possession of the public power and the right of taxation, the officials
now present themselves as organs of society standing above society. The free,
willing respect accorded to the organs of the gentile constitution is not
enough for them, even if they could have it. Representatives of a power which
estranges them from society, they have to be given prestige by means of special
decrees, which invest them with a peculiar sanctity and inviolability. The
lowest police officer of the civilized state has more “authority”
than all the organs of gentile society put together; but the mightiest prince
and the greatest statesman or general of civilization might envy the humblest
of the gentile chiefs the unforced and unquestioned respect accorded to him.
For the one stands in the midst of society; the other is forced to pose as
something outside and above it. 
As the state arose from the need to keep class antagonisms in check, but
also arose in the thick of the fight between the classes, it is normally the
state of the most powerful, economically ruling class, which by its means
becomes also the politically ruling class, and so acquires new means of holding
down and exploiting the oppressed class. The ancient state was, above all, the
state of the slave-owners for holding down the slaves, just as the feudal state
was the organ of the nobility for holding down the peasant serfs and bondsmen,
and the modern representative state is the instrument for exploiting wage-labor
by capital. Exceptional periods, however, occur when the warring classes are so
nearly equal in forces that the state power, as apparent mediator, acquires for
the moment a certain independence in relation to both. This applies to the
absolute monarchy of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, which balances
the nobility and the bourgeoisie against one another; and to the Bonapartism of
the First and particularly of the Second French Empire, which played off the
proletariat against the bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie against the
proletariat. The latest achievement in this line, in which ruler and ruled look
equally comic, is the new German Empire of the Bismarckian nation; here the
capitalists and the workers are balanced against one another and both of them
fleeced for the benefit of the decayed Prussian cabbage Junkers. [German:Krautjunker, translated as ‘country
squire’, but with pejorative overtones.] 
Further, in most historical states the rights conceded to citizens are
graded on a property basis, whereby it is directly admitted that the state is
an organization for the protection of the possessing class against the
non-possessing class. This is already the case in the Athenian and Roman
property classes. Similarly in the medieval feudal state, in which the extent
of political power was determined by the extent of landownership. Similarly,
also, in the electoral qualifications in modern parliamentary states. This
political recognition of property differences is, however, by no means
essential. On the contrary, it marks a low stage in the development of the
state. The highest form of the state, the democratic republic, which in our
modern social conditions becomes more and more an unavoidable necessity and is
the form of state in which alone the last decisive battle between proletariat
and bourgeoisie can be fought out – the democratic republic no longer
officially recognizes differences of property. Wealth here employs its power
indirectly, but all the more surely. It does this in two ways: by plain
corruption of officials, of which America is the classic example, and by an
alliance between the government and the stock exchange, which is effected all
the more easily the higher the state debt mounts and the more the joint-stock
companies concentrate in their hands not only transport but also production
itself, and themselves have their own center in the stock exchange. In addition
to America, the latest French republic illustrates this strikingly, and honest
little Switzerland has also given a creditable performance in this field. But
that a democratic republic is not essential to this brotherly bond between
government and stock exchange is proved not only by England, but also by the
new German Empire, where it is difficult to say who scored most by the
introduction of universal suffrage, Bismarck or the Bleichroder bank. And
lastly the possessing class rules directly by means of universal suffrage. As
long as the oppressed class – in our case, therefore, the proletariat
– is not yet ripe for its self-liberation, so long will it, in its
majority, recognize the existing order of society as the only possible one and
remain politically the tail of the capitalist class, its extreme left wing. But
in the measure in which it matures towards its self-emancipation, in the same
measure it constitutes itself as its own party and votes for its own
representatives, not those of the capitalists. Universal suffrage is thus the
gauge of the maturity of the working class. It cannot and never will be
anything more in the modern state; but that is enough. On the day when the
thermometer of universal suffrage shows boiling-point among the workers, they
as well as the capitalists will know where they stand. 
The state, therefore, has not existed from all eternity. There have been
societies which have managed without it, which had no notion of the state or
state power. At a definite stage of economic development, which necessarily
involved the cleavage of society into classes, the state became a necessity
because of this cleavage. We are now rapidly approaching a stage in the
development of production at which the existence of these classes has not only
ceased to be a necessity, but becomes a positive hindrance to production. They
will fall as inevitably as they once arose. The state inevitably falls with
them. The society which organizes production anew on the basis of free and
equal association of the producers will put the whole state machinery where it
will then belong – into the museum of antiquities, next to the spinning
wheel and the bronze ax. 

Civilization is, therefore, according to the above analysis, the stage of
development in society at which the division of labor, the exchange between
individuals arising from it, and the commodity production which combines them
both, come to their full growth and revolutionizes the whole of previous
society. 
At all earlier stages of society production was essentially collective, just
as consumption proceeded by direct distribution of the products within larger
or smaller communistic communities. This collective production was very
limited; but inherent in it was the producers’ control over their process
of production and their product. They knew what became of their product: they
consumed it; it did not leave their hands. And so long as production remains on
this basis, it cannot grow above the heads of the producers nor raise up
incorporeal alien powers against them, as in civilization is always and
inevitably the case. 
But the division of labor slowly insinuates itself into this process of
production. It undermines the collectivity of production and appropriation,
elevates appropriation by individuals into the general rule, and thus creates
exchange between individuals – how it does so, we have examined above.
Gradually commodity production becomes the dominating form. 
With commodity production, production no longer for use by the producers but
for exchange, the products necessarily change hands. In exchanging his product,
the producer surrenders it; he no longer knows what becomes of it. When money,
and with money the merchant, steps in as intermediary between the producers,
the process of exchange becomes still more complicated, the final fate of the
products still more uncertain. The merchants are numerous, and none of them
knows what the other is doing. The commodities already pass not only from hand
to hand; they also pass from market to market; the producers have lost control
over the total production within their own spheres, and the merchants have not
gained it. Products and production become subjects of chance. 
But chance is only the one pole of a relation whose other pole is named
“necessity.” In the world of nature, where chance also seems to
rule, we have long since demonstrated in each separate field the inner
necessity and law asserting itself in this chance. But what is true of the
natural world is true also of society. The more a social activity, a series of
social processes, becomes too powerful for men's conscious control and grows
above their heads, and the more it appears a matter of pure chance, then all
the more surely within this chance the laws peculiar to it and inherent in it
assert themselves as if by natural necessity. Such laws also govern the chances
of commodity production and exchange. To the individuals producing or
exchanging, they appear as alien, at first often unrecognized, powers, whose
nature Must first be laboriously investigated and established. These economic
laws of commodity production are modified with the various stages of this form
of production; but in general the whole period of civilization is dominated by
them. And still to this day the product rules the producer; still to this day
the total production of society is regulated, not by a jointly devised plan,
but by blind laws, which manifest themselves with elemental violence, in the
final instance in the storms of the periodical trade crises. 
We saw above how at a fairly early stage in the development of production,
human labor-power obtains the capacity of producing a considerably greater
product than is required for the maintenance of the producers, and how this
stage of development was in the main the same as that in which division of
labor and exchange between individuals arise. It was not long then before the
great “truth” was discovered that man also can be a commodity; that
human energy can be exchanged and put to use by making a man into a slave.
Hardly had men begun to exchange than already they themselves were being
exchanged. The active became the passive, whether the men liked it or not. 
With slavery, which attained its fullest development under civilization,
came the first great cleavage of society into an exploiting and an exploited
class. This cleavage persisted during the whole civilized period. Slavery is
the first form of exploitation, the form peculiar to the ancient world; it is
succeeded by serfdom in the middle ages, and wage-labor in the more recent
period. These are the three great forms of servitude, characteristic of the
three great epochs of civilization; open, and in recent times disguised,
slavery always accompanies them. 

The stage of commodity production with which civilization begins is
distinguished economically by the introduction of (1) metal money, and with it
money capital, interest and usury; (2) merchants, as the class of
intermediaries between the producers; (3) private ownership of land, and the
mortgage system; (4) slave labor as the dominant form of production The form of
family corresponding to civilization and coming to definite supremacy with it
is monogamy, the domination of the man over the woman, and the single family as
the economic unit of society. The central link in civilized society is the
state, which in all typical periods is without exception the state of the
ruling class, and in all cases continues to be essentially a machine for
holding down the oppressed, exploited class. Also characteristic of
civilization is the establishment of a permanent opposition between town and
country as basis of the whole social division of labor; and, further, the
introduction of wills, whereby the owner of property is still able to dispose
over it even when he is dead. This institution, which is a direct affront to
the old gentile constitution, was unknown in Athens until the time of Solon; in
Rome it was introduced early, though we do not know the date; [4] among the Germans it was the clerics
who introduced it, in order that there might be nothing to stop the pious
German from leaving his legacy to the Church. 
With this as its basic constitution, civilization achieved things of which
gentile society was not even remotely capable. But it achieved them by setting
in motion the lowest instincts and passions in man and developing them at the
expense of all his other abilities. From its first day to this, sheer greed was
the driving spirit of civilization; wealth and again wealth and once more
wealth, wealth, not of society, but of the single scurvy individual – here
was its one and final aim. If at the same time the progressive development of
science and a repeated flowering of supreme art dropped into its lap, it was
only because without them modern wealth could not have completely realized its
achievements. 
Since civilization is founded on the exploitation of one class by another
class, its whole development proceeds in a constant contradiction. Every step
forward in production is at the same time a step backwards in the position of
the oppressed class, that is, of the great majority. Whatever benefits some
necessarily injures the others; every fresh emancipation of one class is
necessarily a new oppression for another class. The most striking proof of this
is provided by the introduction of machinery, the effects of which are now
known to the whole world. And if among the barbarians, as we saw, the
distinction between rights and duties could hardly be drawn, civilization makes
the difference and antagonism between them clear even to the dullest
intelligence by giving one class practically all the rights and the other class
practically all the duties. 

But that should not be: what is good for the ruling class must also be good
for the whole of society, with which the ruling-class identifies itself.
Therefore the more civilization advances, the more it is compelled to cover the
evils it necessarily creates with the cloak of love and charity, to palliate
them or to deny them – in short, to introduce a conventional hypocrisy
which was unknown to earlier forms of society and even to the first stages of
civilization, and which culminates in the pronouncement: the exploitation of
the oppressed class is carried on by the exploiting class simply and solely in
the interests of the exploited class itself; and if the exploited class cannot
see it and even grows rebellious, that is the basest ingratitude to its
benefactors, the exploiters. [5] 
And now, in conclusion, Morgan’s judgment of civilization: 
Since the advent of civilization, the outgrowth of property
has been so immense, its forms so diversified, its uses so expanding and its
management so intelligent in the interests of its owners, that it has become,
on the part of the people, an unmanageable power. The human mind stands
bewildered in the presence of its own creation. The time will come,
nevertheless, when human intelligence will rise to the mastery over property,
and define the relations of the state to the property it protects, as well as
the obligations and the limits of the rights of its owners. The interests of
society are paramount to individual interests, and the two must be brought into
just and harmonious relations. A mere property career is not the final destiny
of mankind, if progress is to be the law of the future as it has been of the
past. The time which has passed away since civilization began is but a fragment
of the past duration of man’s existence; and but a fragment of the ages
yet to come. The dissolution of society bids fair to become the termination of
a career of which property is the end and aim; because such a career contains
the elements of self-destruction. Democracy in government, brotherhood in
society, equality in rights and privileges, and universal education, foreshadow
the next higher plane of society to which experience, intelligence and
knowledge are steadily tending. It will be a revival, in a higher form, of the
liberty, equality and fraternity of the ancient gentes. 
[Morgan, op. cit., p. 562.–Ed.]
 



Footnotes 

[1] Especially on the
north-west coast of America – see Bancroft. Among the Haidahs on Queen
Charlotte Islands there are households with as many as 700 persons under one
roof. Among the Nootkas whole tribes used to live under one roof. 

[2] For the number of slaves
in Athens, see above, page 107. In Corinth, at the height of its power, the
number of slaves was 460,000; in Ægina, 470,000. In both cases, ten times the
population of free citizens. 

[3] The first historian who
had at any rate an approximate conception of the nature of the gens was
Niebuhr, and for this he had to thank his acquaintance with the Ditmarechen
families, though he was overhasty in transferring their characteristics to the
gens. 

[4] The second part of
Lassalle’s System der erworbenen Rechte (System of Acquired
Rights) turns chiefly on the proposition that the Roman testament is as
old as Rome itself, that there was never in Roman history “a time when there
were no testaments“; that, on the contrary, the testament originated in
pre-Roman times out of the cult of the dead. Lassalle, as a faithful Hegelian
of the old school, derives the provisions of Roman law not from the social
relations of the Romans, but from the “speculative concept” of the human will,
and so arrives at this totally unhistorical conclusion. This is not to be
wondered at in a book which comes to the conclusion, on the ground of the same
speculative concept, that the transfer of property was a purely secondary
matter in Roman inheritance. Lassalle not only believes in the illusions of the
Roman jurists, particularly of the earlier periods; he outdoes them. 

[5] I originally intended to
place the brilliant criticism of civilization which is found scattered through
the work of Charles Fourier beside that of Morgan and my own. Unfortunately, I
have not the time. I will only observe that Fourier already regards monogamy
and private property in land as the chief characteristics of civilization, and
that he calls civilization a war of the rich against the poor. We also find
already in his work the profound recognition that in all societies which are
imperfect and split into antagonisms single families (les families
incohérentes) are the economic units. 



Chapter Eight | Appendix 
Origins of the Family 




==========

## Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy









Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy



Frederick Engels
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy



Written: 1886;
First Published: 1886, in Die Neue Zeit;
Source: Progress Publishers edition;
Translated: by Progress Publishers in 1946;
Transcription/Markup: Paul Taylor;
Proofed: Jim W. Jaszewski, 2003;
Online Version: Marx Engels Internet Archive 1994.

 
Contents:

Foreword
Part 1: Hegel
Part 2: Materialism
Part 3: Feuerbach
Part 4: Marx



Marx-Engels Archive |
Marxists InternetArchive




==========

## Foreword to the 1888 Edition







Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy  —  Foreword




Frederick Engels
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy

Foreword

 
In the preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, published in Berlin, 1859, Karl Marx relates how the two of us in Brussels in the year 1845 set about: “to work out in common the opposition of our view” — the materialist conception of history which was elaborated mainly by Marx — to the ideological view of German philosophy, in fact, to settle accounts with our erstwhile philosophical conscience. The resolve was carried out in the form of a criticism of post-Hegelian philosophy. The manuscript, two large octavo volumes, had long reached its place of publication in Westphalia when we received the news that altered circumstances did not allow of its being printed. We abandoned the manuscript to the gnawing criticism of the mice all the more willingly as we had achieved our main purpose — self-clarification!
 Since then more than 40 years have elapsed and Marx died without either of us having had an opportunity of returning to the subject. We have expressed ourselves in various places regarding our relation to Hegel, but nowhere in a comprehensive, connected account. To Feuerbach, who after all in many respects forms an intermediate link between Hegelian philosophy and our conception, we never returned.
 In the meantime, the Marxist world outlook has found representatives far beyond the boundaries of Germany and Europe and in all the literary languages of the world. On the other hand, classical German philosophy is experiencing a kind of rebirth abroad, especially in England and Scandinavia, and even in Germany itself people appear to be getting tired of the pauper’s broth of eclecticism which is ladled out in the universities there under the name of philosophy.
 In these circumstances, a short, coherent account of our relation to the Hegelian philosophy, of how we proceeded, as well as of how we separated, from it, appeared to me to be required more and more. Equally, a full acknowledgement of the influence which Feuerbach, more than any other post-Hegelian philosopher, had upon us during our period of storm and stress, appeared to me to be an undischarged debt of honor. I therefore willingly seized the opportunity when the editors of Neue Zeit asked me for a critical review of Starcke’s book on Feuerbach. My contribution was published in that journal in the fourth and fifth numbers of 1886 and appears here in revised form as a separate publication.
Before sending these lines to press, I have once again ferreted out and looked over the old manuscript of 1845–46 [The German Ideology].
The section dealing with Feuerbach is not completed. The finished portion consists of an exposition of the materialist conception of history which proves only how incomplete our knowledge of economic history still was at that time. It contains no criticism of Feuerbach’s doctrine itself; for the present purposes, therefore, it was unusable. On the other hand, in an old notebook of Marx’s I have found the 11 Theses on Feuerbach, printed here as an appendix.
These are notes hurriedly scribbled down for later elaboration, absolutely not intended for publication, but invaluable as the first document in which is deposited the brilliant germ of the new world outlook.
Frederick Engels
London
February 21, 1888
 
Part 1: Hegel
 

Table of Contents: Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy


==========

## I







Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy - Part 1: Hegel



Frederick Engels
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy

Part 1: Hegel

 

The volume before us (1) carries us back to a period which, although in time no more than a generation behind us, has become as foreign to the present generation in Germany as if it were already a hundred years old. Yet it was the period of Germany’s preparation for the Revolution of 1848; and all that has happened since then in our country has been merely a continuation of 1848, merely the execution of the last will and testament of the revolution.
Just as in France in the 18th century, so in Germany in the 19th, a philosophical revolution ushered in the political collapse. But how different the two looked! The French were in open combat against all official science, against the church and often also against the state; their writings were printed across the frontier, in Holland or England, while they themselves were often in jeopardy of imprisonment in the Bastille. On the other hand, the Germans were professors, state-appointed instructors of youth; their writings were recognized textbooks, and the termination system of the whole development — the Hegelian system — was even raised, as it were, to the rank of a royal Prussian philosophy of state! Was it possible that a revolution could hide behind these professors, behind their obscure, pedantic phrases, their ponderous, wearisome sentences? Were not precisely these people who were then regarded as the representatives of the revolution, the liberals, the bitterest opponents of this brain-confusing philosophy? But what neither the government nor the liberals saw was seen at least by one man as early as 1833, and this man was indeed none other than Heinrich Heine.[A]
Let us take an example. No philosophical proposition has earned more gratitude from narrow-minded governments and wrath from equally narrow-minded liberals than Hegel’s famous statement: “All that is real is rational; and all that is rational is real.” That was tangibly a sanctification of things that be, a philosophical benediction bestowed upon despotism, police government, Star Chamber proceedings and censorship. That is how Frederick William III and how his subjects understood it. But according to Hegel certainly not everything that exists is also real, without further qualification. For Hegel the attribute of reality belongs only to that which at the same time is necessary: “In the course of its development reality proves to be necessity.” A particular governmental measure — Hegel himself cites the example of “a certain tax regulation” — is therefore for him by no means real without qualification. That which is necessary, however, proves itself in the last resort to be also rational; and, applied to the Prussian state of that time, the Hegelian proposition, therefore, merely means: this state is rational, corresponds to reason, insofar as it is necessary; and if it nevertheless appears to us to be evil, but still, in spite of its evil character, continues to exist, then the evil character of the government is justified and explained by the corresponding evil character of its subjects. The Prussians of that day had the government that they deserved.
Now, according to Hegel, reality is, however, in no way an attribute predictable of any given state of affairs, social or political, in all circumstances and at all times. On the contrary. The Roman Republic was real, but so was the Roman Empire, which superseded it. In 1789, the French monarchy had become so unreal, that is to say, so robbed of all necessity, so irrational, that it had to be destroyed by the Great Revolution, of which Hegel always speaks with the greatest enthusiasm. In this case, therefore, the monarchy was the unreal and the revolution the real. And so, in the course of development, all that was previously real becomes unreal, loses it necessity, its right of existence, its rationality. And in the place of moribund reality comes a new, viable reality — peacefully if the old has enough intelligence to go to its death without a struggle; forcibly if it resists this necessity. Thus the Hegelian proposition turns into its opposite through Hegelian dialectics itself: All that is real in the sphere of human history, becomes irrational in the process of time, is therefore irrational by its very destination, is tainted beforehand with irrationality, and everything which is rational in the minds of men is destined to become real, however much it may contradict existing apparent reality. In accordance with all the rules of the Hegelian method of thought, the proposition of the rationality of everything which is real resolves itself into the other proposition: All that exists deserves to perish.
But precisely therein lay the true significance and the revolutionary character of the Hegelian philosophy (to which, as the close of the whole movement since Kant, we must here confine ourselves), that it once and for all dealt the death blow to the finality of all product of human thought and action. Truth, the cognition of which is the business of philosophy, was in the hands of Hegel no longer an aggregate of finished dogmatic statements, which, once discovered, had merely to be learned by heart. Truth lay now in the process of cognition itself, in the long historical development of science, which mounts from lower to ever higher levels of knowledge without ever reaching, by discovering so-called absolute truth, a point at which it can proceed no further, where it would have nothing more to do than to fold its hands and gaze with wonder at the absolute truth to which it had attained. And what holds good for the realm of philosophical knowledge holds good also for that of every other kind of knowledge and also for practical action. Just as knowledge is unable to reach a complete conclusion in a perfect, ideal condition of humanity, so is history unable to do so; a perfect society, a perfect “state”, are things which can only exist in imagination. On the contrary, all successive historical systems are only transitory stages in the endless course of development of human society from the lower to the higher. Each stage is necessary, and therefore justified for the time and conditions to which it owes its origin. But in the face of new, higher conditions which gradually develop in its own womb, it loses vitality and justification. It must give way to a higher stage which will also in its turn decay and perish. Just as the bourgeoisie by large-scale industry, competition, and the world market dissolves in practice all stable time-honored institutions, so this dialectical philosophy dissolves all conceptions of final, absolute truth and of absolute states of humanity corresponding to it. For it [dialectical philosophy], nothing is final, absolute, sacred. It reveals the transitory character of everything and in everything; nothing can endure before it except the uninterrupted process of becoming and of passing away, of endless ascendancy from the lower to the higher. And dialectical philosophy itself is nothing more than the mere reflection of this process in the thinking brain. It has, of course, also a conservative side; it recognizes that definite stages of knowledge and society are justified for their time and circumstances; but only so far. The conservatism of this mode of outlook is relative; its revolutionary character is absolute — the only absolute dialectical philosophy admits.
It is not necessary, here, to go into the question of whether this mode of outlook is thoroughly in accord with the present state of natural science, which predicts a possible end even for the Earth, and for its habitability a fairly certain one; which therefore recognizes that for the history of mankind, too, there is not only an ascending but also a descending branch. At any rate, we still find ourselves a considerable distance from the turning-point at which the historical course of society becomes one of descent, and we cannot expect Hegelian philosophy to be concerned with a subject which natural science, in its time, had not at all placed upon the agenda as yet.
But what must, in fact, be said here is this: that in Hegel the views developed above are not so sharply delineated. They are a necessary conclusion from his method, but one which he himself never drew with such explicitness. And this, indeed, for the simple reason that he was compelled to make a system and, in accordance with traditional requirements, a system of philosophy must conclude with some sort of absolute truth. Therefore, however much Hegel, especially in his Logic, emphasized that this eternal truth is nothing but the logical, or, the historical, process itself, he nevertheless finds himself compelled to supply this process with an end, just because he has to bring his system to a termination at some point or other. In his Logic, he can make this end a beginning again, since here the point of the conclusion, the absolute idea — which is only absolute insofar as he has absolutely nothing to say about it — “alienates”, that is, transforms, itself into nature and comes to itself again later in the mind, that is, in thought and in history. But at the end of the whole philosophy, a similar return to the beginning is possible only in one way. Namely, by conceiving of the end of history as follows: mankind arrives at the cognition of the self-same absolute idea, and declares that this cognition of the absolute idea is reached in Hegelian philosophy. In this way, however, the whole dogmatic content of the Hegelian system is declared to be absolute truth, in contradiction to his dialectical method, which dissolves all dogmatism. Thus the revolutionary side is smothered beneath the overgrowth of the conservative side. And what applies to philosophical cognition applies also to historical practice. Mankind, which, in the person of Hegel, has reached the point of working out the absolute idea, must also in practice have gotten so far that it can carry out this absolute idea in reality. Hence the practical political demands of the absolute idea on contemporaries may not be stretched too far. And so we find at the conclusion of the Philosophy of Right that the absolute idea is to be realized in that monarchy based on social estates which Frederick William III so persistently but vainly promised to his subjects, that is, in a limited, moderate, indirect rule of the possessing classes suited to the petty-bourgeois German conditions of that time; and, moreover, the necessity of the nobility is demonstrated to us in a speculative fashion.
The inner necessities of the system are, therefore, of themselves sufficient to explain why a thoroughly revolutionary method of thinking produced an extremely tame political conclusion. As a matter of fact, the specific form of this conclusion springs from this, that Hegel was a German, and like his contemporary Goethe had a bit of the philistine’s queue dangling behind. Each of them was an Olympian Zeus in his own sphere, yet neither of them ever quite freed himself from German philistinism.
But all this did not prevent the Hegelian system from covering an incomparably greater domain than any earlier system, nor from developing in this domain a wealth of thought, which is astounding even today. The phenomenology of mind (which one may call a parallel of the embryology and palaeontology of the mind, a development of individual consciousness through its different stages, set in the form of an abbreviated reproduction of the stages through which the consciousness of man has passed in the course of history), logic, natural philosophy, philosophy of mind, and the latter worked out in its separate, historical subdivisions: philosophy of history, of right, of religion, history of philosophy, aesthetics, etc. — in all these different historical fields Hegel labored to discover and demonstrate the pervading thread of development. And as he was not only a creative genius but also a man of encyclopaedic erudition, he played an epoch-making role in every sphere. It is self-evident that owing to the needs of the “system” he very often had to resort to those forced constructions about which his pigmy opponents make such a terrible fuss even today. But these constructions are only the frame and scaffolding of his work. If one does not loiter here needlessly, but presses on farther into the immense building, one finds innumerable treasures which today still possess undiminshed value. With all philosophers it is precisely the “system” which is perishable; and for the simple reason that it springs from an imperishable desire of the human mind — the desire to overcome all contradictions. But if all contradictions are once and for all disposed of, we shall have arrived at so-called absolute truth — world history will be at an end. And yet it has to continue, although there is nothing left for it to do — hence, a new, insoluble contradiction. As soon as we have once realized — and in the long run no one has helped us to realize it more than Hegel himself — that the task of philosophy thus stated means nothing but the task that a single philosopher should accomplish that which can only be accomplished by the entire human race in its progressive development — as soon as we realize that, there is an end to all philosophy in the hitherto accepted sense of the word. One leaves alone “absolute truth”, which is unattainable along this path or by any single individual; instead, one pursues attainable relative truths along the path of the positive sciences, and the summation of their results by means of dialectical thinking. At any rate, with Hegel philosophy comes to an end; on the one hand, because in his system he summed up its whole development in the most splendid fashion; and on the other hand, because, even though unconsciously, he showed us the way out of the labyrinth of systems to real positive knowledge of the world.
One can imagine what a tremendous effect this Hegelian system must have produced in the philosophy-tinged atmosphere of Germany. It was a triumphant procession which lasted for decades and which by no means came to a standstill on the death of Hegel. On the contrary, it was precisely from 1830 to 1840 that “Hegelianism” reigned most exclusively, and to a greater or lesser extent infected even its opponents. It was precisely in this period that Hegelian views, consciously or unconsciously, most extensively penetrated the most diversified sciences and leavened even popular literature and the daily press, from which the average “educated consciousness” derives its mental pabulum. But this victory along the whole front was only the prelude to an internal struggle.
As we have seen, the doctrine of Hegel, taken as a whole, left plenty of room for giving shelter to the most diverse practical party views. And in the theoretical Germany of that time, two things above all were practical: religion and politics. Whoever placed the chief emphasis on the Hegelian system could be fairly conservative in both spheres; whoever regarded the dialectical method as the main thing could belong to the most extreme opposition, both in politics and religion. Hegel himself, despite the fairly frequent outbursts of revolutionary wrath in his works, seemed on the whole to be more inclined to the conservative side. Indeed, his system had cost him much more “hard mental plugging” than his method. Towards the end of the thirties, the cleavage in the school became more and more apparent. The Left wing, the so-called Young Hegelians, in their fight with the pietist orthodox and the feudal reactionaries, abandoned bit by bit that philosophical-genteel reserve in regard to the burning questions of the day which up to that time had secured state toleration and even protection for their teachings. And when in 1840, orthodox pietism and absolutist feudal reaction ascended the throne with Frederick William IV, open partisanship became unavoidable. The fight was still carried on with philosophical weapons, but no longer for abstract philosophical aims. It turned directly on the destruction of traditional religion and of the existing state. And while in the Deutsche Jahrbucher [B]the practical ends were still predominantly put forward in philosophical disguise, in the Rheinische Zeitung of 1842 the Young Hegelian school revealed itself directly as the philosophy of the aspiring radical bourgeoisie and used the meagre cloak of philosophy only to deceive the censorship.
At that time, however, politics was a very thorny field, and hence the main fight came to be directed against religion; this fight, particularly since 1840, was indirectly also political. Strauss’ Life of Jesus, published in 1835, had provided the first impulse. The theory therein developed of the formation of the gospel myths was combated later by Bruno Bauer with proof that a whole series of evangelic stories had been fabricated by the authors themselves. The controversy between these two was carried out in the philosophical disguise of a battle between “self-consciousness” and “substance”. The question whether the miracle stories of the gospels came into being through unconscious-traditional myth-creation within the bosom of the community or whether they were fabricated by the evangelists themselves was magnified into the question whether, in world history, “substance” or “self-consciousness” was the decisive operative force. Finally came Stirner, the prophet of contemporary anarchism — Bakunin has taken a great deal from him — and capped the sovereign “self-consciousness” by his sovereign “ego”[C].
We will not go further into this side of the decomposition process of the Hegelian school. More important for us is the following: the main body of the most determined Young Hegelians was, by the practical necessities of its fight against positive religion, driven back to Anglo-French materialism. This brought them into conflict with the system of their school. While materialism conceives nature as the sole reality, nature in the Hegelian system represents merely the “alienation” of the absolute idea, so to say, a degradation of the idea. At all events, thinking and its thought-product, the idea, is here the primary, nature the derivative, which only exists at all by the condescension of the idea. And in this contradiction they floundered as well or as ill as they could.
Then came Feuerbach’s Essence of Christianity[D]. With one blow, it pulverized the contradiction, in that without circumlocutions it placed materialism on the throne again. Nature exists independently of all philosophy. It is the foundation upon which we human beings, ourselves products of nature, have grown up. Nothing exists outside nature and man, and the higher beings our religious fantasies have created are only the fantastic reflection of our own essence. The spell was broken; the “system” was exploded and cast aside, and the contradiction, shown to exist only in our imagination, was dissolved. One must himself have experienced the liberating effect of this book to get an idea of it. Enthusiasm was general; we all became at once Feuerbachians. How enthusiastically Marx greeted the new conception and how much — in spite of all critical reservations — he was influenced by it, one may read in the The Holy Family[E].
Even the shortcomings of the book contributed to its immediate effect. Its literary, sometimes even high-flown, style secured for it a large public and was at any rate refreshing after long years of abstract and abstruse Hegelianizing. The same is true of its extravagant deification of love, which, coming after the now intolerable sovereign rule of “pure reason”, had its excuse, if not justification. But what we must not forget is that it was precisely these two weaknesses of Feuerbach that “true Socialism”, which had been spreading like a plague in educated Germany since 1844, took as its starting-point, putting literary phrases in the place of scientific knowledge, the liberation of mankind by means of “love” in place of the emancipation of the proletariat through the economic transformation of production — in short, losing itself in the nauseous fine writing and ecstacies of love typified by Herr Karl Grun.
Another thing we must not forget is this: the Hegelian school disintegrated, but Hegelian philosophy was not overcome through criticism; Strauss and Bauer each took one of its sides and set it polemically against the other. Feuerbach smashed the system and simply discarded it. But a philosophy is not disposed of by the mere assertion that it is false. And so powerful a work as Hegelian philosophy, which had exercised so enormous an influence on the intellectual development of the nation, could not be disposed of by simply being ignored. It had to be “sublated” in its own sense, that is, in the sense that while its form had to be annihilatedhrough criticism, the new content which had been won through it had to be saved. How this was brought about we shall see below.
But in the meantime, the Revolution of 1848 thrust the whole of philosophy aside as unceremoniously as Feuerbach had thrust aside Hegel. And in the process, Feuerbach himself was also pushed into the background.
 
Part 2: Materialism
 

Notes
1. Ludwig Feuerbach, by K.N. Starcke, Ph.D., Stuttgart, Ferd. Enke. 1885.
A. Engels had in mind Heine’s remarks on the “German philosophical revolution” contained in the latter’s sketches Zur Geschichte der Religion und Philosophie in Deutschland (On the History of Religion and Philosophy in Germany), written in 1833.
B. The Deutsche Jahrbücher fur Wissenschaft und Kunst (German Annuals of Science and Art): Organ of the Young Hegelians edited by A. Ruge and T. Echtermeyer, and published in Leipzig from 1841 to 1843.
C. Engels refers to Max Stirner’s (pseudonym for Kaspar Schmidt) Der Einzige und sein Eigentum (The Ego and His Own), which appeared in 1845.
D. Feuerbach’s Das Wesen des Christentums (The Essence of Christianity) appeared in Leipzig in 1841.
E. The full title of this book by Marx and Engels is: Die Heilige Familie oder Kritik der kritischen Kritik.  Gegen Bruno Bauer und Konsorten (The Holy Family, or a Criticism of Critical Criticism. Against Bruno Bauer and Co.). It was originally published in Frankfort on the Main in 1845.

Table of Contents: Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy



==========

## II







Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy - Part 2: Materialism



Frederick Engels
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy

Part 2: Materialism

 

The great basic question of all philosophy, especially of more recent philosophy, is that concerning the relation of thinking and being. From the very early times when men, still completely ignorant of the structure of their own bodies, under the stimulus of dream apparitions (1) came to believe that their thinking and sensation were not activities of their bodies, but of a distinct soul which inhabits the body and leaves it at death — from this time men have been driven to reflect about the relation between this soul and the outside world. If, upon death, it took leave of the body and lived on, there was no occassion to invent yet another distinct death for it. Thus arose the idea of immortality, which at that stage of development appeared not at all as a consolation but as a fate against which it was no use fighting, and often enough, as among the Greeks, as a positive misfortune. The quandry arising from the common universal ignorance of what to do with this soul, once its existence had been accepted, after the death of the body, and not religious desire for consolation, led in a general way to the tedious notion of personal immortality. In an exactly similar manner, the first gods arose through the personification of natural forces. And these gods in the further development of religions assumed more and more extramundane form, until finally by a process of abstraction, I might almost say of distillation, occurring naturally in the course of man’s intellectual development, out of the many more or less limited and mutually limiting gods there arose in the minds of men the idea of the one exclusive God of the monotheistic religions.
Thus the question of the relation of thinking to being, the relation of the spirit to nature — the paramount question of the whole of philosophy — has, no less than all religion, its roots in the narrow-minded and ignorant notions of savagery. But this question could for the first time be put forward in its whole acuteness, could achieve its full significance, only after humanity in Europe had awakened from the long hibernation of the Christian Middle Ages. The question of the position of thinking in relation to being, a question which, by the way, had played a great part also in the scholasticism of the Middle Ages, the question: which is primary, spirit or nature — that question, in relation to the church, was sharpened into this: Did God create the world or has the world been in existence eternally?
The answers which the philosophers gave to this question split them into two great camps. Those who asserted the primacy of spirit to nature and, therefore, in the last instance, assumed world creation in some form or other — and among the philosophers, Hegel, for example, this creation often becomes still more intricate and impossible than in Christianity — comprised the camp of idealism. The others, who regarded nature as primary, belong to the various schools of materialism.
These two expressions, idealism and materialism, originally signify nothing else but this; and here too they are not used in any other sense. What confusion arises when some other meaning is put to them will be seen below.
But the question of the relation of thinking and being had yet another side: in what relation do our thoughts about the world surrounding us stand to this world itself? Is our thinking capable of the cognition of the real world? Are we able in our ideas and notions of the real world to produce a correct reflection of reality? In philosophical language this question is called the question of identity of thinking and being, and the overwhelming majority of philosophers give an affirmative answer to this question. With Hegel, for example, its affirmation is self-evident; for what we cognize in the real world is precisely its thought-content — that which makes the world a gradual realization of the absolute idea, which absolute idea has existed somewhere from eternity, independent of the world and before the world. But it is manifest without further proof that thought can know a content which is from the outset a thought-content. It is equally manifest that what is to be proved here is already tacitly contained in the premises. But that in no way prevents Hegel from drawing the further conclusion from his proof of the identity of thinking and being that his philosophy, because it is correct for his thinking, is therefore the only correct one, and that the identity of thinking and being must prove its validity by mankind immediately translating his philosophy from theory into practice and transforming the whole world according to Hegelian principles. This is an illusion which he shares with well-nigh all philosophers.
In addition, there is yet a set of different philosophers — those who question the possibility of any cognition, or at least of an exhaustive cognition, of the world. To them, among the more modern ones, belong Hume and Kant, and they played a very important role in philosophical development. What is decisive in the refutation of this view has already been said by Hegel, in so far as this was possible from an idealist standpoint. The materialistic additions made by Feuerbach are more ingenious than profound. The most telling refutation of this as of all other philosophical crotchets is practice — namely, experiment and industry. If we are able to prove the correctness of our conception of a natural process by making it ourselves, bringing it into being out of its conditions and making it serve our own purposes into the bargain, then there is an end to the Kantian ungraspable “thing-in-itself”. The chemical substances produced in the bodies of plants and animals remained just such “things-in-themselves” until organic chemistry began to produce them one after another, whereupon the “thing-in-itself” became a thing for us — as, for instance, alizarin, the coloring matter of the madder, which we no longer trouble to grow in the madder roots in the field, but produce much more cheaply and simply from coal tar. For 300 years, the Copernican solar system was a hypothesis with 100, 1,000, 10,000 to 1 chances in its favor, but still always a hypothesis. But then Leverrier, by means of the data provided by this system, not only deduced the necessity of the existence of an unknown planet, but also calculated the position in the heavens which this planet must necessarily occupy, and when [Johann] Galle really found this planet [Neptune, discovered 1846, at Berlin Observatory], the Copernican system was proved. If, nevertheless, the neo-Kantians are attempting to resurrect the Kantian conception in Germany, and the agnostics that of Hume in England (where in fact it never became extinct), this is, in view of their theoretical and practical refutation accomplished long ago, scientifically a regression and practically merely a shamefaced way of surreptitiously accepting materialism, while denying it before the world.
But during this long period from Descartes to Hegel and from Hobbes to Feuerbach, these philosophers were by no means impelled, as they thought they were, solely by the force of pure reason. On the contrary, what really pushed them forward most was the powerful and ever more rapidly onrushing progress of natural science and industry. Among the materialists this was plain on the surface, but the idealist systems also filled themselves more and more with a materialist content and attempted pantheistically to reconcile the antithesis between mind and matter. Thus, ultimately, the Hegelian system represents merely a materialism idealistically turned upside down in method and content.
It is, therefore, comprehensible that Starcke in his characterization of Feuerbach first of all investigates the latter’s position in regard to this fundamental question of the relation of thinking and being. After a short introduction, in which the views of the preceding philosophers, particularly since Kant, are described in unnecessarily ponderous philosophical language, and in which Hegel, by an all too formalistic adherence to certain passages of his works, gets far less his due, there follows a detailed description of the course of development of Feuerbach’s “metaphysics” itself, as this course was successively reflected in those writings of this philosopher which have a bearing here. This description is industriously and lucidly elaborated; only, like the whole book, it is loaded with a ballast of philosophical phraseology by no means everywhere unavoidable, which is the more disturbing in its effect the less the author keeps to the manner of expression of one and the same school, or even of Feuerbach himself, and the more he interjects expressions of very different tendencies, especially of the tendencies now rampant and calling themselves philosophical.
The course of evolution of Feuerbach is that of a Hegelian — a never quite orthodox Hegelian, it is true — into a materialist; an evolution which at a definite stage necessitates a complete rupture with the idealist system of his predecessor. With irresistible force, Feuerbach is finally driven to the realization that the Hegelian premundane existence of the “absolute idea”, the “pre-existence of the logical categories” before the world existed, is nothing more than the fantastic survival of the belief in the existence of an extra-mundane creator; that the material, sensuously perceptible world to which we ourselves belong is the only reality; and that our consciousness and thinking, however supra-sensuous they may seem, are the product of a material, bodily organ, the brain. Matter is not a product of mind, but mind itself is merely the highest product of matter. This is, of course, pure materialism. But, having got so far, Feuerbach stops short. He cannot overcome the customary philosophical prejudice, prejudice not against the thing but against the name materialism. He says:
“To me materialism is the foundation of the edifice of human essence and knowledge; but to me it is not what it is to the physiologist, to the natural scientists in the narrower sense, for example, to Moleschott, and necessarily is from their standpoint and profession, namely, the edifice itself. Backwards I fully agree with the materialists; but not forwards.”
Here, Feuerbach lumps together the materialism that is a general world outlook resting upon a definite conception of the relation between matter and mind, and the special form in which this world outlook was expressed at a definite historical stage — namely, in the 18th century. More than that, he lumps it with the shallow, vulgarized form in which the materialism of the 18th century continues to exist today in the heads of naturalists and physicians, the form which was preached on their tours in the fifties by Buchner, Vogt, and Moleschott. But just as idealism underwent a series of stages of development, so also did materialism. With each epoch-making discovery even in the sphere of natural science, it has to change its form; and after history was also subjected to materialistic treatment, a new avenue of development has opened here, too.
The materialism of the last century was predominantly mechanical, because at that time, of all natural sciences, only mechanics, and indeed only the mechanics of solid bodies — celestial and terrestrial — in short, the mechanics of gravity, had come to any definite close. Chemistry at that time existed only in its infantile, phlogistic form [A]. Biology still lay in swaddling clothes; vegetable and animal organisms had been only roughly examined and were explained by purely mechanical causes. What the animal was to Descartes, man was to the materialists of the 18th century — a machine. This exclusive application of the standards of mechanics to processes of a chemical and organic nature — in which processes the laws of mechanics are, indeed, also valid, but are pushed into the backgrounds by other, higher laws — constitutes the first specific but at that time inevitable limitations of classical French materialism.
The second specific limitation of this materialism lay in its inability to comprehend the universe as a process, as matter undergoing uninterrupted historical development. This was in accordance with the level of the natural science of that time, and with the metaphysical, that is, anti-dialectical manner of philosophizing connected with it. Nature, so much was known, was in eternal motion. But according to the ideas of that time, this motion turned, also eternally, in a circle and therefore never moved from the spot; it produced the same results over and over again. This conception was at that time inevitable. The Kantian theory of the origin of the Solar System [that the Sun and planets originated from incandescent rotating nebulous masses] had been put forward but recently and was still regarded merely as a curiosity. The history of the development of the Earth, geology, was still totally unknown, and the conception that the animate natural beings of today are the result of a long sequence of development from the simple to the complex could not at that time scientifically be put forward at all. The unhistorical view of nature was therefore inevitable. We have the less reason to reproach the philosophers of the 18th century on this account since the same thing is found in Hegel. According to him, nature, as a mere “alienation” of the idea, is incapable of development in time — capable only of extending its manifoldness in space, so that it displays simultaneously and alongside of one another all the stages of development comprised in it, and is condemned to an eternal repetition of the same processes. This absurdity of a development in space, but outside of time — the fundamental condition of all development — Hegel imposes upon nature just at the very time when geology, embryology, the physiology of plants and animals, and organic chemistry were being built up, and when everywhere on the basis of these new sciences brilliant foreshadowings of the later theory of evolution were appearing (for instance, Goethe and Lamarck). But the system demanded it; hence the method, for the sake of the system, had to become untrue to itself.
This same unhistorical conception prevailed also in the domain of history. Here the struggle against the remnants of the Middle Ages blurred the view. The Middle Ages were regarded as a mere interruption of history by a thousand years of universal barbarism. The great progress made in the Middle Ages — the extension of the area of European culture, the viable great nations taking form there next to each other, and finally the enormous technical progress of the 14th and 15th centuries — all this was not seen. Thus a rational insight into the great historical interconnectedness was made impossible, and history served at best as a collection of examples and illustrations for the use of philosophers.
The vulgarizing pedlars, who in Germany in the fifties dabbled in materialism, by no means overcame this limitation of their teachers. All the advances of natural science which had been made in the meantime served them only as new proofs against the existence of a creator of the world; and, indeed, they did not in the least make it their business to develop the theory any further. Though idealism was at the end of its tether and was dealt a death-blow by the Revolution of 1848, it had the satisfaction of seeing that materialism had for the moment fallen lower still. Feuerbach was unquestionably right when he refused to take responsibility for this materialism; only he should not have confounded the doctrines of these itinerant preachers with materialism in general.
Here, however, there are two things to be pointed out. First, even during Feuerbach’s lifetime, natural science was still in that process of violent fermentation which only during the last 15 years had reached a clarifying, relative conclusion. New scientific data were acquired to a hitherto unheard-of extent, but the establishing of interrelations, and thereby the bringing of order into this chaos of discoveries following closely upon each other’s heels, has only quite recently become possible. It is true that Feuerbach had lived to see all three of the decisive discoveries — that of the cell, the transformation of energy, and the theory of evolution named after Darwin. But how could the lonely philosopher, living in rural solitude, be able sufficiently to follow scientific developments in order to appreciate at their full value discoveries which natural scientists themselves at that time either still contested or did not know how to make adequate use of? The blame for this falls solely upon the wretched conditions in Germany, in consequence of which cobweb-spinning eclectic flea-crackers had taken possession of the chairs of philosophy, while Feuerbach, who towered above them all, had to rusticate and grow sour in a little village. It is therefore not Feuerbach’s fault that this historical conception of nature, which had now become possible and which removed all the one-sidedness of French materialism, remained inaccessible to him.
Secondly, Feuerbach is quite correct in asserting that exclusively natural-scientific materialism is indeed “the foundation of the edifice of human knowledge, but not the edifice itself”. For we live not only in nature but also in human society, and this also no less than nature has its history of development and its science. It was therefore a question of bringing the science of society, that is, the sum total of the so-called historical and philosophical sciences, into harmony with the materialist foundation, and of reconstructing it thereupon. But it did not fall to Feuerbach’s lot to do this. In spite of the “foundation”, he remained here bound by the traditional idealist fetters, a fact which he recognizes in these words: “Backwards I agree with the materialists, but not forwards!”
But it was Feuerbach himself who did not go “forwards” here; in the social domain, who did not get beyond his standpoint of 1840 or 1844. And this was again chiefly due to this reclusion which compelled him, who, of all philosophers, was the most inclined to social intercourse, to produce thoughts out of his solitary head instead of in amicable and hostile encounters with other men of his calibre. Later, we shall see in detail how much he remained an idealist in this sphere.
It need only be added here that Starcke looks for Feuerbach’s idealism in the wrong place.
“Feuerbach is an idealist; he believes in the progress of mankind.” (p.19)
“The foundation, the substructure of the whole, remains nevertheless idealism. Realism for us is nothing more than a protection again aberrations, while we follow our ideal trends. Are not compassion, love, and enthusiasm for truth and justice ideal forces?” (p.VIII)
In the first place, idealism here means nothing, but the pursuit of ideal aims. But these necessarily have to do at the most with Kantian idealism and its “categorical imperative”; however, Kant himself called his philosophy “transcendental idealism” by no means because he dealt therein also with ethical ideals, but for quite other reasons, as Starcke will remember. The superstitition that philosophical idealism is pivoted round a belief in ethical, that is, social, ideals, arose outside philosophy, among the German philistines, who learned by heart from Schiller’s poems the few morsels of philosophical culture they needed. No one has criticized more severely the impotent “categorical imperative” of Kant — impotent because it demands the impossible, and therefore never attains to any reality — no one has more cruelly derided the philistine sentimental enthusiasm for unrealizable ideals purveyed by Schiller than precisely the complete idealist Hegel (see, for example, his Phenomenology).
In the second place, we simply cannot get away from the fact that everything that sets men acting must find its way through their brains — even eating and drinking, which begins as a consequence of the sensation of hunger or thirst transmitted through the brain, and ends as a result of the sensation of satisfaction likewise transmitted through the brain. The influences of the external world upon man express themselves in his brain, are reflected therein as feelings, impulses, volitions — in short, as “ideal tendencies”, and in this form become “ideal powers”. If, then, a man is to be deemed an idealist because he follows “ideal tendencies” and admits that “ideal powers” have an influence over him, then every person who is at all normally developed is a born idealist and how, in that case, can there still be any materialists?
In the third place, the conviction that humanity, at least at the present moment, moves on the whole in a progressive direction has absolutely nothing to do with the antagonism between materialism and idealism. The French materialists no less than the deists Voltaire and Rousseau held this conviction to an almost fanatical degree, and often enough made the greatest personal sacrifices for it. If ever anybody dedicated his whole life to the “enthusiasm for truth and justice” — using this phrase in the good sense — it was Diderot, for instance. If, therefore, Starcke declares all this to be idealism, this merely proves that the word materialism, and the whole antagonism between the two trends, has lost all meaning for him here.
The fact is that Starcke, although perhaps unconsciously, in this makes an unpardonable concession to the traditional philistine prejudice against the word materialism resulting from its long-continued defamation by the priests. By the word materialism, the philistine understands gluttony, drunkenness, lust of the eye, lust of the flesh, arrogance, cupidity, avarice, covetousness, profit-hunting, and stock-exchange swindling — in short, all the filthy vices in which he himself indulges in private. By the word idealism he understands the belief in virtue, universal philanthropy, and in a general way a “better world”, of which he boasts before others but in which he himself at the utmost believes only so long as he is having the blues or is going through the bankruptcy consequent upon his customary “materialist” excesses. It is then that he sings his favorite song, What is man? — Half beast, half angel.
For the rest, Starcke takes great pains to defend Feuerbach against the attacks and doctrines of the vociferous assistant professors who today go by the name of philosophers in Germany. For people who are interested in this afterbirth of classical German philosophy this is, of course, a matter of importance; for Starcke himself it may have appeared necessary. We, however, will spare the reader this.
 
Part 3: Feuerbach
 

 
(1) Among savages and lower barbarians the idea is still universal that the human forms which appear in dreams are souls which have temporarily left their bodies; the real man is, therefore, held responsible for acts committed by his dream apparition against the dreamer. Thus Imthurn found this belief current, for example, among the Indians of Guiana in 1884.
[A] Phlogistic Theory: The theory prevailing in chemistry during the 17th and 18th centuries that combustion takes place due to the presence in certain bodies of a special substance named phlogiston.

Table of Contents: Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy



==========

## III







Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy - Part 3: Feuerbach



Frederick Engels
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy

Part 3: Feuerbach

 

The real idealism of Feuerbach becomes evident as soon as we come to his philosophy of religion and ethics. He by no means wishes to abolish religion; he wants to perfect it. Philosophy itself must be absorbed in religion.
“The periods of humanity are distinguished only by religious changes. A historical movement is fundamental only when it is rooted in the hearts of men. The heart is not a form of religion, so that the latter should exist also in the heart; the heart is the essence of religion.” (Quoted by Starcke, p.168.)
According to Feuerbach, religion is the relation between human beings based on the affections, the relation based on the heart, which relation until now has sought its truth in a fantastic mirror image of reality — in the mediation of one or many gods, the fantastic mirror images of human qualities — but now finds it directly and without any mediation in the love between “I” and “Thou”. Thus, finally, with Feuerbach sex love becomes one of the highest forms, if not the highest form, of the practice of his new religion.
Now relations between human beings, based on affection, and especially between the two sexes, have existed as long as mankind has. Sex love in particular has undergone a development and won a place during the last 800 years which has made it a compulsory pivotal point of all poetry during this period. The existing positive religions have limited themselves to the bestowal of a higher consecration upon state-regulated sex love — that is, upon the marriage laws — and they could all disappear tomorrow without changing in the slightest the practice of love and friendship. Thus the Christian religion in France, as a matter of fact, so completely disappeared in the year 1793–95 that even Napoleon could not re-introduce it without opposition and difficulty; and this without any need for a substitute in Feuerbach’s sense, making itself in the interval.
Feuerbach’s idealism consists here in this: he does not simply accept mutual relations based on reciprocal inclination between human beings, such as sex love, friendship, compassion, self-sacrifice, etc., as what they are in themselves — without associating them with any particular religion which to him, too, belongs to the past; but instead he asserts that they will attain their full value only when consecrated by the name of religion. The chief thing for him is not that these purely human relations exist, but that they shall be conceived of as the new, true, religion. They are to have full value only after they have been marked with a religious stamp. Religion is derived from religare [“to bind”] and meant, originally, a bond. Therefore, every bond between two people is a religion. Such etymological tricks are the last resort of idealist philosophy. Not what the word means according to the historical development of its actual use, but what it ought to mean according to its derivation is what counts. And so sex love, and the intercourse between the sexes, is apotheosized to a religion, merely in order that the word religion, which is so dear to idealistic memories, may not disappear from the language. The Parisian reformers of the Louis Blanc trend used to speak in precisely the same way in the forties. They, likewise, could conceive of a man without religion only as a monster, and used to say to us: “Donc, l’atheisme c’est votre religion!” [“Well, then atheism is your religion!”] If Feuerbach wishes to establish a true religion upon the basis of an essentially materialist conception of nature, that is the same as regarding modern chemistry as true alchemy. If religion can exist without its god, alchemy can exist without its philosopher’s stone. By the way, there exists a very close connection between alchemy and religion. The philosopher’s stone has many godlike properties and the Egyptian-Greek alchemists of the first two centuries of our era had a hand in the development of Christian doctrines, as the data given by Kopp and Bertholet have proved.
Feuerbach’s assertion that “the periods of humanity are distinguished only by religious changes” is decidedly false. Great historical turning-points have been accompanied by religious changes only so far as the three world religions which have existed up to the present — Buddhism, Christianity, and Islam — are concerned. The old tribal and national religions, which arose spontaneously, did not proselytize and lost all their power of resistance as soon as the independence of the tribe or people was lost. For the Germans, it was sufficient to have simple contact with the decaying Roman world empire and with its newly adopted Christian world religion which fitted its economic, political, and ideological conditions. Only with these world religions, arisen more or less artificially, particularly Christianity and Islam, do we find that the more general historical movements acquire a religious imprint. Even in regard to Christianity, the religious stamp in revolutions of really universal significance is restricted to the first stages of the bourgeoisie’s struggle for emancipation — from the 13th to the 17th century — and is to be accounted for, not as Feuerbach thinks by the hearts of men and their religious needs, but by the entire previous history of the Middle Ages, which knew no other form of ideology than religion and theology. But when the bourgeoisie of the 18th century was strengthened enough likewise to posses an ideology of its own, suited to its own class standpoint, it made its great and conclusive revolution — the French —, appealing exclusively to juristic and political ideas, and troubling itself with religion only in so far as it stood in its way. But it never occurred to it to put a new religion in place of the old. Everyone knows how Robespierre failed in his attempt [to set up a religion of the “highest being”].
The possibility of purely human sentiments in our intercourse with other human beings has nowadays been sufficiently curtailed by the society in which we must live, which is based upon class antagonism and class rule. We have no reason to curtail it still more by exalting these sentiments to a religion. And similarly the understanding of the great historical class struggles has already been sufficiently obscured by current historiography, particularly in Germany, so that there is also no need for us to make such an understanding totally impossible by transforming the history of these struggles into a mere appendix of ecclesiastical history. Already here it becomes evident how far today we have moved beyond Feuerbach. His “finest” passages in glorification of his new religion of love are totally unreadable today.
The only religion which Feuerbach examines seriously is Christianity, the world religion of the Occident, based upon monotheism. He proves that the Christian god is only a fantastic reflection, a mirror image, of man. Now, this god is, however, himself the product of a tedious process of abstraction, the concentrated quintessence of the numerous earlier tribal and national gods. And man, whose image this god is, is therefore also not a real man, but likewise the quintessence of the numerous real men, man in the abstract, therefore himself again a mental image. Feuerbach, who on every page preaches sensuousness, absorption in the concrete, in actuality, becomes thoroughly abstract as soon as he begins to talk of any other than mere sex relations between human beings.
Of these relations, only one aspect appeals to him: morality. And here we are again struck by Feuerbach’s astonishing poverty when compared to Hegel. The latter’s ethics, or doctrine of moral conduct, is the philosophy of right, and embraces: (1) abstract right; (2) morality; (3) social ethics [Sittlichkeit], under which are comprised: the family, civil society, and the state.
Here the content is as realistic as the form is idealistic. Besides morality, the whole sphere of law, economy, politics is here included. With Feuerbach, it is just the reverse. In the form he is realistic since he takes his start from man; but there is absolutely no mention of the world in which this man lives; hence, this man remains always the same abstract man who occupied the field in the philosophy of religion. For this man is not born of woman; he issues, as from a chrysalis, from the god of monotheistic religions. He therefore does not live in a real world historically come into being and historically determined. True, he has intercourse with other men; however, each one of them is just as much an abstraction as he himself. In his philosophy of religion we still had men and women, but in his ethics even this last distinction disappears. Feuerbach, to be sure, at long intervals makes such statements as: “Man thinks differently in a palace and in a hut.” “If because of hunger, of misery, you have no stuff in your body, you likewise have no stuff for morality in your head, in your mind, or heart.” “Politics must become our religion,” etc.
But Feuerbach is absolutely incapable of achieving anything with these maxims. They remain mere phrases, and even Starcke has to admit that for Feuerbach politics constituted an impassable frontier and the “science of society, sociology, was terra incognita to him”.
He appears just as shallow, in comparison with Hegel, in his treatment of the antithesis of good and evil.
“One believes one is saying something great,” Hegel remarks, “if one says that ‘man is naturally good’. But one forgets that one says something far greater when one says ‘man is naturally evil’.”
With Hegel, evil is the form in which the motive force of historical development presents itself. This contains the twofold meaning that, on the one hand, each new advance necessarily appears as a sacrilege against things hallowed, as a rebellion against condition, though old and moribund, yet sanctified by custom; and that, on the other hand, it is precisely the wicked passions of man — greed and lust for power — which, since the emergence of class antagonisms, serve as levers of historical development — a fact of which the history of feudalism and of the bourgeoisie, for example, constitutes a single continual proof. But it does not occur to Feuerbach to investigate the historical role of moral evil. To him, history is altogether an uncanny domain in which he feels ill at ease. Even his dictum: “Man as he sprang originally from nature was only a mere creature of nature, not a man. Man is a product of man, of culture, of history” — with him, even this dictum remains absolutely sterile.
What Feuerbach has to tell us about morals can, therefore, only be extremely meagre. The urge towards happiness is innate in man, and must therefore form the basis of all morality. But the urge towards happiness is subject to a double correction. First, by the natural consequences of our actions: after the debauch comes the “blues”, and habitual excess is followed by illness. Secondly, by its social consequences: if we do not respect the similar urge of other people towards happiness they will defend themselves, and so interfere with our own urge toward happiness. Consequently, in order to satisfy our urge, we must be in a position to appreciate rightly the results of our conduct and must likewise allow others an equal right to seek happiness. Rational self-restraint with regard to ourselves, and love — again and again love! — in our intercourse with others — these are the basic laws of Feuerbach’s morality; from them, all others are derived. And neither the most spirited utterances of Feuerbach nor the strongest eulogies of Starcke can hide the tenuity and banality of these few propositions.
Only very exceptionally, and by no means to this and other people’s profit, can an individual satisfy his urge towards happiness by preoccupation with himself. Rather, it requires preoccupation with the outside world, with means to satisfy his needs — that is to say, food, an individual of the opposite sex, books, conversation, argument, activities, objects for use and working up. Feuerbach’s morality either presupposes that these means and objects of satisfaction are given to every individual as a matter of course, or else it offers only inapplicable good advice and is, therefore, not worth a brass farthing to people who are without these means. And Feuerbach himself states this in plain terms:
“Man thinks differently in a palace and in a hut. If because of hunger, of misery, you have no stuff in your body, you likewise have no stuff for morality in your head, in your mind, or heart.”
Do matters fare any better in regard to the equal right of others to satisfy their urge towards happiness? Feuerbach posed this claim as absolute, as holding good for all times and circumstances. But since when has it been valid? Was there ever in antiquity between slaves and masters, or in the Middle Ages between serfs and barons, any talk about an equal right to the urge towards happiness? Was not the urge towards happiness of the oppressed class sacrificed ruthlessly and “by the right of law” to that of the ruling class? Yes, that was indeed immoral; nowadays, however, equality of rights is recognized. Recognized in words ever since and inasmuch as the bourgeoisie, in its fight against feudalism and in the development of capitalist production, was compelled to abolish all privileges of estate, that is, personal privileges, and to introduce the equality of all individuals before law, first in the sphere in private law, then gradually also in the sphere of public law. But the urge towards happiness thrives only to a trivial extent on ideal rights. To the greatest extent of all it thrives on material means; and capitalist production takes care to ensure that the great majority of those equal rights shall get only what is essential for bare existence. Capitalist production has, therefore, little more respect, if indeed any more, for the equal right to the urge towards happiness of the majority than had slavery or serfdom. And are we better off in regard to the mental means of happiness, the educational means? Is not even “the schoolmaster of Sadowa” a mythical person? [A]
More. According to Feuerbach’s theory of morals, the Stock Exchange is the highest temple of moral conduct, provided only that one always speculates right. If my urge towards happiness leads me to the Stock Exchange, and if there I correctly gauge the consequences of my actions so that only agreeable results and no disadvantages ensue — that is, I always win — then I am fulfilling Feuerbach’s precept. Moreover, I do not thereby interfere with the equal right of another person to pursue his happiness; for that other man went to the Exchange just as voluntarily as I did and in concluding the speculative transaction with me he has followed his urge towards happiness as I have followed mine. If he loses his money, his action is ipso facto proved to have been unethical, because of his bad reckoning, and since I have given him the punishment he deserves, I can even slap my chest proudly, like a modern Rhadamanthus. Love, too, rules on the Stock Exchange, in so far as it is not simply a sentimental figure of speech, for each finds in others the satisfaction of his own urge towards happiness, which is just what love ought to achieve and how it acts in practice. And if I gamble with correct prevision of the consequences of my operations, and therefore with success, I fulfil all the strictest injunctions of Feuerbachian morality — and becomes a rich man into the bargain. In other words, Feuerbach’s morality is cut exactly to the pattern of modern capitalist society, little as Feuerbach himself might desire or imagine it.
But love! — yes, with Feuerbach, love is everywhere and at all times the wonder-working god who should help to surmount all difficulties of practical life — and at that in a society which is split into classes with diametrically opposite interests. At this point, the last relic of the revolutionary character disappears from his philosophy, leaving only the old cant: Love one another — fall into each other’s arms regardless of distinctions of sex or estate — a universal orgy of reconciliation!
In short, the Feuerbachian theory of morals fares like all its predecessors. It is designed to suit all periods, all peoples and all conditions, and precisely for that reason it is never and nowhere applicable. It remains, as regards the real world, as powerless as Kant’s categorical imperative. In reality every class, even every profession, has its own morality, and even this it violates whenever it can do so with impunity. And love, which is to unite all, manifests itself in wars, altercations, lawsuits, domestic broils, divorces, and every possible exploitation of one by another.
Now how was it possible that the powerful impetus given by Feuerbach turned out to be so unfruitful for himself? For the simple reason that Feuerbach himself never contrives to escape from the realm of abstraction — for which he has a deadly hatred — into that of living reality. He clings fiercely to nature and man; but nature and man remain mere words with him. He is incapable of telling us anything definite either about real nature or real men. But from the abstract man of Feuerbach, one arrives at real living men only when one considers them as participants in history. And that is what Feuerbach resisted,and therefore the year 1848, which he did not understand, meant to him merely the final break with the real world, retirement into solitude. The blame for this again falls chiefly on the conditions them obtaining in Germany, which condemned him to rot away miserably.
But the step which Feuerbach did not take nevertheless had to be taken. The cult of abstract man, which formed the kernel of Feuerbach’s new religion, had to be replaced by the science of real men and of their historical development. This further development of Feuerbach’s standpoint beyond Feuerbach was inaugurated by Marx in 1845 in The Holy Family.
 
Chapter 4: Marx
 

 
[A] The schoolmaster of Sadowa: An expression currently used by German bourgeois publicists after the victory of the Prussians at Sadowa (in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866), the implications being that the Prussian victory was to be attributed to the superiority of the Prussian system of public education.
Table of Contents: Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy



==========

## IV







Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy - Part 4: Marx



Frederick Engels
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy

Part 4: Marx

 

Strauss, Bauer, Stirner, Feuerbach — these were the offshoots of Hegelian philosophy, in so far as they did not abandon the field of philosophy. Strauss, after his Life of Jesus and Dogmatics, produced only literary studies in philosophy and ecclesiastical history after the fashion of Renan. Bauer only achieved something in the field of the history of the origin of Christianity, though what he did here was important. Stirner remained a curiosity, even after Bakunin blended him with Proudhon and labelled the blend “anarchism”. Feuerbach alone was of significance as a philosopher. But not only did philosophy — claimed to soar above all special sciences and to be the science of sciences connecting them — remain to him an impassable barrier, an inviolable holy thing, but as a philosopher, too, he stopped half-incapable of disposing of Hegel through criticism; he simply threw him aside as useless, while he himself, compared with the encyclopaedic wealth of the Hegelian system, achieved nothing positive beyond a turgid religion of love and a meagre, impotent morality.
Out of the dissolution of the Hegelian school, however, there developed still another tendency, the only one which has borne real fruit. And this tendency is essentially connected with the name of Marx (1).
The separation from Hegelian philosophy was here also the result of a return to the materialist standpoint. That means it was resolved to comprehend the real world — nature and history — just as it presents itself to everyone who approaches it free from preconceived idealist crotchets. It was decided mercilessly to sacrifice every idealist fancy which could not be brought into harmony with the facts conceived in their own and not in a fantastic interconnection. And materialism means nothing more than this. But here the materialistic world outlook was taken really seriously for the first time and was carried through consistently — at least in its basic features — in all domains of knowledge concerned.
Hegel was not simply put aside. On the contrary, a start was made from his revolutionary side, described above, from the dialectical method. But in its Hegelian form, this method was unusable. According to Hegel, dialectics is the self-development of the concept. The absolute concept does not only exist — unknown where — from eternity, it is also the actual living soul of the whole existing world. It develops into itself through all the preliminary stages which are treated at length in the Logic and which are all included in it. Then it “alienates” itself by changing into nature, where, unconscious of itself, disguised as a natural necessity, it goes through a new development and finally returns as man’s consciousness of himself. This self-consciousness then elaborates itself again in history in the crude form until finally the absolute concept again comes to itself completely in the Hegelian philosophy. According to Hegel, therefore, the dialectical development apparent in nature and history — that is, the causal interconnection of the progressive movement from the lower to the higher, which asserts itself through all zigzag movements and temporary retrogression — is only a copy [Abklatsch] of the self-movement of the concept going on from eternity, no one knows where, but at all events independently of any thinking human brain. This ideological perversion had to be done away with. We again took a materialistic view of the thoughts in our heads, regarding them as images [Abbilder] of real things instead of regarding real things as images of this or that stage of the absolute concept. Thus dialectics reduced itself to the science of the general laws of motion, both of the external world and of human thought — two sets of laws which are identical in substance, but differ in their expression in so far as the human mind can apply them consciously, while in nature and also up to now for the most part in human history, these laws assert themselves unconsciously, in the form of external necessity, in the midst of an endless series of seeming accidents. Thereby the dialectic of concepts itself became merely the conscious reflex of the dialectical motion of the real world and thus the dialectic of Hegel was turned over; or rather, turned off its head, on which it was standing, and placed upon its feet. And this materialist dialectic, which for years has been our best working tool and our sharpest weapon, was, remarkably enough, discovered not only by us but also, independently of us and even of Hegel, by a German worker, Joseph Dietzgen. (2)
In this way, however, the revolutionary side of Hegelian philosophy was again taken up and at the same time freed from the idealist trimmings which with Hegel had prevented its consistent execution. The great basic thought that the world is not to be comprehended as a complex of readymade things, but as a complex of processes, in which the things apparently stable no less than their mind images in our heads, the concepts, go through an uninterrupted change of coming into being and passing away, in which, in spite of all seeming accidentally and of all temporary retrogression, a progressive development asserts itself in the end — this great fundamental thought has, especially since the time of Hegel, so thoroughly permeated ordinary consciousness that in this generality it is now scarcely ever contradicted. But to acknowledge this fundamental thought in words and to apply it in reality in detail to each domain of investigation are two different things. If, however, investigation always proceeds from this standpoint, the demand for final solutions and eternal truths ceases once for all; one is always conscious of the necessary limitation of all acquired knowledge, of the fact that it is conditioned by the circumstances in which it was acquired. On the other hand, one no longer permits oneself to be imposed upon by the antithesis, insuperable for the still common old metaphysics, between true and false, good and bad, identical and different, necessary and accidental. One knows that these antitheses have only a relative validity; that that which is recognized now as true has also its latent false side which will later manifest itself, just as that which is now regarded as false has also its true side by virtue of which it could previously be regarded as true. One knows that what is maintained to be necessary is composed of sheer accidents and that the so-called accidental is the form behind which necessity hides itself — and so on.
The old method of investigation and thought which Hegel calls “metaphysical”, which preferred to investigate things as given, as fixed and stable, a method the relics of which still strongly haunt people’s minds, had a great deal of historical justification in its day. It was necessary first to examine things before it was possible to examine processes. One had first to know what a particular thing was before one could observe the changes it was undergoing. And such was the case with natural science. The old metaphysics, which accepted things as finished objects, arose from a natural science which investigated dead and living things as finished objects. But when this investigation had progressed so far that it became possible to take the decisive step forward, that is, to pass on the systematic investigation of the changes which these things undergo in nature itself, then the last hour of the old metaphysic struck in the realm of philosophy also. And in fact, while natural science up to the end of the last century was predominantly a collecting science, a science of finished things, in our century it is essentially a systematizing science, a science of the processes, of the origin and development of these things and of the interconnection which binds all these natural processes into one great whole. Physiology, which investigates the processes occurring in plant and animal organisms; embryology, which deals with the development of individual organisms from germs to maturity; geology, which investigates the gradual formation of the Earth’s surface — all these are the offspring of our century.
But, above all, there are three great discoveries which have enabled our knowledge of the interconnection of natural processes to advance by leaps and bounds:
First, the discovery of the cell as the unit from whose multiplication and differentiation the whole plant and animal body develops. Not only is the development and growth of all higher organisms recognized to proceed according to a single general law, but the capacity of the cell to change indicates the way by which organisms can change their species and thus go through a more than individual development.
Second, the transformation of energy, which has demonstrated to us that all the so-called forces operative in the first instance in inorganic nature — mechanical force and its complement, so-called potential energy, heat, radiation (light, or radiant heat), electricity, magnetism, and chemical energy — are different forms of manifestation of universal motion, which pass into one another in definite proportions so that in place of a certain quantity of the one which disappears, a certain quantity of another makes its appearance and thus the whole motion of nature is reduced to this incessant process of transformation from one form into another.
Finally, the proof which Darwin first developed in connected form that the stock of organic products of nature environing us today, including man, is the result of a long process of evolution from a few originally unicellular germs, and that these again have arisen from protoplasm or albumen, which came into existence by chemical means.
Thanks to these three great discoveries, and the other immense advances in natural science, we have now arrived at the point where we can demonstrate the interconnection between the processes in nature not only in particular spheres but also the interconnection of these particular spheres on the whole, and so can present in an approximately systematic form a comprehensive view of the interconnection in nature by means of the facts provided by an empirical science itself. To furnish this comprehensive view was formerly the task of so-called natural philosophy. It could do this only by putting in place of the real but as yet unknown interconnections ideal, fancied ones, filling in the missing facts by figments of the mind and bridging the actual gaps merely in imagination. In the course of this procedure it conceived many brilliant ideas and foreshadowed many later discoveries, but it also produced a considerable amount of nonsense, which indeed could not have been otherwise. Today, when one needs to comprehend the results of natural scientific investigation only dialetically, that is, in the sense of their own interconnection, in order to arrive at a “system of nature” sufficient for our time; when the dialectical character of this interconnection is forcing itself against their will even into the metaphysically-trained minds of the natural scientists, today natural philosophy is finally disposed of. Every attempt at resurrecting it would be not only superfluous but a step backwards.
But what is true of nature, which is hereby recognized also as a historical process of development, is likewise true of the history of society in all its branches and of the totality of all sciences which occupy themselves with things human (and divine). Here, too, the philosophy of history, of right, of religion, etc., has consisted in the substitution of an interconnection fabricated in the mind of the philosopher for the real interconnection to be demonstrated in the events; has consisted in the comprehension of history as a whole as well as in its separate parts, as the gradual realization of ideas — and naturally always only the pet ideas of the philosopher himself. According to this, history worked unconsciously but of necessity towards a certain ideal goal set in advance — as, for example, in Hegel, towards the realization of his absolute idea — and the unalterable trend towards this absolute idea formed the inner interconnection in the events of history. A new mysterious providence — unconscious or gradually coming into consciousness — was thus put in the place of the real, still unknown interconnection. Here, therefore, just as in the realm of nature, it was necessary to do away with these fabricated, artificial interconnections by the discovery of the real ones — a task which ultimately amounts to the discovery of the general laws of motion which assert themselves as the ruling ones in the history of human society.
In one point, however, the history of the development of society proves to be essentially different from that of nature. In nature — in so far as we ignore man’s reaction upon nature — there are only blind, unconscious agencies acting upon one another, out of whose interplay the general law comes into operation. Nothing of all that happens — whether in the innumerable apparent accidents observable upon the surface, or in the ultimate results which confirm the regularity inherent in these accidents — happens as a consciously desired aim. In the history of society, on the contrary, the actors are all endowed with consciousness, are men acting with deliberation or passion, working towards definite goals; nothing happens without a conscious purpose, without an intended aim. But this distinction, important as it is for historical investigation, particularly of single epochs and events, cannot alter the fact that the course of history is governed by inner general laws. For here, also, on the whole, in spite of the consciously desired aims of all individuals, accident apparently reigns on the surface. That which is willed happens but rarely; in the majority of instances the numerous desired ends cross and conflict with one another, or these ends themselves are from the outset incapable of realization, or the means of attaining them are insufficient. thus the conflicts of innumerable individual wills and individual actions in the domain of history produce a state of affairs entirely analogous to that prevailing in the realm of unconscious nature. The ends of the actions are intended, but the results which actually follow from these actions are not intended; or when they do seem to correspond to the end intended, they ultimately have consequences quite other than those intended. Historical events thus appear on the whole to be likewise governed by chance. But where on the surface accident holds sway, there actually it is always governed by inner, hidden laws, and it is only a matter of discovering these laws.
Men make their own history, whatever its outcome may be, in that each person follows his own consciously desired end, and it is precisely the resultant of these many wills operating in different directions, and of their manifold effects upon the outer world, that constitutes history. Thus it is also a question of what the many individuals desire. The will is determined by passion or deliberation. But the levers which immediately determine passion or deliberation are of very different kinds. Partly they may be external objects, partly ideal motives, ambition, “enthusiasm for truth and justice”, personal hatred, or even purely individual whims of all kinds. But, on the one hand, we have seen that the many individual wills active in history for the most part produce results quite other than those intended — often quite the opposite; that their motives, therefore, in relation to the total result are likewise of only secondary importance. On the other hand, the further question arises: What driving forces in turn stand behind these motives? What are the historical forces which transform themselves into these motives in the brains of the actors?
The old materialism never put this question to itself. Its conception of history, in so far as it has one at all, is therefore essentially pragmatic; it divides men who act in history into noble and ignoble and then finds that as a rule the noble are defrauded and the ignoble are victorious. hence, it follows for the old materialism that nothing very edifying is to be got from the study of history, and for us that in the realm of history the old materialism becomes untrue to itself because it takes the ideal driving forces which operate there as ultimate causes, instead of investigating what is behind them, what are the driving forces of these driving forces. This inconsistency does not lie in the fact that ideal driving forces are recognized, but in the investigation not being carried further back behind these into their motive causes. On the other hand, the philosophy of history, particularly as represented by Hegel, recognizes that the ostensible and also the really operating motives of men who act in history are by no means the ultimate causes of historical events; that behind these motives are other motive powers, which have to be discovered. But it does not seek these powers in history itself, it imports them rather from outside, from philosophical ideology, into history. Hegel, for example, instead of explaining the history of ancient Greece out of its own inner interconnections, simply maintains that it is nothing more than the working out of “forms of beautiful individuality”, the realization of a “work of art” as such. He says much in this connection about the old Greeks that is fine and profound, but that does not prevent us today from refusing to be put off with such an explanation, which is a mere manner of speech.
When, therefore, it is a question of investigating the driving powers which — consciously or unconsciously, and indeed very often unconsciously — lie behind the motives of men who act in history and which constitute the real ultimate driving forces of history, then it is not a question so much of the motives of single individuals, however eminent, as of those motives which set in motion great masses, whole people, and again whole classes of the people in each people; and this, too, not merely for an instant, like the transient flaring up of a straw-fire which quickly dies down, but as a lasting action resulting in a great historical transformation. To ascertain the driving causes which here in the minds of acting masses and their leaders — to so-called great men — are reflected as conscious motives, clearly or unclearly, directly or in an ideological, even glorified, form — is the only path which can put us on the track of the laws holding sway both in history as a whole, and at particular periods and in particular lands. Everything which sets men in motion must go through their minds; but what form it will take in the mind will depend very much upon the circumstances. The workers have by no means become reconciled to capitalist machine industry, even though they no longer simply break the machines to pieces, as they still did in 1848 on the Rhine.
But while in all earlier periods the investigation of these driving causes of history was almost impossible — on account of the complicated and concealed interconnections between them and their effects — our present period has so far simplified these interconnections that the riddle could be solved. Since the establishment of large-scale industry — that is, at least since the European peace of 1815 — it has been no longer a secret to any man in England that the whole political struggle there pivoted on the claims to supremacy of two classes: the landed aristocracy and the bourgeoisie (middle class). In France, with the return of the Bourbons, the same fact was perceived, the historians of the Restoration period, from Thierry to Guisot, Mignet, and Thiers, speak of it everywhere as the key to the understanding of all French history since the Middle Ages. And since 1830, the working class, the proletariat, has been recognized in both countries as a third competitor for power. Conditions had become so simplified that one would have had to close one’s eyes deliberately not to see in the light of these three great classes and in the conflict of their interests the driving force of modern history — at least in the two most advanced countries.
But how did these classes come into existence? If it was possible at first glance still to ascribe the origin of the great, formerly feudal landed property — at least in the first instance — to political causes, to taking possession by force, this could not be done in regard to the bourgeoise and the proletariat. Here, the origin and development of two great classes was seen to lie clearly and palpably in purely economic causes. And it was just as clear that in the struggle between landed property and the bourgeoisie, no less than in the struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, it was a question, first and foremost, of economic interests, to the furtherance of which political power was intended to serve merely as a means. Bourgeoisie and proletariat both arose in consequences of a transformation of the economic conditions, more precisely, of the mode of production. The transition, first from guild handicrafts to manufacture, and then from manufacture to large-scale industry, with steam and mechanical power, had caused the development of these two classes. At a certain stage, the new productive forces set in motion by the bourgeoisie — in the first place the division of labor and the combination of many detail laborers [Teilarbeiter] in one general manufactory — and the conditions and requirements of exchange, developed through these productive forces, became incompatible with the existing order of production handed down by history and sanctified by law — that is to say, incompatible with the privileges of the guild and the numerous other personal and local privileges (which were only so many fetters to the unprivileged estates) of the feudal order to society. The productive forces represented by the bourgeoisie rebelled against the order of production represented by the feudal landlords and the guild-masters. The result is known, the feudal fetters were smashed, gradually in England, at one blow in France. In Germany, the process is not yet finished. But just as, at a definite stage of its development, manufacture came into conflict with the feudal order of production, so now large-scale industry has already come into conflict with the bourgeois order or production established in its place.Tied down by this order, by the narrow limits of the capitalist mode of production, this industry produces, on the one hand, an ever-increasingly proletarianziation of the great mass of the people, and on the other hand, an ever greater mass of unsalable products. Overproduction and mass misery, each the cause of the other — that is the absurd contradiction which is its outcome, and which of necessity calls for the liberation of the productive forces by means of a change in the mode of production.
In modern history at least it is, therefore, proved that all political struggles are class struggles, and all class struggles for emancipation, despite their necessarily political form — for every class struggle is a political struggle — turn ultimately on the question of economic emancipation. Therefore, here at least, the state — the political order — is the subordination, and civil society — the realm of economic relations — the decisive element. The traditional conception, to which Hegel, too, pays homage, saw in the state the determining element, and in civil society the element determined by it. Appearances correspond to this. As all the driving forces of the actions of any individual person must pass through his brain, and transform themselves into motives of his will in order to set him into action, so also all the needs of civil society — no matter which class happens to be the ruling one — must pass through the will of the state in order to secure general validity in the form of laws. That is the formal aspect of the matter — the one which is self-evident. The question arises, however, what is the content of this merely formal will — of the individual as well as of the state — and whence is this content derived? Why is just this willed and not something else? If we enquire into this, we discover that in modern history the will of the state is, on the whole, determined by the changing needs of civil society, but the supremacy of this or that class, in the last resort, by the development of the productive forces and relations of exchange.
But if even in our modern era, with its gigantic means of production and communication, the state is not an independent domain with an independent development, but one whose existence as well as development is to be explained in the last resort by the economic conditions of life of society, then this must be still more true of all earlier times when the production of the material life of man was not yet carried on with these abundant auxiliary means, and when, therefore, the necessity of such production must have exercised a still greater mastery over men. If the state even today, in the era of big industry and of railways, is on the whole only a reflection, in concentrated form, of the economic needs of the class controlling production, then this must have been much more so in an epoch when each generation of men was forced to spend a far greater part of its aggregate lifetime in satisfying material needs, and was therefore much more dependent on them than we are today. An examination of the history of earlier periods, as soon as it is seriously undertaken from this angle, most abundantly confirms this. But, of course, this cannot be gone into here.
If the state and public law are determined by economic relations, so, too, of course, is private law, which indeed in essence only sanctions the existing economic relations between individuals which are normal in the given circumstances. The form in which this happens can, however, vary considerably. It is possible, as happened in England, in harmony with the whole national development, to retain in the main the forms of the old feudal laws while giving them a bourgeois content; in fact, directly reading a bourgeois meaning into the feudal name. But, also, as happened in Western continental Europe, roman law, the first world law of a commodity-producing society, with its unsurpassably fine elaboration of all the essential legal relations of simple commodity owners (of buyers and sellers, debtors and creditors, contracts, obligations, etc.) can be taken as the foundation. In which case, for the benefit of a still petty-bourgeois and semi-feudal society, it can either be reduced to the level of such a society simply through judicial practice (common law) or, with the help of allegedly enlightened, moralizing jurists it can be worked into a special code of law to correspond with such social level — a code which in these circumstances will be a bad one also from the legal standpoint (for instance, Prussian Landrecht). But after a great bourgeois revolution it is, however, also possible for such a classic law code of bourgeois society as the French Code Civile to be worked out upon the basis of this same Roman Law. If, therefore, bourgeois legal rules merely express the economic life conditions of society in legal form, then they can do so well or ill according to circumstances.
The state presents itself to us as the first ideological power over man. Society creates for itself an organ for the safeguarding of its common interests against internal and external attacks. This organ is the state power. Hardly come into being, this organ makes itself independent vis-a-vis society; and, indeed, the more so, the more it becomes the organ of a particular class, the more it directly enforces the supremacy of that class. The fight of the oppressed class against the ruling class becomes necessarily a political fight, a fight first of all against the political dominance of this class. The consciousness of the interconnection between this political struggle and its economic basis becomes dulled and can be lost altogether. While this is not wholly the case with the participants, it almost always happens with the historians. Of the ancient sources on the struggles within the Roman Republic, only Appian tells us clearly and distinctly what was at issue in the last resort — namely, landed property.
But once the state has become an independent power vis-a-vis society, it produces forthwith a further ideology. It is indeed among professional politicians, theorists of public law, and jurists of private law, that the connection with economic facts gets lost for fair. Since in each particular case, the economic facts must assume the form of juristic motives in order to receive legal sanction; and since, in so doing, consideration of course has to be given to the whole legal system already in operation, the juristic form is, in consequence, made everything and the economic content nothing. Public law and private law are treated as independent spheres, each being capable of and needing a systematic presentation by the consistent elimination of all inner contradictions.
Still higher ideologies, that is, such as are still further removed from the material, economic basis, take the form of philosophy and religion. Here the interconnection between conceptions and their material conditions of existence becomes more and more complicated, more and more obscured by intermediate links. But the interconnection exists. Just as the whole Renaissance period, from the middle of the 15th century, was an essential product of the towns and, therefore, of the burghers, so also was the subsequently newly-awakened philosophy. Its content was in essence only the philosophical expression of the thoughts corresponding to the development of the small and middle burghers into a big bourgeoisie. Among last century’s Englishmen and Frenchmen who in many cases were just as much political economists as philosophers, this is clearly evident; and we have proved it above in regard to the Hegelian school.
We will now in addition deal only briefly with religion, since the latter stands further away from material life and seems to be most alien to it. Religion arose in very primitive times from erroneous, primitive conceptions of men about their own nature and external nature surrounding them. Every ideology, however, once it has arisen, develops in connection with the given concept-material, and develops this material further; otherwise, it would not be an ideology, that is, occupation with thoughts as with independent entities, developing independently and subject only to their own laws. In the last analysis, the material life conditions of the persons inside whose heads this thought process goes on determine the course of the process, which of necessity remains unknown to these persons, for otherwise there would be an end to all ideology. These original religious notions, therefore, which in the main are common to each group of kindred peoples, develop, after the group separates, in a manner peculiar to each people, according to the conditions of life falling to their lot. For a number of groups of peoples, and particularly for the Aryans (so-called Indo-Europeans) this process has been shown in detail by comparative mythology. The gods thus fashioned within each people were national gods, whose domain extended no farther than the national territory which they were to protect; on the other side of its boundaries, other gods held undisputed sway. They could continue to exist, in imagination, only as long as the nation existed; they fell with its fall. The Roman world empire, the economic conditions of whose origin we do not need to examine here, brought about this downfall of the old nationalities. The old national gods decayed, even those of the Romans, which also were patterned to suit only the narrow confines of the city of Rome. The need to complement the world empire by means of a world religion was clearly revealed in the attempts made to recognize all foreign gods that were the least bit respectable and provide altars for them in Rome alongside the native gods. But a new world religion is not to be made in this fashion, by imperial decree. The new world religion, Christianity, had already quietly come into being, out of a mixture of generalized Oriental, particularly Jewish, theology, and vulgarized Greek, particularly Stoic, philosophy. What it originally looked like has to be first laboriously discovered, since its official form, as it has been handed down to us, is merely that in which it became the state religion to which purpose it was adapted by the Council of Nicaea. The fact that already after 250 years it became the state religion suffices to show that it was the religion in correspondence with the conditions of the time. In the Middle Ages, in the same measure as feudalism developed, Christianity grew into the religious counterpart to it, with a corresponding feudal hierarchy. And when the burghers began to thrive, there developed, in opposition to feudal Catholicism, the Protestant heresy, which first appeared in Southern France among the Albigenses[A], at the time the cities there reached the highest point of their florescence. The Middle Ages had attached to theology all the other forms of ideology — philosophy, politics, jurisprudence — and made them subdivision of theology. It thereby constrained every social and political movement to take on a theological form. The sentiments of the masses were fed with religion to the exclusion of all else; it was therefore necessary to put forward their own interests in a religious guise in order to produce a great tempest. And just as the burghers from the beginning brought into being an appendage of propertyless urban plebeians, day laborers and servants of all kinds, belonging to no recognized social estate, precursors of the later proletariat, so likewise heresy soon became divided into a burgher-moderate heresy and a plebeian-revolutionary one, the latter an abomination to the burgher heretics themselves.
The ineradicability of the Protestant heresy corresponded to the invincibility of the rising burghers. When these burghers had become sufficiently strengthened, their struggle against the feudal nobility, which till then had been predominantly local, began to assume national dimensions. The first great action occurred in Germany — the so-called reformation. The burghers were neither powerful enough nor sufficiently developed to be able to unite under their banner the remaining rebellious estates — the plebeians of the towns, the lower nobility, and the peasants on the land. At first, the nobles were defeated; the peasants rose in a revolt which formed the peak of the whole revolutionary struggle; the cities left them in the lurch, and thus the revolution succumbed to the armies of the secular princes who reaped the whole profit. Thenceforward, Germany disappears for three centuries from the ranks of countries playing an independent active part in history. But, beside the German Luther appeared the Frenchman Calvin. With true French acuity, he put the bourgeois character of the Reformation in the forefront, republicanized and democratized the Church. While the Lutheran Reformation in Germany degenerated and reduced the country to rack and ruin, the Calvinist Reformation served as a banner for the republicans in Geneva, in Holland, and in Scotland, freed Holland from Spain and from the German Empire, and provided the ideological costume for the second act of the bourgeois revolution, which was taking place in England. Here, Calvinism justified itself as the true religious disguise of the interests of the bourgeoisie of that time, and on this account did not attain full recognition when the revolution ended in 1689 in a compromise between one part of the nobility and the bourgeoisie. The English state Church was re-established; but not in its earlier form of a Catholicism which had the king for its pope, being, instead, strongly Calvinized. The old state Church had celebrated the merry Catholic Sunday and had fought against the dull Calvinist one. The new, bourgeoisified Church introduced the latter, which adorns England to this day.
In France, the Calvinist minority was suppressed in 1685 and either Catholized or driven out of the country. But what was the good? Already at that time the freethinker Pierre Bayle was at the height of his activity, and in 1694 Voltaire was born. The forcible measures of Louis XIV only made it easier for the French bourgeoisie to carry through its revolution in the irreligious, exclusively political form which alone was suited to a developed bourgeoisie. Instead of Protestants, freethinkers took their seats in the national assemblies. Thereby Christianity entered into its final stage. It was incapable of doing any future service to any progressive class as the ideological garb of its aspirations. It became more and more the exclusive possession of the ruling classes; they apply it as a mere means of government, to keep the lower classes within bounds. Moreover, each of the different classes uses its own appropriate religion: the landed nobility — Catholic Jesuitism, or Protestant orthodoxy; the liberal and radical bourgeoisie — rationalism; and it makes little difference whether these gentlemen themselves believe in their respective religions or not.
We see, therefore: religion, once formed, always contains traditional material, just as in all ideological domains tradition forms a great conservative force. But the transformations which this material undergoes spring from class relations — that is to say, out of the economic relations of the people who execute these transformations. And here that is sufficient.
In the above, it could only be a question of giving a general sketch of the Marxist conception of history, at most with a few illustrations, as well. The proof must be derived from history itself; and, in this regard, it may be permitted to say that is has been sufficiently furnished in other writings. This conception, however, puts an end to philosophy in the realm of history, just as the dialectical conception of nature makes all natural philosophy both unnecessary and impossible. It is no longer a question anywhere of inventing interconnections from out of our brains, but of discovering them in the facts. For philosophy, which has been expelled from nature and history, there remains only the realm of pure thought, so far as it is left: the theory of the laws of the thought process itself, logic and dialectics.

 
With the Revolution of 1848, “educated” Germany said farewell to theory and went over to the field of practice. Small production and manufacture, based upon manual labor, were superseded by real large-scale industry. Germany again appeared on the world market. The new little German Empire [B] abolished at least the most crying of the abuses with which this development had been obstructed by the system of petty states, the relics of feudalism, and bureaucratic management. But to the same degree that speculation abandoned the philosopher’s study in order to set up its temple in the Stock Exchange, educated Germany lost the great aptitude for theory which had been the glory of Germany in the days of its deepest political humiliation — the aptitude for purely scientific investigation, irrespective of whether the result obtained was practically applicable or not, whether likely to offend the police authorities or not. Official German natural science, it is true, maintained its position in the front rank, particularly in the field of specialized research. But even the American journal Science rightly remarks that the decisive advances in the sphere of the comprehensive correlation of particular facts and their generalization into laws are now being made much more in England, instead of, as formerly, in Germany. And in the sphere of the historical sciences, philosophy included, the old fearless zeal for theory has now disappeared completely, along with classical philosophy. Inane eclecticism and an anxious concern for career and income, descending to the most vulgar job-hunting, occupy its place. The official representatives of these sciences have become the undisguised ideologists of the bourgeoisie and the existing state — but at a time when both stand in open antagonism to the working class.
Only among the working class does the German aptitude for theory remain unimpaired. Here, it cannot be exterminated. Here, there is no concern for careers,for profit-making, or for gracious patronage from above. On the contrary, the more ruthlessly and disinterestedly science proceeds the more it finds itself in harmony with the interest and aspirations of the workers. The new tendency, which recognized that the key to the understanding of the whole history of society lies in the history of the development of labor, from the outset addressed itself by preference to the working class and here found the response which it neither sought nor expected from officially recognized science. The German working-class movement is the inheritor of German classical philosophy.
 

 
(1) Here I may be permitted to make a personal explanation. Lately repeated reference has been made to my share in this theory, and so I can hardly avoid saying a few words here to settle this point. I cannot deny that both before and during my 40 years’ collaboration with Marx I had a certain independent share in laying the foundation of the theory, and more particularly in its elaboration.  But the greater part of its leading basic principles, especially in the realm of economics and history, and, above all, their final trenchant formulation, belong to Marx. What I contributed — at any rate with the exception of my work in a few special fields — Marx could very well have done without me. What Marx accomplished I would not have achieved.  Marx stood higher, saw further, and took a wider and quicker view than all the rest of us. Marx was a genius; we others were at best talented. Without him the theory would not be by far what it is today.  If therefore rightly bears his name.
(2) See Das Wesen der menschlichen Kopfarbeit, dargestellt von einem Handarbeiter [The Nature of Human Brainwork, Described by a Manual Worker]. Hamburg, Meissner.
[A] Albingenses: A religious sect which, during the 12th and 13th centuries, directed a movement against the Roman Catholic Church. The name is derived from the town of Albi, in the south of France.
[B] “The new little German Empire”: This term is applied to the German Empire without Austria, which arose in 1871, under Prussian hegemony.
Table of Contents: Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy



==========

## The Role of Force in History



The Role of Force in History by Frederick Engels






Works of Frederick Engels 1887
The Role of Force in History

Written: between the end of December 1887 and March 1888;
Source: MECW, Volume 26, p. 453;
First Published: in Die Neue Zeit, 1895-96;
Transcribed: Andy Blunden

Table of Contents

Chapter One. Why the German bourgeoisie turns to Prussia for national unification

Chapter Two. How Bismarck made Prussia a great power

Chapter Three. Bismarck takes Prussia to the gates of Paris

Chapter Four. Why Alsace-Lorraine prefer to be French

Chapter Five. The social classes of Bismarck’s Germany

Chapter Six. How Bismarck failed to modernise Germany
 


Engels on War |
Marx/Engels Archive





==========

## A Critique of the Draft Social-Democratic Programme of 1891



 A Critique of the Draft Social-Democratic Program of 1891 by Engels





Works of Frederick Engels 1891
A Critique of the Draft Social-Democratic Program of 1891

Source: MECW Volume 27, p. 217;
Written: June 18 and 29 1891;
First Published: without Appendix, 1901-02 and in full in Marx and Engels, Works, Moscow 1936;
Transcribed: by Andy Blunden.

The present draft differs very favourably from the former programme [at Gotha].The strong survivals of outmoded traditions — both the specific Lassallean and vulgar socialistic — have in the main been removed, and as regards its theoretical aspect the draft is, on the whole, based on present-day science and can be discussed on this basis.
It is divided into three sections: I. The Preamble, II. Political Demands, III. Demands for Measures of Protection for the Workers.

I. Preamble in Ten Paragraphs
In general it suffers from the attempt to combine two things that are uncombinable: a programme and a commentary on the programme as well. The fear that a short, pointed exposition would not be intelligible enough, has caused explanations to be added, which make it verbose and drawn out. To my view the programme should be as short and precise as possible. No harm is done even if it contains the occasional foreign word, or a sentence whose full significance cannot be understood at first sight. Verbal exposition at meetings and written commentaries in the press take care of all that, and the short, precise phrase, once understood, takes root in the memory, and becomes a slogan, a thing that never happens with verbose explanations. Too much should not be sacrificed for the sake of popularity, and the mental ability and educational level of our workers should not be underestimated. They have understood much more difficult things than the shortest, most concise programme can offer them; and if the period of the Anti-Socialist Law has made more difficult, and here and there even prevented the spreading of comprehensive knowledge among the masses joining the movement, now that our propagandist literature can again be kept and read without risking trouble, lost time will soon be made up for under the old leadership.
I shall try to make this entire section somewhat shorter and if I succeed shall enclose it or send it on later. Now, I shall deal with the individual paragraphs numbered from 1 to 10.
Paragraph 1. “The separation,” etc., “mines, pits, quarries” — three words for the same thing; two should be deleted. I would leave mines (Bergwerke), which is a word used even in the most level parts of the country, and I would designate them all by this widely used term. I would, however, add “railways and other means of communication”.
Paragraph 2. Here I would insert: “In the hands of their appropriators (or their owners) the social means of labour are” and likewise below “dependence ... on the owners (or appropriators) of the means of labour”, etc.
It has already been said in para. I that these gentlemen have appropriated these things as “exclusive possession” and will simply need to be repeated here if one absolutely insists on introducing the word “monopolises”. Neither this nor the other word adds anything to the sense. And anything redundant in a programme weakens it.
“The means of labour necessary for the existence of society”
 — these are precisely those that are at hand. Before the steam engine it was possible to do without it, now we couldn’t. Since all the means of labour are nowadays directly or indirectly — either by their design or because of the social division of labour — social means of labour, these words express what is available at every given moment sufficiently clearly, correctly and without any misleading associations.
If this conclusion is intended to correspond with the preamble of the Rules of the International, I should prefer it to correspond completely: “to social misery” (this is No. 1), “mental degradation and political dependence” [General Rules of the International Working Men’s Association]. Physical degradation is part of social misery and political dependence is a fact, while the denial of political rights is a declamatory phrase which is only relatively true and for this reason does not belong in the programme.
Paragraph 3. In my opinion the first sentence should be changed.
“Under the domination of the individual owners.”
First of all that which follows is an economic fact, which should be explained in economic terms. The expression “domination of the individual owners” creates the false impression that this has been caused by the political domination of that gang of robbers. Secondly, these individual owners include not only “capitalists and big landowners” (what does the “bourgeoisie” following here signify? Are they a third class of individual owners? Are the big landowners also “bourgeois"? And, once we have turned to the subject of big landowners, should we ignore the colossal survivals of feudalism, which give the whole filthy business of German politics its specific reactionary character?). Peasants and petty bourgeois too are “individual owners”, at least they still are today; but they do not appear anywhere in the programme and therefore the wording should make it clear that they are not included in the category of individual owners under discussion.
“The accumulation of the means of labour and of the wealth that has been created by the exploited.”
The “wealth” consists of 1. means of labour, 2. means of subsistence. It is therefore grammatically incorrect and illogical to mention one part of the wealth without the other and then refer to the total wealth, linking the two by and.
“...increases ... in the hands of the capitalists with growing speed”.
What has happened to the “big landowners” and the “bourgeoisie” mentioned above? If it is enough to speak only of capitalists here, it should be so above as well. If one wishes to specify, however, it is generally not enough to mention them alone.
“The number and the misery of the proletariat increase continuously.”
This is incorrect when put in such a categorical way. The organisation of the workers and their constantly growing resistance will possibly check the increase of misery to a certain extent. However, what certainly does increase is the insecurity of existence. I should insert this.
Paragraph 4.
“The planlessness rooted in the nature of capitalist private production”
needs considerable improvement. I am familiar with capitalist production as a social form, or an economic phase; capitalist private production being a phenomenon which in one form or another is encountered in that phase. What is capitalist private production? Production by separate entrepreneurs, which is increasingly becoming an exception. Capitalist production by joint-stock companies is no longer private production but production on behalf of many associated people. And when we pass on from joint-stock companies to trusts, which dominate and monopolise whole branches of industry, this puts an end not only to private production but also to planlessness. If the word “private” were deleted the sentence could pass.
“The ruin of broad layers of the population.”
Instead of this declamatory phrase, which looks as though we still regret the ruin of the bourgeois and petty bourgeois, I should state the simple fact: “which by the ruin of the urban and rural middle classes, the petty bourgeois and small peasants, widen (or deepen) the chasm between the haves and have-nots”.
The last two phrases repeat the same thing. In the Appendix to Section 1, I give a draft amendment.
Paragraph 5. Instead of “the causes” this should read “its causes”, which is probably due to a slip of the pen.
Paragraph 6. “Mines, pits, quarries,” see above, para. 1. “Private production,” see above. I would say: “The transformation of present capitalist production on behalf of individuals or joint-stock companies into socialist production on behalf of society as a whole and according to a preconceived plan, a transformation, etc. ... which creates... and by which alone can be achieved the emancipation of the working class and with it the emancipation of all members of society without exception.” 
Paragraph 7. I would say as in the Appendix to Section I.
Paragraph 8. Instead of “class-conscious”, which in our circles is an easily understood abbreviation, I would say the following to facilitate universal understanding and translation into foreign languages: “with workers conscious of their class position”, or something like it.
Paragraph 9. Closing sentence: “... places... and thereby concentrates in the same hands the power of economic exploitation and political oppression”.
Paragraph 10. After “class rule” the words “and the classes themselves” should be inserted. The abolition of classes is our basic demand, without which the abolition of class rule is economically inconceivable. Instead of “for equal rights for all”, I suggest: “for equal rights and equal duties of all”, etc. Equal duties are for us a particularly important addition to the bourgeois-democratic equal rights and do away with their specifically bourgeois meaning.
The closing sentence: “In their struggle ... are capable,” would be better deleted. The imprecise wording “which are capable ... of improving the position of the people in general” (who is that?), can be taken to embrace everything, protective tariffs and free trade, guilds and freedom of enterprise, loans on landed security, exchange banks, compulsory vaccination and prohibition of vaccination, alcoholism and prohibition, etc., etc. What should be said here, has already been said earlier, and it is unnecessary to mention specifically that the demand for the whole includes every separate part, for this, to my mind, weakens the impact. If, however, this sentence is intended as a link to pass on to the individual demands, something resembling the following could be said: “Social Democracy fights for all demands which help it approach this goal” (“measures and arrangements” to be deleted as repetitious). Or else, which would be even better: to say directly what it is all about, i.e., that it is necessary to catch up with what the bourgeoisie has missed; I have included a closing sentence to this effect in Appendix I. I consider this important in connection with my notes to the next section and to motivate the proposals put forward by me therein.

II. Political Demands
The political demands of the draft have one great fault. It lacks precisely what should have been said. If all the 10 demands were granted we should indeed have more diverse means of achieving our main political aim, but the aim itself would in no wise have been achieved. As regards the rights being granted to the people and their representatives, the imperial constitution is, strictly speaking, a copy of the Prussian constitution of 1850, a constitution whose articles are extremely reactionary and give the government all the real power, while the chambers are not even allowed to reject taxes; a constitution, which proved during the period of the conflict that the government could do anything it liked with it. The rights of the Reichstag are the same as those of the Prussian chamber and this is why Liebknecht called this Reichstag the fig-leaf of absolutism. It is an obvious absurdity to wish “to transform all the instruments of labour into common property” on the basis of this constitution and the system of small states sanctioned by it, on the basis of the “union” between Prussia and Reuss-Greiz-Schleiz-Lobenstein, in which one has as many square miles as the other has square inches.
To touch on that is dangerous, however. Nevertheless, somehow or other, the thing has to be attacked. How necessary this is is shown precisely at the present time by opportunism, which is gaining ground in a large section of the Social-Democratic press. Fearing a renewal of the Anti-Socialist Law, or recalling all manner of over-hasty pronouncements made during the reign of that law, they now want the party to find the present legal order in Germany adequate for putting through all party demands by peaceful means. These are attempts to convince oneself and the party that “present-day society is developing towards socialism” without asking oneself whether it does not thereby just as necessarily outgrow the old social order and whether it will not have to burst this old shell by force, as a crab breaks its shell, and also whether in Germany, in addition, it will not have to smash the fetters of the still semi-absolutist, and moreover indescribably confused political order. One can conceive that the old society may develop peacefully into the new one in countries where the representatives of the people concentrate all power in their hands, where, if one has the support of the majority of the people, one can do as one sees fit in a constitutional way: in democratic republics such as France and the U.S.A., in monarchies such as Britain, where the imminent abdication of the dynasty in return for financial compensation is discussed in the press daily and where this dynasty is powerless against the people. But in Germany where the government is almost omnipotent and the Reichstag and all other representative bodies have no real power, to advocate such a thing in Germany, when, moreover, there is no need to do so, means removing the fig-leaf from absolutism and becoming oneself a screen for its nakedness.
In the long run such a policy can only lead one’s own party astray. They push general, abstract political questions into the foreground, thereby concealing the immediate concrete questions, which at the moment of the first great events, the first political crisis automatically pose themselves. What can result from this except that at the decisive moment the party suddenly proves helpless and that uncertainty and discord on the most decisive issues reign in it because these issues have never been discussed? Must there be a repetition of what happened with protective tariffs, which were declared to be a matter of concern only to the bourgeoisie, not affecting the interests of the workers in the least, that is, a matter on which everyone could vote as he wished? Are not many people now going to the opposite extreme and are they not, in contrast to the bourgeoisie, who have become addicted to protective tariffs, rehashing the economic distortions of Cobden and Bright and preaching them as the purest socialism — the purest Manchesterism? This forgetting of the great, the principal considerations for the momentary interests of the day, this struggling and striving for the success of the moment regardless of later consequences, this sacrifice of the future of the movement for its present, may be “honestly” meant, but it is and remains opportunism, and “honest” opportunism is perhaps the most dangerous of all!
Which are these ticklish, but very significant points?
First. If one thing is certain it is that our party and the working class can only come to power under the form of a democratic republic. This is even the specific form for the dictatorship of the proletariat, as the Great French Revolution has already shown. It would be inconceivable for our best people to become ministers under an emperor, as Miquel. It would seem that from a legal point of view it is inadvisable to include the demand for a republic directly in the programme, although this was possible even under Louis Phillippe in France, and is now in Italy. But the fact that in Germany it is not permitted to advance even a republican party programme openly, proves how totally mistaken is the belief that a republic, and not only a republic, but also communist society, can be established in a cosy, peaceful way.
However, the question of the republic could possibly be passed by. What, however, in my opinion should and could be included is the demand for the concentration of all political power in the hands of the people’s representatives. That would suffice for the time being if it is impossible to go any further.
Second. The reconstitution of Germany. On the one hand, the system of small states must be abolished — just try to revolutionise society while there are the Bavarian-Württemberg reservation rights — and the map of present-day Thuringia, for example, is such a sorry sight. On the other hand, Prussia must cease to exist and must be broken up into self-governing provinces for the specific Prussianism to stop weighing on Germany. The system of small states and Prussianism are the two sides of the antithesis now gripping Germany in a vice, in which one side must always serve as the excuse and justification for the existence of the other.
What should take its place? In my view, the proletariat can only use the form of the one and indivisible republic. In the gigantic territory of the United States, the federal republic is still, on the whole, a necessity, although in the Eastern states it is already becoming a hindrance. It would be a step forward in Britain where the two islands are peopled by four nations and in spite of a single Parliament three different systems of legislation already exist side by side. In little Switzerland, it has long been a hindrance, tolerable only because Switzerland is content to be a purely passive member of the European state system. For Germany, federalisation on the Swiss model would be an enormous step backward. Two points distinguish a union state from a completely unified state: first, that each member state, each canton, has its own civil and criminal legislative and judicial system, and, second, that alongside a popular chamber there is also a federal chamber in which each canton, whether large or small, votes as such. The first we have luckily overcome and we shall not be so childish as to reintroduce it, the second we have in the Bundesrat and we could do very well without it, since our “federal state” generally constitutes a transition to a unified state. The revolution of 1866 and 1870 must not be reversed from above but supplemented and improved by a movement from below.
So, then, a unified republic. But not in the sense of the present French Republic, which is nothing but the Empire established in 1799’ without the Emperor. From 1792 to 1799 each French department, each commune, enjoyed complete self-government on the American model, and this is what we too must have. How self-government is to be organised and how we can manage without a bureaucracy has been shown to us by America and the First French Republic, and is being shown even today by Australia, Canada and the other English colonies. And a provincial and communal self-government of this type is far freer than, for instance, Swiss federalism, under which, it is true, the canton is very independent in relation to the federation, but is also independent in relation to the district and the commune. The cantonal governments appoint the district governors and prefects, which is unknown in English speaking countries and which we want to abolish here as resolutely in the future as the Prussian Landräte and Regicrungsräte.
Probably few of these points should be included in the programme. I mention them also mainly to describe the system in Germany where such matters cannot be discussed openly, and to emphasise the self-deception of those who wish to transform such a system in a legal way into communist society. Further, to remind the party executive that there are other important political questions besides direct legislation by the people and the gratuitous administration of justice without which we can also ultimately get by. In the generally unstable conditions these questions may become urgent at any time and what will happen then if they have not been discussed by us beforehand and no agreement has been reached on them?
However, what can be included in the programme and can, at least indirectly, serve as a hint of what may not be said directly is the following demand:
“Complete self-government in the provinces, districts and communes through officials elected by universal suffrage. The abolition of all local and provincial authorities appointed by the state.”
Whether or not it is possible to formulate other programme demands in connection with the points discussed above, I am less able to judge here than you can over there. But it would be desirable to debate these questions within the party before it is too late.
1. I fail to see the difference between “election rights and voting rights”, between “elections and voting” respectively. If such a distinction should be made, it should in any case be expressed more clearly or explained in a commentary appended to the draft.
2. “The right of the people to propose and reject” what? All laws or the decisions of the people’s representatives — this should be added.
5. Complete separation of the Church from the State. All religious communities without exception are to be treated by the state as private associations. They are to be deprived of any support from public funds and of all influence on public education. (They cannot be prohibited from forming their own schools out of their own funds and from teaching their own nonsense in them.)
6. In that case the point on the “secular character of the school” no longer arises, since it relates to the preceding paragraph.
8 and 9. Here I want to draw attention to the following: These points demand that the following should be taken over by the state: (1) the bar, (2) medical services, (3) pharmaceutics, dentistry, midwifery, nursing, etc., etc., and later the demand is advanced that workers’ insurance become a state concern. Can all this be entrusted to Mr. von Caprivi? And is it compatible with the rejection of all state socialism, as stated above?
10. Here I should say: “Progressive... tax to cover all expenditure of the state, district and community, insofar as taxes are required for it. Abolition of all indirect state and local taxes, duties, etc.” The rest is a redundant commentary or motivation that tends to weaken the effect.

III. Economic Demands
To item 2. Nowhere more so than in Germany does the right of association require guarantees also from the state.
The closing phrase: “for the regulation”, etc., should be added as item 4 and be given a corresponding form. In this connection it should be noted that we would be taken in good and proper by labour chambers made up half of workers and half of entrepreneurs. For years to come the entrepreneurs would always have a majority, for only a single black sheep among the workers would be needed to achieve this. If it is not agreed upon that in cases of conflict both halves express separate opinions, it would be much better to have a chamber of entrepreneurs and in addition an independent chamber of workers.
In conclusion I should like to request that the draft be compared once more with the French programme where some things seem better precisely for Section III. Being pressed for time, I unfortunately cannot search for the Spanish programme, which is also very good in many respects.

Appendix to Section I
1. “Pits, quarries” delete — “Railways and other means of communication.”
2. In the hands of their appropriators (or their owners) the social means of labour have become means of exploitation. The economic subjugation of the worker by the appropriator of the means of labour, that is to say, of the means of livelihood, conditioned thereby, is the basis of slavery in all its forms: social misery, mental degradation and political dependence.
3. Under this exploitation the wealth created by the exploited is concentrated in the hands of the exploiters — the capitalists and big landowners — with growing speed; the distribution of the product of labour between the exploiters and exploited becomes ever more uneven, and the numbers and insecurity of the proletariat grow ever greater, etc.
4. “Private” (production) delete ... deteriorate, by the ruin of the urban and rural middle classes, the petty bourgeois and small peasants, widen (or deepen) the chasm between the haves and have-nots, make general insecurity the normal state of society and prove that the class of the appropriators of the social means of labour has lost the vocation and ability for economic and political leadership.
5. “its” causes.
6. ... and the transformation of capitalist production on behalf of individuals or joint-stock companies into socialist production on behalf of society as a whole and according to a preconceived plan, a transformation, for which capitalist society itself creates the material and spiritual conditions, and by which alone can be achieved the emancipation of the working class and with it the emancipation of all members of society without exception.
7. The emancipation of the working class can be the work only of the working class itself. It is self-evident that the working class cannot leave its emancipation either to the capitalists and big landowners, its opponents and exploiters, or to the petty bourgeois and small peasants, who, being stifled by competition on the part of the big exploiters, have no choice but’ to join either their ranks or those of the workers.
8. ... with workers conscious of their class position, etc.
9. ... places ... and thereby concentrates in the same hands the power of economic exploitation and political oppression of the workers.
10. ... class rule and the classes themselves and for equal rights and equal duties of all without, etc. ... origin (delete end). In its struggle for ... mankind it is obstructed by Germany’s backward political state. First and foremost, it has to conquer room for movement, to abolish the massive survivals of feudalism and absolutism, in short, to do the work which the German bourgeois parties were and still are too cowardly to carry out. Hence it has, at least at present, to include also such demands in its programme, which in other cultural countries have already been implemented by the bourgeoisie.
 


Erfurt Program
Letter to Kautsky |
Critique of the Gotha Program
1891 works |
Marx/Engels Archive





==========

## Preface to Condition of the Working Class in England









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## The Future Italian Revolution and the Socialist Party









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## The Peasant Question in France and Germany






The Peasant Question in France and Germany






Works of Frederick Engels 1894
The Peasant Question in France and Germany


Source: Volume 3 of the Selected Works;
Written: between November 15-22, 1894;
First Published: in Die Neue Zeit, 1894-95;
Translated: by Progress Publishers;
Transcribed: by director@marx.org, October 1993.


Engels' The Peasant Question in France and Germany
was part of the current debate around agrarian issues. Engels wrote it
as rebuttal to various French Socialists (like Vollmar) and the agrarian
programme adopted in Marseilles in 1892 and supplemented in Nantes in 1894
(Frankfurt Congress of German Social-Democrats). In it, Engels discusses
a policy of alliance between the working class and the working peasantry.


Preface

Part 1: France

Part 2: Germany
 



Works on Pre-Capitalist Social Formations and the Peasantry
The Peasant Question in France and Germany, Engels 1894
Afterword to ‘On Social Relations in Russia’, Engels 1894
On The History of Early Christianity, Engels 1894
Origin of the Family, etc., Engels 1884
Letter to Vera Zasulich, Marx 1881
Transition from Ape to Man, Engels 1876
On Social Relations in Russia, Engels 1874
Precapitalist Economic Formations, Marx 1857
The Peasant War in Germany, Engels 1850

The German Ideology, Marx & Engels 1845

 


Subject Archive on Precapitalist formations
Marx Engels Archive




==========

## I






The Peasant Question in France and Germany




Engels 1894: The Peasant Question in France and Germany
Part 1: France
The rural population in which we can address ourselves
consists of quite different parts, which vary greatly with the various
regions.
In the west of Germany, as in France and Belgium, there prevails
the small-scale cultivations of small-holding peasants, the majority of
whom own and the minority of whom rent their parcels of land.
In the northwest — in Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein —
we have a preponderance of big and middle peasants who cannot do without
male and female farm servants and even day labourers. The same is true
of part of Bavaria.
In Prussia east of the Elbe, and in Mecklenburg, we have the regions
of big landed estates and large-scale cultivation with hinds, cotters,
and day laborers, and in between small and middle peasants in relatively
unimportant and steadily decreasing proportion.
In central Germany, all of these forms of production and ownership
are found mixed in various proportions, depending upon the locality, without
the decided prevalence of any particular form over a large area.
Besides, there are localities varying in extent where the arable
land owned or rented is insufficient to provide for the subsistence of
the family, but can serve only as the basis for operating a domestic industry
and enabling the latter to pay the otherwise incomprehensibly low wages
that ensure the steady sale of its products despite all foreign competition.
Which of these subdivisions of the rural population can be won
over by the Social-Democratic party? We, of course, investigate this question
only in broad outline; we single out only clear-forms. We lack space to
give consideration in intermediate stages and mixed rural populations.
Let us begin with the small peasant. Not only is he, of all peasants,
the most important for Western Europe in general, but he is also the critical
case that decides the entire question. Once we have clarified in our minds
our attitude to the small peasant, we have all the data needed to determine
our stand relative to the other constituent parts of the rural population.
By small peasant we mean here the owners or tenant — particularly
the former — of a patch of land no bigger, as a rule, than he and his
family can till, and no smaller than can sustain the family. This small
peasant, just like the small handicraftsman, is therefore a toiler who
differs from the modern proletarian in that he still possesses his instruments
of labor; hence, a survival of a past mode of production. There is a threefold
difference between him and his ancestor, the serf, bondman, or, quite exceptionally,
the free peasant liable to rent and feudal services. First, in that the
French Revolution freed him from feudal services and dues that he owed
to the landlord and, in the majority of cases, at least on the left bank
of the Rhine, assigned his peasant farm to him as his own free property.
Secondly, in that he lost the protection of, and the right to
participate in, the self-administering Mark community, and hence his share
in the emoluments of the former common Mark. The common Mark was whisked
away partly by the erstwhile feudal lord and partly by enlightened bureaucratic
legislation patterned after Roman law. This deprives the small peasant
of modern times of the possibility of feeding his draft animals without
buying fodder. Economically, however, the loss of the emoluments derived
from the Mark by far outweighs the benefits accruing from the abolition
of feudal services. The number of peasants unable to keep draft animals
of their own is steadily increasing.
Thirdly, the peasant of today has lost half of his former productive
activity. Formerly, he and his family produced, from raw material he had
made himself, the greater part of the industrial products that he needed;
the rest of what he required was supplied by village neighbors who plied
a trade in addition to farming and were paid mostly in articles of exchange
or in reciprocal services. The family, and still more the village, was
self-sufficient, produced almost everything it needed. It was natural economy
almost unalloyed; almost no money was necessary. Capitalist production
put an end to this by its money economy and large-scale industry. But if
the Mark emoluments represented one of the basic conditions of his existence,
his industrial side line was another. And thus the peasant sinks ever lower.
Taxes, crop failures, divisions of inheritance and litigations drive one
peasant after another into the arms of the usurer; the indebtedness becomes
more and more general and steadily increases in amount in each case —
in brief, our small peasant, like every other survival of a past mode of
production, is hopelessly doomed. He is a future proletarian.
As such, he ought to lend a ready ear in socialist propaganda.
But he is prevented from doing so for the time being by his deep-rooted
sense of property. The more difficult it is for him to defend his endangered
patch of land, the more desperately he clings to it, the more he regards
the Social-Democrats, who speak of transferring landed property to the
whole of society, as just as dangerous a foe as the usurer and lawyer.
How is Social-Democracy to overcome this prejudice? What can is offer to
the doomed small peasant without becoming untrue to itself?
Here we find a practical point of support in the agrarian programme
of the French Socialists of the Marxian trend, a programme which is the
more noteworthy as it comes from the classical land of small-peasant economy.
The Marseilles Congress of 1892 adopted the first agrarian programme
of the Party. It demands for propertyless rural workers (that is
to say, day laborers and hinds): minimum wages fixed by trade unions and
community councils; rural trade courts consisting half of workers; prohibition
of the sale of common lands; and the leasing of public domain lands to
communities which are to rent all this land, whether owned by them or rented,
to associations of propertyless families of farm laborers for common cultivation,
on conditions that the employment of wage-workers be prohibited and that
the communities exercise control; old-age and invalid pensions, to be defrayed
by means of a special tax on big landed estates.
For the small peasants, with special consideration for
tenant farmers, purchase of machinery by the community to be leased at
cost price to the peasants; the formation of peasant co-operatives for
the purchase of manure, drain-pipes, seed, etc., and for the sale of the
produce; abolition of the real estate transfer tax if the value involved
does not exceed 5,000 francs; arbitration commissions of the Irish pattern
to reduce exorbitant rentals and compensate quitting tenant farmers and
sharecroppers (me'tayers) for appreciation of the land due to them; repeal
of article 2102 of the Civil Code which allows a landlord to on the distraint
crop, and the abolition of the right of creditors to levy on growing crops;
exemption from levy and distraint of a definite amount of farm implements
and of the crop, seed, manure, draft animals, in shirt, whatever is indispensable
to the peasant for carrying on his business; revision of the general cadastre,
which has long been out of date, and until such time a local revision in
each community; lastly, free instruction in farming, and agricultural experimental
stations.
As we see, the demands made in the interests of the peasants —
those made in the interests of the workers do not concern us here, for
the time being — are not very far-reaching. Part of them has already been
realised elsewhere. The tenants' arbitration courts follow the Irish prototype
by express mention. Peasant co-operatives already exist in the Rhine provinces.
The revision of the cadastre has been a constant pious wish of all liberals,
and even bureaucrats, throughout Western Europe. The other points, too,
could be carried into effect without any substantial impairment of the
existing capitalist order. So much simply in characterisation of the programme.
No reproach is intended; quite the contrary.
The Party did such a good business with this programme among the
peasants in the most diverse parts of France that — since appetite comes
with eating — one felt constrained to suit it still more to their taste.
It was felt, however, that this would be treading on dangerous ground.
How was the peasant to be helped — not the peasant as a future proletarian,
but as a present propertied peasant — without violating the basic principles
of the general socialist programme? In order to meet this objection, the
new practical proposals were prefaced by a theoretical preamble, which
seeks to prove that it is in keeping with the principles of socialism to
protect small-peasant property from destruction by the capitalist mode
of production, although one is perfectly aware that this destruction is
inevitable. Let us now examine more closely this preamble as well as the
demands themselves, which were adopted by the Nantes Congress in September
of this year.
The preamble begins as follows:
Whereas according to the terms of the general programme of the Party
producers can be free only in so far as they are in possession of the means
of production;
Whereas in the sphere of industry these means of production have
already reached such a degree of capitalist centralisation that they can
be restored to the producers only in the collective or social form, but
in the sphere of agriculture — at least in present-day France — this
is by no means the case, the means of production, namely, the land, being
in very many localities still in the hands of the individual producers
themselves as their individuals possession;
Whereas even if this state of affairs characterized by small-holding
ownership is irretrievably doomed (est fatalement appete' a dispaitre),
still it is not for socialism to hasten its doom, as its task does not
consist in separating property from labor but, on the contrary, in uniting
both of these factors of all production by placing them in the same hands,
factors the separation of which entails the servitude and poverty of the
workers reduced to proletarians;
Whereas, on the one hand, it is the duty of socialism to put the
agricultural proletarians again in possession — collective or social in
form — of the great domains after expropriating their present idle ownership,
it is, on the other hand, on less its imperative duty to maintain the peasants
themselves tilling their patches of land in possession of the same as against
the fisk, the usurer, and the encroachments of the newly-arisen big landowners;
Whereas it is expedient to extend this protection also to the
producers who as tenants or sharecroppers (me'tayers) cultivate the land
owned by others and who, if they exploit day laborers, are to a certain
extent compelled to do so because of the exploitation to which they themselves
are subjected —
Therefore the Workers' Party — which unlike the anarchists does
not count on an increase and spread of poverty for the transformation of
the social order but expects labor and society in general to be emancipated
only by the organisation and concerted efforts of the workers of both country
and town, by their taking possession of the government and legislation
— has adopted the following agrarian programme in order thereby to bring
together all the elements of rural production, all occupations which by
virtue of various rights and titles utilise the national soil, to wage
an identical struggle against the common for: the feudality of landownership.

Now, for a closer examination of these "whereases".
To being with, the statement in the French programme that freedom
of the producers presupposes the possession of the means of production
must be supplemented by those immediately following: either as individual
possession, which form never and nowhere existed for the producers in general,
and is daily being made more impossible by industrial progress; or as common
possession, a form the material and intellectual preconditions of which
have been established by the development of capitalist society itself;
that therefore taking collective possession of the means of production
must be fought for by all means at the disposal of the proletariat.
The common possession of the means of production is thus set forth
here as the sole principal goal to be striven for. Not only in industry,
where the ground has already been prepared, but in general, hence also
in agriculture. According to the programme, individual possession never
and nowhere obtained generally for all producers; for that very reason,
and because industrial progress removes it anyhow, socialism is not interested
in maintaining but rather in removing it; because where it exists and in
so far as it exists it makes common possession impossible. Once we cite
the programme in support of our contention, we must cite the entire programme,
which considerably modifies the proposition quoted in Nantes; for it makes
the general historical truth expressed in it dependent upon the conditions
under which alone it can remain a truth today in Western Europe and North
America.
Possession of the means of production by the individual producers
nowadays no longer grants these producers real freedom. Handicraft has
already been ruined in the cities; in metropolises like London, it has
already disappeared entirely, having been superseded by large-scale industry,
the sweatshop system and miserable bunglers who thrive on bankruptcy. The
self-supporting small peasant is neither in the safe possession of his
tiny patch of land, nor is he free. He, as well as his house, his farmstead,
and his new fields, belong to the usurer; his livelihood is more uncertain
than that of the proletarian, who at least does have tranquil days now
and then, which is never the case with the eternally tortured debt slave.
Strike out Article 2102 of the Civil Code, provide by law that a definite
amount of a peasant's farm implements, cattle, etc., shall be exempt from
levy and distraint; yet you cannot ensure him against an emergency in which
he is compelled to sell his cattle "voluntarily", in which he must sign
himself away, body and soul, to the usurer and be glad to get a reprieve.
Your attempt to protect the small peasant in his property does not protect
his liberty but only the particular form of his servitude; it prolongs
a situation in which he can neither live nor die. It is, therefore, entirely
out of place here to cite the first paragraph of your programme as authority
for your contention.
The preamble states that in present-day France, the means of production
— that is, the land — is in very many localities still in the hands of
individual producers as their individual possession; that, however, it
is not the task of socialism to separate property from labor, but, on the
contrary, to unite these two factors of all production by placing them
in the same hands. As has already been pointed out, the latter in this
general form is by no means the task of socialism. Its task is, rather,
only to transfer the means of production to the producers as their common
possession. As soon as we lose sight of this, the above statement becomes
directly misleading in that it implies that it is the mission of socialism
to convert the present sham property of the small peasant in his fields
into real property — that is to say, to convert the small tenant into
an owner and the indebted owner into a debtless owner. Undoubtedly, socialism
is interested to see that the false semblance of peasant property should
disappear, but not in this manner.
At any rate, we have now got so far that the preamble can straightforwardly
declare it to be the duty of socialism, indeed, its imperative duty,
"to maintain the peasants themselves tilling their patches of land
in possession of the same as against the fisk, the usurer and the encroachments
of the newly-arisen big landowners."

The preamble thus imposes upon socialism the imperative duty to carry out
something which it had declared to be impossible in the preceding paragraph.
It charges it to "maintain" the small-holding ownership of the peasants
although it itself states that this form of ownership is "irretrievably
doomed". What are the fisk, the usurer, and the newly-arisen big landowners
if not the instruments by means of which capitalist production brings about
this inevitable doom? What means "socialism" is to employ to protect the
peasant against this trinity, we shall see below.
But not only the small peasant is to be protected in his property.
It is likewise
"expedient to extend this protection also to the producers who, as
tenants or sharecroppers (Metayers), cultivate the land owned by others
and who, if they exploit day laborers, are to a certain extent compelled
to do so because of the exploitation to which they themselves are subjected".

Here, we are entering upon ground that is passing strange. Socialism is
particularly opposed to the exploitation of wage labor. And here it is
declared to be the imperative duty of socialism to protect the French tenants
when they "exploit day laborers", as the text literally states! And that
because they are compelled to do so to a certain by "the exploitation to
which they themselves are subjected"!
How easy and pleasant it is to keep on coasting once you are on
the toboggan slide! When now the big and middle peasants of Germany come
to ask the French Socialists to intercede with the German Party Executive
to get the German Social-Democratic Party to protect them in the exploitation
of their male and female farm servants, citing in support of the contention
the "exploitation to which they themselves are subjected" by usurers, tax
collectors, grain speculators and cattle dealers, what will they answer?
What guarantee have they that our agrarian big landlords will not send
them Count Kanitz (as he also submitted a proposal like theirs, providing
for a state monopoly of grain importation) and likewise ask for socialist
protection of their exploitation of the rural workers, citing in support
"the exploitation to which they themselves are subjected" by stock-jobbers,
money lender, and grain speculators?
Let us say here, at the outset, that the intentions of our French
friends are not as bad as one would suppose. The above sentence, we are
told, is intended to cover only a quite special case — namely, the following:
In Northern France, just as in our sugar-beet districts, land is leased
to the peasants subject to the obligation to cultivate beets, on conditions
which are extremely onerous. They must deliver the beets to a state factory
at a price fixed by it, must but definite seed, use a fixed quantity of
prescribed fertilizer, and on delivery are badly cheated into t he bargain.
We know all about this in Germany, as well. But,if this sort of peasant
is to be taken under one's wing, this must be said openly and expressly.
As the sentence reads now, in its unlimited general form, it is a direct
violation not only of the French programme, but also of the fundamental
principle of socialism in general, and its authors will have no cause for
complaint if this careless piece of editing is used against them in various
quarters to their intention.
Also capable of such misconstruction are the concluding words
of the preamble according to which it is the task of the Socialist Workers'
Party
"to bring together all the elements of rural production, all occupations
which, by virtue of various rights and titles, utilize the national soil,
to wage an identical struggle against the common foe: the feudality of
landownership".

I flatly deny that the socialist workers' party of any country is charged
with the task of taking into its fold, in addition to the rural proletarians
and the small peasants, also the idle and big peasants and perhaps even
the tenants of the big estates, the capitalist cattle breeders and other
capitalist exploiters of the national soil. To all of them, the feudality
of landownership may appear to be a common foe. On certain questions, we
may make common cause with them and be able to fight side by side with
them for definite aims. We can use in our Party individuals from every
class of society, but have no use whatever for any groups representing
capitalist, middle-bourgeois,or middle-peasant interests. Here, too, what
they mean is not as bad as it looks. The authors evidently never even gave
all this a thought. But unfortunately they allowed themselves to be carried
away by their zeal for generalization and they must not be surprised if
they are taken at their word.
After the preamble come the newly-adopted addenda to the programme
itself. They betray the same cursory editing as the preamble.
The article providing that the communities must procure farming
machinery and lease it at cost to the peasants is modified so as to provide
that the communities are, in the first place, to receive state subsidies
for this purpose and, secondly, that the machinery is to be placed at the
disposal of the small peasants gratis. This further concession will not
be of much avail to the small peasants, whose fields and mode of production
permit of but little use of machinery.
Furthermore,
"substitution of a single progressive tax on all incomes upward of
3,000 francs for all existing direct and indirect taxes".

A similar demand has been included for many years in almost every Social-Democratic
programme. But that this demand is raised in the special interests of the
small peasants is something new and shows only how little its real scope
has been calculated. take Great Britain. There the state budget amounts
to 90 million pounds sterling, of which 13.5 to 14 million are accounted
for by the income tax. The smaller part of the remaining 76 million is
contributed by taxing business (post and telegraph charges, stamp tax),
but by far the greater part of it by imposts on articles of mass consumption,
by the constantly repeated clipping of small, imperceptible amounts totalling
many millions from the incomes of all members of the population, but particularly
of tis poorer sections. In present-day society, it is scarcely possible
to defray state expenditures in any other way. Suppose the whole 90 million
are saddled in Great Britain on the incomes of 120 pounds sterling = 3,000
francs and in excess thereof by the imposition of a progressive direct
tax. The average annual accumulation, the annual increase of the aggregate
national wealth, amounted in 1865 to 1875, according to Giffen, to 240
million pounds sterling. Let us assume it now equals 200 million annually;
a tax burden of 90 million would consume almost one-third of the aggregate
accumulation. In other words, no government except a Socialist one can
undertake any such thing. When the Socialists are at the helm there will
be things for them to carry into execution alongside of which that tax
reform will figure as a mere, and quite insignificant, settlement for the
moment while altogether different prospects open up before the small peasants.
One seems to realize that the peasant will have to wait rather
long for this tax reform so that "in the meantime" (en attendant) the following
prospect is held out to them:
"Abolition of taxes on land for all peasants living by their own labor,
and reduction of these taxes on all mortgaged plots."

The latter half of this demand can refer only to peasant farms too big
to be operated by the family itself; hence, it is again a provision in
favor of peasants who "exploit day laborers".
Again:
"Hunting and fishing rights without restrictions other than such as
may be necessary for the conservation of game and fish and the protection
of growing crops."

This sounds very popular, but the concluding part of the sentence wipes
out the introductory part. How many rabbits, partridges, pikes, and carps,
are there even today per peasant family in all rural localities? Would
you say more than would warrant giving each peasant jut one day
a year for free hunting and fishing?
"Lowering of the legal and conventional rate of interest" —

hence, renewed usury laws, a renewed attempt to introduce a police measure
that has always filed everywhere for the last two thousand years. If a
small peasant finds himself in a position where recourse to a usurer is
the lesser evil to him, the usurer will always find ways and means of sucking
him dry without falling foul of the usury laws. This measure could serve
at most to soothe the small peasant, but he will derive no advantage from
it; on the contrary, it makes it more difficult for him to obtain credit
precisely when he needs it most.
"Medical service free of charge and medicines at cost price" —

this at any rate is not a measure for the special protection of the peasants.
The German programme goes further and demands that medicine too should
be free of charge.
"Compensation for families of reservists called up for military duty
for the duration of their service" —

this already exists, though most inadequately, in Germany and Austria and
is likewise no special peasant demand.
"Lowering of the transport charges for fertilizer and farm machinery
and products" —

is on the whole in effect in Germany, and mainly in the interest — of
the big landowners.
"Immediate preparatory work for the elaboration of a plan of public
works for the amelioration of the soil and the development of agricultural
production" —

leaves everything in the realm of uncertitude and beautiful promises and
is also above all in the interest of the big landed estates.
In brief, after the tremendous theoretical effort exhibited in
the preamble, the practical proposals of the new agrarian programme are
even more unrevealing as to the way in which the French Workers' Party
expects to be able to maintain the small peasants in possession of their
small holdings, which, on its own territory, are irretrievably doomed.
 


Marx Engels Archive |
Contents




==========

## II






The Peasant Question in France and Germany




Engels 1894: The Peasant Question in France and Germany
Part 2: Germany
In one point our French comrades are absolutely right:
No lasting revolutionary transformation is possible in France against
the will of the small peasant. Only, it seems to me, they have not got
the right leverage if they mean to bring the peasant under their influence.
They are bent, it seems, to win over the small peasant forthwith,
possibly even for the next general elections. This they can hope to achieve
only by making very risky general assurances in defence of which they are
compelled to set forth even much more risky theoretical considerations.
Then, upon closer examination, it appears that the general assurances are
self-contradictory (promise to maintain a state of affairs which, as one
declares oneself, is irretrievably doomed) and that the various measures
are either wholly without effect (usury laws), or are general workers'
demands or demands which also benefit the big land-owners or finally are
such as are of no great importance by any means in promoting the interests
of the small peasants. In consequence, the directly practical part of the
programme of itself corrects the erroneous initial part and reduces the
apparently formidable grandiloquence of the preamble to actually innocent
proportions.
Let us say it outright: in view of the prejudices arising out
of their entire economic position, their uprising and their isolated mode
of life, prejudices nurtured by the bourgeois press and the big land-owners,
we can win the mass of the small peasants forthwith only if we can make
them a promise which we ourselves know we shall not be able to keep. That
is, we must promise them not only to protect their property in any event
against all economic forces sweeping upon them, but also to relieve them
of the burdens which already now oppress them: to transform the tenant
into a free owner and to pay the debts of the owner succumbing to the weight
of his mortgage. If we could do this, we should again arrive at the point
from which the present situation would necessarily develop anew. We shall
not have emancipated the peasant but only given him a reprieve.
But it is not in our interests to win the peasant overnight, only
to lose him again on the morrow if we cannot keep our promise. We have
no more use for the peasant as a Party member, if he expects us to perpetuate
his property in his small holding, than for the small handicraftsman who
would fain be perpetuated as a master. These people belong to the anti-Semites.
Let them go to the anti-Semites and obtain from the latter the promise
to salvage their small enterprises. Once they learn there what these glittering
phrases really amount to, and what melodies are fiddled down from the anti-Semitic
heavens, they will realize in ever-increasing measure that we who promise
less and look for salvation in entirely different quarters are after all
more reliable people. If the French had the strident anti-Semitic demagogy
we have, they would hardly have committed the Nantes mistake.
What, then, is our attitude towards the small peasantry? How shall
we have to deal with it on the day of our accession to power?
To begin with, the French programme is absolutely correct in stating:
that we foresee the inevitable doom of the small peasant, but that it is
not our mission to hasten it by any interference on our part.
Secondly, it is just as evident that when we are in possession
of state power, we shall not even think of forcibly expropriating the small
peasants (regardless of whether with or without compensation), as we shall
have to do in the case of the big landowners. Our task relative to the
small peasant consists, in the first place, in effecting a transition of
his private enterprise and private possession to cooperative ones, not
forcibly but by dint of example and the proffer of social assistance for
this purpose. And then, of course, we shall have ample means of showing
to the small peasant prospective advantages that must be obvious to him
even today.
Almost 20 years ago, the Danish Socialists, who have only one
real city in their country — Copenhagen — and therefore have to rely
almost exclusively on peasant propaganda outside of it, were already drawing
up such plans. The peasants of a village or parish — there are many big
individual homesteads in Denmark — were to pool their land to form a single
big farm i order to cultivate it for common account and distribute the
yield in proportion to the land, money, and labor contributed. In Denmark,
small landed property plays only a secondary role. But, if we apply this
idea to a region of small holdings, we shall find that if these are pooled
and the aggregate area cultivated on a large scale, part of the labor power
employed hitherto is rendered superfluous. It is precisely this saving
of labor that represents one of the main advantages of large-scale farming.
Employment can be found for this labor in two ways. Either additional land
taken from big estates in the neighborhood is placed at the disposal of
the peasant co-operative, or the peasants in question are provided with
the means and the opportunity of engaging in industry as an accessory calling,
primarily and as far as possible for their own use. In either case, their
economic position is improved and simultaneously the general social directing
agency is assured the necessary influence to transform the peasant co-operative
to a higher form, and to equalize the rights and duties of the co-operative
as a whole as well as of its individual members with those of the other
departments of the entire community. How this is to be carried out in practice
in each particular case will depend upon the circumstance of the case and
the conditions under which we take possession of political power. We may,
thus, possibly be in a position of offer these co-operatives yet further
advantages: assumption of their entire mortgage indebtedness by the national
bank with a simultaneous sharp reduction of the interest rate; advances
from public funds for the establishment of large-scale production (to be
made not necessarily or primarily in money but in the form of required
products: machinery, artificial fertilizer, etc.), and other advantages.
The main point is, and will be, to make the peasants understand
that we can save, preserve their houses and fields for them only by transforming
them into co-operative property operated co-operatively. It is precisely
the individual farming conditioned by individual ownership that drives
the peasants to their doom. If they insist on individual operation, they
will inevitably be driven from house and home and their antiquated mode
of production superseded by capitalist large-scale production. That is
how the matter stands. Now, we come along and offer the peasants the opportunity
of introducing large-scale production themselves, not for account of the
capitalists but for their own, common account. Should it really be impossible
to make the peasants understand that this is in their own interest, that
it is the sole means of their salvation?
Neither now, nor at any time in the future, can we promise the
small-holding peasants to preserve their individual property and individual
enterprise against the overwhelming power of capitalist production. We
can only promise then that we shall not interfere in their property relations
by force, against their will. Moreover, we can advocate that the struggle
of the capitalists and big landlords against the small peasants should
be waged from now on with a minimum of unfair means and that direct robbery
and cheating, which are practiced only too often, be as far as possible
prevented. In this we shall succeed only in exceptional cases. Under the
developed capitalist mode of production, nobody can tell where honesty
ends and cheating begins. But always it will make a considerable difference
whether public authority is on the side of the cheater or the cheated.
We, of course, are decidedly on the side of the small peasant; we shall
do everything at all permissible to make his lot more bearable, to facilitate
his transition to the co-operative should he decide to do so, and even
to make it possible for him to remain on his small holding for a protracted
length of time to think the matter over, should he still be unable to bring
himself to this decision. We do this not only because we consider the small
peasant living by his own labor as virtually belonging to us, but also
in the direct interest of the Party. The greater the number of peasants
whom we can save from being actually hurled down into the proletariat,
whom we can win to our side while they are still peasants, the more quickly
and easily the social transformation will be accomplished. It will serve
us nought to wait with this transformation until capitalist production
has developed everywhere to its utmost consequences, until the last small
handicraftsman and the last small peasant have fallen victim to capitalist
large-scale production. The material sacrifice to be made for this purpose
in the interest of the peasants and to be defrayed out of public funds
can, from the point of view of capitalist economy, be viewed only as money
thrown away, but it is nevertheless an excellent investment because it
will effect a perhaps tenfold saving in the cost of the social reorganization
in general. In this sense, we can, therefore, afford to deal very liberally
with the peasants. This is not the place to go into details, to make concrete
proposals to that end; here we can deal only with general principles.
Accordingly, we can do no greater disservice to the Party as well
as to the small peasants than to make promises that even only create the
impression that we intend to preserve the small holdings permanently. It
would mean directly to block the way of the peasants to their emancipation
and to degrade the Party to the level of rowdy anti-Semitism. On the contrary,
it is the duty of our Party to make clear to the peasants again and again
that their position is absolutely hopeless as long as capitalism holds
sway, that it is absolutely impossible to preserve their small holdings
for them as such, that capitalist large-scale production is absolutely
sure to run over their impotent antiquated system of small production as
a train runs over a pushcart. If we do this, we shall act in conformity
with the inevitable trend of economic development, and this development
will not fail to bring our words home to the small peasants.
Incidentally, I cannot leave this subject without expressing my
conviction that the authors of the Nantes programme are also essentially
of my opinion. Their insight is much too great for them not to know that
areas now divided into small holdings are also bound to become common property.
They themselves admit that small-holding ownership is destined to disappear.
The report of the National Council drawn up by Lafargue and delivered at
the Congress of Nantes likewise fully corroborates this view. It has been
published in German in the Berlin Sozialdemokrat of October 18 of
this year. The contradictory nature of the expressions used in the Nantes
programme itself betrays the fact what the authors actually say is not
what they want to say. If they are not understood and their statements
misused, as has already happened, that is of course their own fault. At
any rate, they will have to elucidate their programme and the next French
congress revise it thoroughly.
We now come to the bigger peasants. Here as a result of the division
of inheritance as well as indebtedness and forced sales of land we find
a variegated pattern of intermediate stages, from small-holding peasant
to big peasant proprietor, who has retained his old patrimony intact or
even added to it. Where the middle peasant lives among small-holding peasants,
his interests and views will not differ greatly from theirs; he knows,
from his own experience, how many of his kind have already sunk to the
level of small peasants. But where middle and big peasants predominate
and the operation of the farms requires, generally, the help of male and
female servants, it is quite a different matter. Of course a workers' party
has to fight, in the first place, on behalf of the wage-workers — that
is, for the male and female servantry and the day laborers. It is unquestionably
forbidden to make any promises to the peasants which include the continuance
of the wage slavery of the workers. But, as long as the big and middle
peasants continue to exist, as such they cannot manage without wage-workers.
If it would, therefore, be downright folly on our part to hold out prospects
to the small-holding peasants of continuing permanently to be such, it
would border on treason were we to promise the same to the big and middle
peasants.
We have here again the parallel case of the handicraftsmen in
the cities. True, they are more ruined than the peasants, but there still
are some who employ journeymen in addition to apprentices, or for whom
apprentices do the work of journeymen. Let those of these master craftsmen
who want to perpetuate their existence as such cast in their lot with the
anti-Semites until they have convinced themselves that they get no help
in that quarter either. The rest, who have realized that their mode of
production is inevitably doomed, are coming over to us and, moreover, are
ready in future to share the lot that is in store for all other workers.
The same applies to the big and middle peasants. It goes without saying
that we are more interested in their male and female servants and day laborers
than in them themselves. If these peasants want to be guaranteed the continued
existence of their enterprises, we are in no position whatever to assure
them of that. They must then take their place among the anti-Semites, peasant
leaguers, and similar parties who derive pleasure from promising everything
and keeping nothing. We are economically certain that the big and middle
peasants must likewise inevitably succumb to the competition of capitalist
production, and the cheap overseas corn, as is proved by the growing indebtedness
and the everywhere evident decay of these peasants as well. We can do nothing
against this decay except recommend here too the pooling of farms to form
co-operative enterprises, in which the exploitation of wage labor will
be eliminated more and more, and their gradual transformation into branches
of the great national producers' co-operative with each branch enjoying
equal rights and duties can be instituted. If these peasants realize the
inevitability of the doom of their present mode of production and draw
the necessary conclusions they will come to us and it will be incumbent
upon us to facilitate, to the best of our ability, also their transition
to the changed mode of production. Otherwise, we shall have to abandon
them to their fate and address ourselves to their wage-workers, among whom
we shall not fail to find sympathy. Most likely, we shall be able to abstain
here as well from resorting to forcible expropriation, and as for the rest
to count on future economic developments making also these harder pates
amenable to reason.
Only the big landed estates present a perfectly simple case. Here,
we are dealing with undisguised capitalist production and no scruples of
any sort need restrain us. Here, we are confronted by rural proletarians
in masses and our task is clear. As soon as out Party is in possession
of political power, it has simply to expropriate the big landed proprietors,
just like the manufacturers in industry. Whether this expropriation is
to be compensated for or not will, to a great extent, depend not upon us
but the circumstances under which we obtain power, and particularly upon
the attitude adopted by these gentry, the big landowners, themselves. We
by no mens consider compensation as impermissible in any event; Marx told
me (and how many times!) that, in his opinion, we would get off cheapest
if we could buy out the whole lot of them. But, this does not concern us
here. The big estates, thus restored to the community, are to be turned
over by us to the rural workers who are already cultivating them and are
to be organized into co-operatives. They are to be assigned to them for
their use and benefit under the control of the community. Nothing can as
yet be stated as to the terms of their tenure. At any rate, the transformation
of the capitalist enterprise into a social enterprise is here fully prepared
for and can be carried into execution overnight, precisely as in Mr. Krupp's
or Mr. von Stumm's factory. And the example of these agricultural co-operatives
would convince also the last of the still resistant small-holding peasants,
and surely also many big peasants, of the advantages of co-operative, large-scale
production.
Thus, we can open up prospects here before the rural proletarians
as splendid as those facing the industrial workers, and it can be only
a question of time, and of only a very short time, before we win over to
our side the rural workers of Prussia east of the Elbe. But once we have
the East-Elbe rural workers, a different wind will blow at once all over
Germany. The actual semi-servitude of the East-Elbe rural workers is the
main basis of the domination of Prussian Junkerdom and thus of Prussia's
specific overlordship in Germany. It is the Junkers east of the Elbe who
have created and preserved the specifically Prussian character of the bureaucracy
as well as of the body of army officers — the Junkers, who are being reduced
more and more to ruin by their indebtedness, impoverishment, and parasitism,
at state and private cost and for that very reason cling the more desperately
to the dominion which they exercise; the Junkers, whose haughtiness, bigotry,
and arrogance, have brought the German Reich of the Prussian nation [3]
within the country into such hatred — even when every allowance is made
for the fact that at present this Reich is inevitable as the sole form
in which national unity can now be attained — and abroad so little respect
despite its brilliant victories. The power of these Junkers is grounded
on the fact that within the compact territory of the seven old Prussian
provinces — that is, approximately one-third of the entire territory of
the Reich — they have at their disposal the landed property, which here
brings with it both social and political power. And not only the landed
property but, through their beet-sugar refineries and liquor distilleries,
also the most important industries of this area. Neither the big landowners
of the rest of Germany nor the big industrialists are in a similarly favorable
positions. Neither of them have a compact kingdom at their disposal. Both
are scattered over a wide stretch of territory and complete among themselves
and with other social elements and compete among themselves and with other
social elements surrounding them for economic and political predominance.
But, the economic foundation of this domination of the Prussian Junkers
is steadily deteriorating. Here, too, indebtedness and impoverishment are
spreading irresistibly, despite all state assistance (and since Frederick
II, this item is included in every regular Junker budget). Only the actual
semi-serfdom sanctioned by law and custom and the resulting possibility
of the unlimited exploitation of the rural workers, still barely keep the
drowning Junkers above water. Sow the seed of Social-Democracy among these
workers, give them the courage and cohesion to insist upon their rights,
and the glory of the Junkers will be put to an end. The great reactionary
power, which to Germany represents the same barbarous, predatory element
as Russian tsardom does to the whole of Europe, will collapse like a pricked
bubble. The "picked regiments" of the Prussian army will become Social-Democratic,
which will result in a shift of power that is pregnant with an entire upheaval.
But, for this reason, it is of vastly greater importance to win the rural
proletariat east of the Elbe than the small peasants of Western Germany,
or yet the middle peasants of Southern Germany. It is here, in East-Elbe
Prussia, that the decisive battle of our cause will have to be fought and
for this very reason both government and Junkerdom will do their utmost
to prevent our gaining access here. And should, as we are threatened, new
violent measures be resorted to to impede the spread of our Party, their
primary purpose will be to protect the East-Elbe rural proletariat from
our propaganda. It's all the same to us. We shall win it nevertheless.
 


Marx Engels Archive |
Contents




==========

## Engels to P. L. Lavrov








Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1875



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1875
Engels to Pyotr  Lavrov
In London
Abstract


Written: Nov. 12-17, 1875;
Transcription/Markup: Brian Baggins;
Online Version: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2000.

London, Nov. 12-17, 1875

1) Of the Darwinian doctrine I accept the theory of evolution, but Darwin’s method of proof (struggle for life, natural selection) I consider only a first, provisional, imperfect expression of a newly discovered fact.  Until Darwin’s time the very people who now see everywhere only struggle for existence (Vogt, Búchner, Moleschott, etc.) emphasized precisely cooperation in organic nature, the fact that the vegetable kingdom supplies oxygen and nutriment to the animal kingdom and conversely the animal kingdom supplies plants with carbonic acid and manure, which was particularly stressed by Liebig.  Both conceptions are justified within certain limits, but the one is as one-sided and narrowminded as the other.  The interaction of bodies in nature – inanimate as well as animate – includes both harmony and collision, struggle and cooperation.  When therefore a self-styled natural scientist takes the liberty of reducing the whole of historical development with all its wealth and variety to the one-sided and meager phrase “struggle for existence,” a phrase which even in the sphere of nature can be accepted only cum grano salis, such a procedure really contains its own condemnation.   [...] 

3) I do not deny the advantages of your method of attack, which I would like to call psychological; but I would have chosen another method.  Everyone of us is influenced more or less by the intellectual environment in which he mostly moves.  For Russia, where you know your public better than I, and for a propaganda journal that appeals to the “restraining effect", [a quote from Lavrov’s article] the moral sense, your method is probably the better one.  For Germany, where false sentimentality has done and still does so much damage, it would not fit; it would be misunderstood, sentimentality perverted.  In our country it is hatred rather than love that is needed – at least in the immediate future – and more than anything else a shedding of the last remnants of German idealism, an establishment of the material facts in their historical rights.  I should therefore attack – and perhaps will when the time comes – these bourgeois Darwinists in about the following manner:


The whole Darwinists teaching of the struggle for existence is simply a transference from society to living nature of Hobbes’s doctrine of bellum omnium contra omnes [from Hobbes’s De Cive and Leviathan, chapter 13-14] and of the bourgeois-economic doctrine of competition together with Malthus’s theory of population.  When this conjurer’s trick has been performed (and I questioned its absolute  permissibility, as I have indicated in point 1, particularly as far as the Malthusian theory is concerned), the same theories are transferred back again from organic nature into history and it is now claimed that their validity as eternal laws of human society has been proved.  The puerility of this procedure is so obvious that not a word need be said about it.  But if I wanted to go into the matter more thoroughly I should do so by depicting them in the first place as bad economists and only in the second place as bad naturalists and philosophers.


4) The essential difference between human and animal society consists in the fact that animals at most collect while men produce.  This sole but cardinal difference alone makes it impossible simply to transfer laws of animal societies to human societies.  It makes it possible, as you properly remark:


“for man to struggle not only for existence but also for pleasures and for the increase of his pleasures,...  To be ready to renounce his lower pleasures for the highest pleasure.”  [Engels’ italics – quoted from Lavrov’s Sierra article]


Without disputing your further conclusions from this I would, proceeding from my own premises, make the following inferences: At a certain stage the production of man attains such a high-level that not only necessaries but also luxuries, at first, true enough, only for a minority, are produced.  The struggle for existence – if we permit this category for the moment to be valid – is thus transformed into a struggle for pleasures, no longer for mere means of  subsistence  but for means of  development, socially produced  means of development, and to this stage the categories derived from the animal kingdom are no longer applicable.  But if, as has now happened, production in its capitalist form produces a far greater quantity of means of subsistence and development than capitalist society can consume because it keeps the great mass of real producers artificially away from these means of subsistence and development; if this society is forced by its own law of life constantly to increase this output which is already too big for it and therefore periodically, every 10 years, reaches the point where it destroys not only a mass of products but even productive forces – what sense is there left in all this talk of “struggle for existence”?  The struggle for existence can then consist only in this: that the producing class takes over the management of production and distribution from the class that was hitherto entrusted with it but has now become incompetent to handle it, and there you have the socialist revolution.


Apropos.  Even the mere contemplation of previous history as a series of class struggles suffices to make clear the utter shallowness of the conception of this history as a feeble variety of the “struggle for existence.”  I would therefore never do this favor to these false naturalists.


5) For the same reason I would have changed accordingly the formulation of the following proposition of yours, which is essentially quite correct:


“that to facilitate the struggle the idea of solidarity could finally...  grow to a point where it will embrace all mankind and oppose it, as a society of brothers living in solidarity, to the rest of the world – the world of minerals, plants, and animals.”


6) On the other hand I cannot agree with you that the “bellum omnium contra omnes” was the first phase of human development.  In my opinion, the social instinct was one of the most essential levers of the evolution of man from the ape.  The first man must have lived in bands and as far as we can peer into the past we find that this was the case....


 [ ....] 

 


Monthly Review Translation |
1875 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to W. Blos



==========

## Engels to K. Kautsky










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1882



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1882
Engels to Karl Kautsky
In Vienna
Abstract


Published: Gesamtausgabe, International Publishers, 1942;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

London, 12 September, 1882

You ask me what the English workers think about colonial policy. Well, exactly the same as they think about politics in general: the same as what the bourgeois think. There is no workers' party here, there are only Conservatives and Liberal-Radicals, and the workers gaily share the feast of England's monopoly of the world market and the colonies. In my opinion the colonies proper, i.e., the countries occupied by a European population, Canada, the Cape, Australia, will all become independent; on the other hand the countries inhabited by a native population, which are simply subjugated, India, Algiers, the Dutch, Portuguese and Spanish possessions, must be taken over for the time being by the proletariat and led as rapidly as possible towards independence.  How this process will develop is difficult to say. India will perhaps, indeed very probably, produce a revolution, and as the proletariat emancipating itself cannot conduct any colonial wars, this would have to be given full scope; it would not pass off without all sorts of destruction, of course, but that sort of thing is inseparable from all revolutions.  The same might also take place elsewhere, e.g., in Algiers and Egypt, and would certainly be the best thing for us.  We shall have enough to do at home.  Once Europe is reorganised, and North America, that will furnish such colossal power and such an example that the semi-civilised countries will follow in their wake of their own accord. Economic needs alone will be responsible for this. But as to what social and political phases these countries will then have to pass through before they likewise arrive at socialist organisation, we to-day can only advance rather idle hypotheses, I think. One thing alone is certain: the victorious proletariat can force no blessings of any kind upon any foreign nation without undermining its own victory by so doing.  Which of course by no means excludes defensive wars of various kinds.

The business in Egypt has been contrived by Russian diplomacy. Gladstone is to take Egypt (which he has not got yet by a long way and if he had it he would still be a long way from keeping it) in order that Russia may take Armenia, which according to Gladstone would be a further liberation of a Christian country from the Mohammedan yoke.  Everything else about the affair is a sham, humbug, pretext. Whether the humbug will succeed will soon be seen.
 


1882 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1886



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1886
Engels to Florence Kelley Wischnewetsky
In Zurich
Abstract


Source: Marx and Engels Correspondence;
Publisher: International Publishers (1968);
First Published: Gestamtausgabe;
 Translated: Donna Torr;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan in 2000.
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

London, December 28, 1886

My preface will of course turn entirely on the immense stride made by the American working man in the last ten months, and naturally also touch H.G. [Henry George] and his land scheme. But it cannot pretend to deal exhaustively with it. Nor do I
think the time has come for that. It is far more important that the movement should spread, proceed harmoniously, take root and embrace as much as possible the whole American proletariat, than that it should start and proceed from the beginning on theoretically perfectly correct lines. There is no better road to theoretical clearness of comprehension than "durch Schaden klug werden" [to learn by one's own mistakes]. And for a whole large class, there is no other road, especially for a nation so eminently practical as the Americans. The great thing is to get the working class to move as a class; that once obtained, they will soon find the right direction, and all who resist, H.G. or Powderly, will be left out in the cold with small sects of their own.  Therefore I think also the K[nights] of L[abour] a most important factor in the movement which ought not to be pooh-poohed from without but to be revolutionised from within, and I consider that many of the Germans there have made a grievous mistake when they tried, in face of a mighty and glorious movement not of their creation, to make of their imported and not always understood theory a kind of alleinseligmachendes dogma and to keep aloof from any movement which did not accept that dogma. Our theory is not a dogma but the exposition of a process of evolution, and that process involves successive phases. To expect that the Americans will start with the full consciousness of the theory worked out in older industrial countries is to expect the impossible. What the Germans ought to do is to act up to their own theory --if they understand it, as we did in 1845 and 1848--to go in for any real general working-class movement, accept its faktische starting points as such and work it gradually up to the theoretical level by pointing out how every mistake made, every reverse suffered, was a necessary consequence of mistaken theoretical views in the original programme; they ought, in the words of The Communist Manifesto, to represent the movement of the future in the movement of the present. But above all give the movement time to consolidate, do not make the inevitable confusion of the first start worse confounded by forcing down people's throats things which at present they cannot properly understand, but which they soon will learn.  A million or two of workingmen's votes next November for a bona fide workingmen's party is worth infinitely more at present than a hundred thousand votes for a doctrinally perfect platform.  The very first attempt--soon to be made if the movement progresses--to consolidate the moving masses on a national basis will bring them all face to face, Georgites, K. of L., Trade Unionists, and all; and if our German friends by that time have learnt enough of the language of the country to go in for a discussion, then will be the time for them to criticise the views of the others and thus, by showing up the inconsistencies of the various standpoints, to bring them gradually to understand their own actual position, the position made for them by the correlation of capital and wage labour. But anything that might delay or prevent that national consolidation of the workingmen's party--no matter what platform--I should consider a great mistake, and therefore I do not think the time has arrived to speak out fully and exhaustively either with regard to H.G. or the K. of L.
 


1886 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to C. Schmidt










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890
Engels to Conrad Schmidt
In Berlin
Abstract


First published: Sozialistische Monatshefte, Nr. 18-19, Berlin, 1920;
Transcription/Markup: Brian Baggins;
Online Version: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2000.

London, August 5, 1890
 [ ....] 

I saw a review of Paul Barth's book [Die Geschichtsphilosophie Hegels und der Hegelianer bis auf Marx und Hartmann] by that bird of ill omen, Moritz Wirth, in the Vienna Deutsche Worte, and this book itself, as well.  I will have a look at it, but I must say that if "little Moritz" is right when he quotes Barth as stating that the sole example of the dependence of philosophy, etc., on the material conditions of existence which he can find in all Marx's works is that Descartes declares animals to the machines, then I am sorry for the man who can write such a thing.  And if this man has not yet discovered that while the material mode of existence is the primum agens [primary agent, prime cause] this does not preclude the ideological spheres from reacting upon it in their turn, though with a secondary effect, he cannot possibly have understood the subject he is writing about.  However, as I said, all this is secondhand and little Moritz is a dangerous friend.  The materialist conception of history has a lot of them nowadays, to whom it serves as an excuse for  not  studying history.  Just as Marx used to say, commenting on the French "Marxists" of the late [18]70s: "All I know is that I am not a Marxist."


There has also been a discussion in the Volks-Tribune about the distribution of products in future society, whether this will take place according to the amount of work done or otherwise.  The question has been approached very "materialistically" in opposition to certain idealistic phraseology about justice.  But strangely enough it has not struck anyone that, after all, the method of distribution essentially depends on how much there is to distribute, and that this must surely change with the progress of production and social organization, so that the method of distribution may also change.  But everyone who took part in the discussion, "socialist society" appeared not as something undergoing continuous change and progress but as a stable affair fixed once for all, which must, therefore, have a method of distribution fixed once for all.  All one can reasonably do, however, is 1) to try and discover the method of distribution to be used at the beginning, and 2) to try and find the general tendency of the further development.  But about this I do not find a single word in the whole debate.

 
In general, the word "materialistic" serves many of the younger writers in Germany as a mere phrase with which anything and everything is labeled without further study, that is, they stick on this label and then consider the question disposed of.  But our conception of history is above all a guide to study, not a lever for construction after the manner of the Hegelian.  All history must be studied afresh, the conditions of existence of the different formations of society must be examined individually before the attempt is made to deduce them from the political, civil law, aesthetic, philosophic, religious, etc., views corresponding to them.  Up to now but little has been done here because only a few people have got down to it seriously.  In this field we can utilize heaps of help, it is immensely big, anyone who will work seriously can achieve much and distinguish himself.  But instead of this too many of the younger Germans simply make use of the phrase historical materialism (and everything can be turned into a phrase) only in order to get their own relatively scanty historical knowledge — for economic history is still as yet in its swaddling clothes!  — constructed into a neat system as quickly as possible, and they then deem themselves something very tremendous.  And after that a Barth can come along and attack the thing itself, which in his circle has indeed been degraded to a mere phrase.


However, all this will right itself.  We're strong enough in Germany now to stand a lot.  One of the greatest services which the Anti-Socialist Law did us was to free us from the obtuseness of the German intellectual who had got tinged with socialism.  We are now strong enough to digest the German intellectual too, who is giving himself great airs again.  You, who have really done something, must have noticed yourself how few of the young literary men who fasten themselves on to the party give themselves in the trouble to study economics, the history of economics, the history of trade, of industry, of agriculture, of the formations of society.  How many know anything of Maurer except his name!  The self-sufficiency of the journalist must serve for everything here and the result looks like it.  It often seems as if these gentlemen think anything is good enough for the workers.  If these gentlemen only knew that Marx thought his best things were still not good enough for the workers, how he regarded it as a crime to offer the workers anything but the very best!


 [ ....] 

 


1890 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to Otto von Boenigk










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890
Engels to Otto Von Boenigk
In Breslau
Abstract


Transcription/Markup: Brian Baggins;
Online Version: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2000;

Folkestone, near Dover
August 21, 1890

...  I can reply only briefly and in general terms to your inquiries [A], for as concerns the first question I should otherwise have to write a treatise.

Ad. 1. To my mind, the so-called “socialist society” is not anything immutable.  Like all other social formations, it should be conceived in a state of constant flux and change.  Its crucial difference from the present order consists naturally in production organized on the basis of common ownership by the nation of all means of production.  To begin this reorganization tomorrow, but performing it gradually, seems to me quite feasible.  That our workers are capable of it is borne out by their many producer and consumer cooperatives which, whenever they're not deliberately ruined by the police, are equally well and far more honestly run than the bourgeois stock companies.  I cannot see how you can speak of the ignorance of the masses in Germany after the brilliant evidence of political maturity shown by the workers in their victorious struggle against the Anti-Socialist Law.  The patronizing and errant lecturing of our so-called intellectuals seems to me a far greater impediment.  We are still in need of technicians, agronomists, engineers, chemists, architects, etc., it is true, but if the worst comes to the worst we can always buy them just as well as the capitalists buy them, and if a severe example is made of a few of the traders among them — for traders there are sure to be — they will find it to their own advantage to deal fairly with us.  But apart from the specialists, among whom I also include schoolteachers, we can get along perfectly well without the other “intellectuals.”  The present influx of literati and students into the party, for example, may be quite damaging if these gentlemen are not properly kept in check.


The Junker latifundia east of the Elbe could be easily leased under the due technical management to the present day-laborers and other retinue, who work the estates jointly.  If any disturbances occur, the Junkers, who have brutalized people by flouting all the existing school legislation, will alone be to blame.


The biggest obstacles are the small peasants and the importunate super-clever intellectuals who always think they know everything so much the better, the less they understand it.


Once we have a sufficient number of followers among the masses, the big industries and the large-scale latifundia farming can be quickly socialized, provided we hold the political power.  The rest will follow shortly, sooner or later.  And we shall have it all our own way in large-scale production.


You speak of an absence of uniform insight.  This exists — but on the part of the intellectuals to stem from the aristocracy and the bourgeoisie and who do not suspect how much they still have to learn from the workers...

 


[A]
Boenigk asked Engels whether it was possible and advisable to effect socialist transformations considering the differences in education, level of consciousness, etc., among the various classes of society.

 


1890 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to J. Bloch










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890
Engels to J. Bloch
In Königsberg
Abstract


Source: Historical Materialism (Marx, Engels, Lenin), p. 294 - 296;
Publisher: Progress Publishers, 1972;
First Published: by  Der sozialistische Akademiker, Berlin, October 1, 1895;
Translated: from German;
Online Version: marxists.org 1999;
Transcription/Markup: Brian Baggins;

London, September 21, 1890
[....]
 


According to the materialist conception of history, the ultimately determining element in history is the production and reproduction of real life. Other than this neither Marx nor I have ever asserted. Hence if somebody twists this into saying that the economic element is the only determining one, he transforms that proposition into a meaningless, abstract, senseless phrase. The economic situation is the basis, but the various elements of the superstructure — political forms of the class struggle and its results, to wit: constitutions established by the victorious class after a successful battle, etc., juridical forms, and even the reflexes of all these actual struggles in the brains of the participants, political, juristic, philosophical theories, religious views and their further development into systems of dogmas — also exercise their influence upon the course of the historical struggles and in many cases preponderate in determining their form. There is an interaction of all these elements in which, amid all the endless host of accidents (that is, of things and events whose inner interconnection is so remote or so impossible of proof that we can regard it as non-existent, as negligible), the economic movement finally asserts itself as necessary. Otherwise the application of the theory to any period of history would be easier than the solution of a simple equation of the first degree.

We make our history ourselves, but, in the first place, under very definite assumptions and conditions. Among these the economic ones are ultimately decisive. But the political ones, etc., and indeed even the traditions which haunt human minds also play a part, although not the decisive one. The Prussian state also arose and developed from historical, ultimately economic, causes. But it could scarcely be maintained without pedantry that among the many small states of North Germany, Brandenburg was specifically determined by economic necessity to become the great power embodying the economic, linguistic and, after the Reformation, also the religious difference between North and South, and not by other elements as well (above all by its entanglement with Poland, owing to the possession of Prussia, and hence with international political relations — which were indeed also decisive in the formation of the Austrian dynastic power). Without making oneself ridiculous it would be a difficult thing to explain in terms of economics the existence of every small state in Germany, past and present, or the origin of the High German consonant permutations, which widened the geographic partition wall formed by the mountains from the Sudetic range to the Taunus to form a regular fissure across all Germany.

In the second place, however, history is made in such a way that the final result always arises from conflicts between many individual wills, of which each in turn has been made what it is by a host of particular conditions of life. Thus there are innumerable intersecting forces, an infinite series of parallelograms of forces which give rise to one resultant — the historical event. This may again itself be viewed as the product of a power which works as a whole unconsciously and without volition. For what each individual wills is obstructed by everyone else, and what emerges is something that no one willed. Thus history has proceeded hitherto in the manner of a natural process and is essentially subject to the same laws of motion. But from the fact that the wills of individuals — each of whom desires what he is impelled to by his physical constitution and external, in the last resort economic, circumstances (either his own personal circumstances or those of society in general) — do not attain what they want, but are merged into an aggregate mean, a common resultant, it must not be concluded that they are equal to zero. On the contrary, each contributes to the resultant and is to this extent included in it.

I would furthermore ask you to study this theory from its original sources and not at second-hand; it is really much easier. Marx hardly wrote anything in which it did not play a part. But especially The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte is a most excellent example of its application. There are also many allusions to it in Capital. Then may I also direct you to my writings: Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science and Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy, in which I have given the most detailed account of historical materialism which, as far as I know, exists. [The German Ideology was not published in Marx or Engels lifetime] 
 
Marx and I are ourselves partly to blame for the fact that the younger people sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is due to it. We had to emphasise the main principle vis-à-vis our adversaries, who denied it, and we had not always the time, the place or the opportunity to give their due to the other elements involved in the interaction. But when it came to presenting a section of history, that is, to making a practical application, it was a different matter and there no error was permissible. Unfortunately, however, it happens only too often that people think they have fully understood a new theory and can apply it without more ado from the moment they have assimilated its main principles, and even those not always correctly. And I cannot exempt many of the more recent "Marxists" from this reproach, for the most amazing rubbish has been produced in this quarter, too....


[....]
 

 


1890 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to C. Schmidt










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890
Engels to Conrad Schmidt
In Berlin
Abstract


Source: Marx and Engels Correspondence;
Publisher: International Publishers (1968);
First Published: Gestamtausgabe;
Translated: Donna Torr;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan in 2000;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

London,  October 27, 1890

I think you would do very well to take the post in Zürich. [Editor of the Zürich Post.]  You could always learn a good deal about economics there, especially if you bear in mind that Zürich is still only a third-rate money and speculation market, so that the impressions which make themselves felt there are weakened or deliberately
distorted by twofold or threefold reflection. But you will get a practical knowledge of the mechanism and be obliged to follow the stock exchange reports from London, New York, Paris, Berlin and Vienna at first hand, and in this way the world market, in its reflex as money and stock market, will reveal itself to you.  Economic, political and other reflections are just like those in the human eye, they pass through a condensing lens and therefore appear upside down, standing on their heads. Only the nervous system which would put them on their feet again for representation is lacking.  The money market man only sees the movement of industry and of the world market in the inverted reflection of the money and stock market and so effect becomes cause to him. I noticed that in the 'forties already in Manchester: the London Stock Exchange reports were utterly useless for the course of industry and its periodical maxima and minima because these gentry tried to explain everything from crises on the money market, which were generally only symptoms. At that time the object was to explain away the origin of industrial crises as temporary overproduction, so that the thing had in addition its tendentious side, provocative of distortion.  This point has now gone (for us, at any rate, for good and all), added to which it is indeed a fact that the money market can also have its own crises, in which direct disturbances of industry only play a subordinate part or no part at all – here there is still much, especially in the history of the last twenty years, to be examined and established.
Where there is division of labour on a social scale there is also mutual independence among the different sections of work. In the last instance production is the decisive factor. But when the trade in products becomes independent of production itself, it follows a movement of its own, which, while it is governed as a whole by production, still in particular cases and within this general dependence follows particular laws contained in the nature of this new factor; this movement has phases of its own and in its turn reacts on the movement of production. The discovery of America was due to the thirst for gold which had previously driven the Portuguese to Africa (compare Soetbeer's Production of Precious Metals), because the enormously extended European industry of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries and the trade corresponding to it demanded more means of exchange than Germany, the great silver country from 1450 to 1550, could provide. The conquest of India by the Portuguese, Dutch and English between 1500 and 1800 had imports from India as its object – nobody dreamt of exporting anything there. And yet what a colossal reaction these discoveries and conquests, solely conditioned by the interests of trade, had upon industry:  they first created the need for exports to these countries and developed large-scale industry.
So it is too with the money market. As soon as trading in money becomes separate from trade in commodities it has (under certain conditions imposed by production and commodity trade and within these limits) a development of its own, special laws and separate phases determined by its own nature. If,  in this further development,  trade in  money  extends in addition to trade in securities and these securities are not only government securities but also industrial and transport stocks and shares, so that money trade conquers the direct control over a portion of the production by which, taken as a whole, it is  itself controlled,  then  the  reaction  of money  trading  on production becomes still stronger and more complicated. The money traders have become the owners of railways, mines, iron works, etc. These means of production take on a double aspect if their working has to be directed sometimes in the immediate interests of production but sometimes also according to the requirements of the shareholders, in so far as they are money traders. The most striking example of this is the American railways, whose working is entirely dependent on the stock exchange operations of a Jay Gould or a Vanderbilt, etc., these having nothing whatever to do with the particular railway concerned and its interests as a means of communication. And even here in England we have seen struggles lasting for tens of years between different railway companies over the boundaries of their respective territories – struggles in which an enormous amount of money was thrown away, not in the interests of production and communications but simply because of a rivalry which usually only had the object of facilitating the stock exchange dealings of the shareholding money traders.
With these few indications of my conception of the relation of production to commodity trade and of both to money trading, I have already also answered, in essence, your questions about "historical materialism" generally.  The thing is easiest to grasp from the point of view of the division of labour. Society
gives rise to certain common functions which it cannot dispense with.  The persons selected for these functions form a new branch of the division of labour within society. This gives them particular interests, distinct too from the interests of those who gave them their office; they make themselves independent of the latter and – the state is in being. And now the development is the same as  it was with  commodity trade and later with money trade; the new independent power, while having in the main to follow the movement of production, also, owing to its inward independence (the relative independence originally transferred to it and gradually further developed) reacts in its turn upon the conditions and course of production. It is the interaction of two unequal forces: on one hand the economic movement, on the other the new political power, which strives for as much independence as possible, and which, having once been established, is also endowed with a movement of its own. On the whole, the economic movement gets its way, but it has also to suffer reactions from the political movement which it established and endowed with relative independence itself, from the movement of the state power on the one hand and of the opposition simultaneously engendered on the other. Just as the movement of the industrial market is, in the main and with the reservations already indicated, reflected in the money market and, of course, in inverted form, so the struggle between the classes already existing and already in conflict with one another is reflected in the struggle between government and opposition, but also in inverted form, no longer directly but indirectly, not as a class struggle but as a fight for political principles, and so distorted that it has taken us thousands of years to get behind it again.
The reaction of the state power upon economic development can be one of three kinds: it can run in the same direction, and then development is more rapid; it can oppose the line of development, in which case nowadays state power in every great nation will go to pieces in the long run; or it can cut off the economic development from certain paths, and impose on it certain others. This case ultimately reduces itself to one of the two previous ones.  But it is obvious that in cases two and three the political power can do great damage to the economic development and result in the squandering of great masses of energy and material.
Then there is also the case of the conquest and brutal destruction of economic resources, by which, in certain circumstances, a whole local or national economic development could formerly be ruined. Nowadays such a case usually has the opposite effect, at least among great nations: in the long run the defeated power often gains more economically, politically and morally than the victor.
It is similar with law. As soon as the new division of labour which creates professional lawyers becomes necessary, another new and independent sphere is opened up which, for all its general dependence on production and trade, still has its own capacity for reacting upon these spheres as well. In a modern state, law must not only correspond to the general economic position and be its expression, but must also be an expression which is consistent in itself, and which does not, owing to inner contradictions, look glaringly inconsistent.  And in order to achieve this, the faithful reflection of economic conditions is more and more infringed upon. All the more so the more rarely it happens that a code of law is the blunt, unmitigated, unadulterated expression of the domination of a class – this in itself would already offend the “conception of justice.” Even in the Code Napoleon the pure logical conception of justice held by the revolutionary bourgeoisie of 1792-96 is already adulterated in many ways, and in so far as it is embodied there has daily to undergo all sorts of attenuation owing to the rising power of the proletariat. Which does not prevent the Code Napoleon from being the statute book which serves as a basis for every new code of law in every part of the world. Thus to a great extent the course of the “development of law” only consists: first in the attempt to do away with the contradictions arising from the direct translation of economic relations into legal principles, and to establish a harmonious system of law, and then in the repeated breaches made in this system by the influence and
pressure of further economic development, which involves it in further contradictions (I am only speaking here of civil law for the moment).
The reflection of economic relations as legal principles is necessarily also a topsy turvy one:  it happens without the person who is acting being conscious of it; the jurist imagines he is operating with a priori principles, whereas they are really only economic reflexes; so everything is upside down. And it seems to me obvious that this inversion, which, so long as it remains unrecognised, forms what we call ideological conception, reacts in its turn upon the economic basis and may, within certain limits, modify it.   The basis of the law of inheritance – assuming that the stages reached in the development of the family are equal – is an economic one. But it would be difficult to prove, for instance, that the absolute liberty of the testator in England and the severe restrictions imposed upon him in France are only due in every detail to economic causes. Both react back, however, on the economic sphere to a very considerable extent, because they influence the division of property.
As to the realms of ideology which soar still higher in the air, religion, philosophy, etc., these have a prehistoric stock, found already in existence and taken over in the historic period, of what we should to-day call bunk. These various false conceptions of nature, of man's own being, of spirits, magic forces, etc., have for the most part only a negative economic basis; but the low economic development of the prehistoric period is supplemented and also partially conditioned and even caused by the false conceptions of nature. And even though economic necessity was the main driving force of the progressive knowledge of nature and becomes ever more so, it would surely be pedantic to try and find economic causes for all this primitive nonsense.  The history of science is the history of the gradual clearing away of this nonsense or of its replacement by fresh but already less absurd nonsense. The people who deal with this belong in their turn to special spheres in the division of labour and appear to themselves to be working in an independent field. And in so far as they form an independent group within the social division of labour, in so far do their productions, including their errors, react back as an influence upon the whole development of society, even on its economic development. But all the same they themselves remain under the dominating influence of economic development. In philosophy, for instance, this can be most readily proved in the bourgeois period.  Hobbes was the first modern materialist (in the eighteenth century sense) but he was an absolutist in a period when absolute monarchy was at its height throughout the whole of Europe and when the fight of absolute monarchy versus the people was beginning in England. Locke, both in religion and politics, was the child of the class compromise of 1688. The English deists and their more consistent successors, the French materialists, were the true philosophers of the bourgeoisie, the French even of the bourgeois revolution.  The German petty bourgeois runs through German philosophy from Kant to Hegel, sometimes positively and sometimes negatively. But the philosophy of every epoch, since it is a definite sphere in the division of labour, has as its presupposition certain definite intellectual material handed down to it by its predecessors, from which it takes its start. And that is why economically backward countries can still play first fiddle in philosophy: France in the eighteenth century compared with England, on whose philosophy the French based themselves, and later Germany in comparison with both. But the philosophy both of France and Germany and the general blossoming of literature at that time were also the result of a rising economic development. I consider the ultimate supremacy of economic development established in these spheres too, but it comes to pass within conditions imposed by the particular sphere itself: in philosophy, for instance, through the operation of economic influences  (which again generally only act under political, etc., disguises) upon the existing philosophic material handed down by predecessors. Here economy creates nothing absolutely new (a novo), but it determines the way in which the existing material of thought is altered and further developed, and that too for the most part indirectly, for it is the political, legal and moral reflexes which exercise the greatest direct influence upon philosophy.
About religion I have said the most necessary things in the last section on Feuerbach.
If therefore Barth supposes that we deny any and every reaction of the political, etc., reflexes of the economic movement upon the movement itself, he is simply tilting at windmills. He has only got to look at Marx's Eighteenth Brumaire, which deals almost exclusively with the particular part played by political struggles and events; of course, within their general dependence upon economic conditions. Or Capital, the section on the working day, for instance, where legislation, which is surely a political act, has such a trenchant effect. Or the section on the history of the bourgeoisie. (Chapter XXIV.) Or why do we fight for the political dictatorship of the proletariat if political power is economically impotent? Force (that is state power) is also an economic power.
But I have no time to criticise the book now. I must first get Vol. III out and besides I think too that Bernstein, for instance, could deal with it quite effectively.
What these gentlemen all lack is dialectic. They never see anything but here cause and there effect. That this is a hollow abstraction, that such metaphysical polar opposites only exist in the real world during crises, while the whole vast process proceeds in the form of interaction (though of very unequal forces, the economic movement being by far the strongest, most elemental and most decisive) and that here everything is relative and nothing is absolute – this they never begin to see. Hegel has never existed for them.
 


1890 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to F. Mehring










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1893



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1893
Engels to Franz Mehring
Abstract


Source: Marx and Engels Correspondence;
Publisher: International Publishers (1968);
First Published: Gestamtausgabe;
 Translated: Donna Torr;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan in 2000;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

London, July 14, 1893

Today is my first opportunity to thank you for the Lessing Legend you were kind enough to send me.  I did not want to reply with a bare formal acknowledgment of receipt of the book but intended at the same time to tell you something about it, about its contents.  Hence the delay.

I shall begin at the end — the appendix on historical materialism, in which you have described the main things excellently and for any unprejudiced person convincingly. If I find anything to object to it is that you attribute more credit to me than I deserve, even if I count in everything which I might possibly have found out for myself – in time – but which Marx with his more rapid coup d’oeil (grasp) and wider vision discovered much more quickly. When one has the good fortune to work for forty years with a man like Marx, one does not usually get the recognition one thinks one deserves during his lifetime. Then if the greater man dies, the lesser easily gets overrated, and this seems to me to be just my case at present; history will set all this right in the end and by that time one will be safely round the corner and know nothing more about anything.
Otherwise there is only one other point lacking, which, however, Marx and I always failed to stress enough in our writings and in regard to which we are all equally guilty. That is to say, we all laid, and were bound to lay, the main emphasis, in the first place, on the derivation of political, juridical and other ideological notions, and of actions arising through the medium of these notions, from basic economic facts. But in so doing we neglected the formal side — the ways and means by which these notions, etc., come about — for the sake of the content. This has given our adversaries a welcome opportunity for misunderstandings, of which Paul Barth is a striking example.
Ideology is a process accomplished by the so-called thinker consciously, indeed, but with a false consciousness. The real motives impelling him remain unknown to him, otherwise it would not be an ideological process at all. Hence he imagines  false or apparent motives. Because it is a process of thought he derives both its form and its content from pure thought, either his own or that of his predecessors. He works with mere thought material which he accepts without examination as the product of thought, he does not investigate further for a more remote process independent of thought;  indeed its origin seems obvious to him, because as all action is produced through the medium of thought it also appears to him to be ultimately based upon thought. The ideologist who deals with history (history is here simply meant to comprise all the spheres – political, juridical, philosophical, theological – belonging to society and not only to nature), the ideologist dealing with history then, possesses in every sphere of science material which has formed itself independently out of the thought of previous generations and has gone through an independent series of developments in the brains of these successive generations. True, external facts belonging to its own or other spheres may have exercised a co-determining influence on this development, but the tacit pre-supposition is that these facts themselves are also only the fruits of a process of thought, and so we still remain within that realm of pure thought which has successfully digested the hardest facts.
It is above all this appearance of an independent history of state constitutions, of systems of law, of ideological conceptions in every separate domain, which dazzles most people.  If Luther and Calvin “overcome” the official Catholic religion, or Hegel “overcomes” Fichte and Kant, or if the constitutional Montesquieu is indirectly “overcome” by Rousseau with his “Social Contract,” each of these events remains within the sphere of theology, philosophy or political science,
represents a stage in the history of these particular spheres of thought and never passes outside the sphere of thought. And  since the bourgeois illusion of the eternity and the finality of capitalist production has been added as well, even the victory of the physiocrats and Adam Smith over the mercantilists is accounted as a sheer victory of thought; not as the reflection in thought of changed economic facts but as the finally achieved correct understanding of actual conditions subsisting always and everywhere – in fact if Richard Coeur-de-Lion and Philip Augustus had introduced free trade instead of getting mixed up in the crusades we should have been spared five hundred years of misery and stupidity.
This side of the matter, which I can only indicate here, we have all, I think, neglected more than it deserves. It is the old story: form is always neglected at first for content. As I say, I have done that too, and the mistake has always only struck me later. So I am not only far from reproaching you with this in any way, but as the older of the guilty parties I have no right to do so, on the contrary; but I would like all the same to draw your attention to this point for the future. Hanging together with this too is the fatuous notion of the ideologists that because we deny an independent historical development to the various ideological spheres which play a part in history we also deny them any effect upon history. The basis of this is the common undialectical conception of cause and effect as rigidly opposite poles, the total disregarding of interaction;  these gentlemen often almost deliberately forget that once an historic element has been brought into the world by other elements, ultimately by economic facts, it also reacts in its turn and may react on its environment and even on its own causes. For instance, Barth on the priesthood and religion on your page 475. I was very glad to see how you settled this fellow, whose banality exceeds all expectations; and him they make a professor of history in Leipzig!  I must say that old man Wachsmuth — also rather a bonehead but greatly appreciative of facts — was quite a different chap.
As for the rest, I can only repeat about the book what I repeatedly said about the articles when they appeared in the Neue Zeit; it is by far the best presentation in existence of the genesis of the Prussian state. Indeed, I may well say that it is the only good presentation, correctly developing in most matters their interconnections down to the very details. One regrets only that you were unable to include the entire further development down to Bismarck and one cannot help hoping that you will do this another time and present a complete coherent picture, from the Elector Frederick William down to old William. For you have already made the preliminary investigations and, in the main at least, they are as good as finished. The thing has to be done sometime anyhow before the shaky old shanty comes tumbling down. The dissipation of the monarchical-patriotic legends, although not really a necessary precondition for the abolition of the monarchy which screens class domination (for a pure, bourgeois republic in Germany has been made obsolete by events before it has come into existence) is nevertheless one of the most effective levers for that purpose.
Then you will also have more space and opportunity to depict the local history of Prussia as part of Germany’s general misery. This is the point where I occasionally depart somewhat from your view, especially in the conception of the preliminary conditions for the dismemberment of Germany and of the failure of the bourgeois revolution in Germany during the sixteenth century. If I get down to reworking the historical introduction to my Peasant War, which I hope I shall do next winter, I shall be able to develop there the points in question. Not that I consider those you indicated incorrect, but I put others alongside them and group them somewhat differently.
In studying German history — the story of a continuous state of wretchedness — I have always found that only a comparison with the corresponding French periods produces a correct idea of proportions, because what happens there is the direct opposite of what happens in our country. There, the establishment of a national state from the scattered parts of the feudal state, just when we pass through the period of our greatest decline. There, a rare objective logic, during the whole course of the process; with us, increasingly dreary desultoriness. There, during the Middle Ages, the English conqueror, who intervenes in favour of the Provencal nationality against the Northern French nationality, represents foreign intervention, and the wars with England represent, in a way, the Thirty Years’ War, which there, however, ends in the ejection of the foreign invaders and the subjugation of the South by the North. Then comes the struggle between the central power and Burgundy, the vassal, which relies on its foreign possessions, and plays the part of Brandenburg-Prussia, a struggle which ends, however, in the victory of the central power and conclusively establishes the national state. And precisely at that moment the national state completely collapses in our country (in so far as the “German kingdom” within the Holy Roman Empire can be called a national state) and the plundering of German territory on a large scale sets in. This comparison is most humiliating for Germans but for that very reason the more instructive; and since our workers have put Germany back again in the forefront of the historical movement it has become somewhat easier for us to swallow the ignominy of the past.
Another especially significant feature of the development of Germany is the fact that not one of the two member states which in the end partitioned Germany between them was purely German — both were colonies on conquered Slav territory: Austria a Bavarian and Brandenburg a Saxon colony — and that they acquired power within Germany only by relying upon the support of foreign, non-German possessions: Austria upon that of Hungary (not to mention Bohemia) and Brandenburg upon that of Prussia. On the Western border, the one in greatest jeopardy, nothing of the kind took place; on the Northern border it was left to the Danes to protect Germany against the Danes; and in the South there was so little to protect that the frontier guard, the Swiss, even succeeded in tearing themselves loose from Germany!
But I am speaking of all kinds of extraneous matter, let this palaver at least serve you as proof of how stimulating an effect your work has upon me.
Once more cordial thanks and greetings from
Yours,
F. Engels
 


1893 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to N. F. Danielson










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1893



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1893
Engels to Nikolai Danielson
In St Petersburg
Abstract


Source: Marx and Engels Correspondence;
Publisher: International Publishers (1968);
First Published: Gestamtausgabe;
 Translated: Donna Torr;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan in 2000;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

October 17, 1893

When I received your letter of July 18, announcing your return home, I was on the point myself of going abroad for two months and am only just returned. This is the reason of my long silence.

Many thanks for the copies of the Ocherki three of which I have forwarded to appreciative friends. The book, I am glad to see, has caused considerable stir and indeed sensation, as it well merited. Among the Russians I have met, it was the chief subject of conversation.  Only yesterday one of them writes: "With us in Russia a controversy is going on about the 'fate of capitalism in Russia'."

In the Berlin Sozial-Politische Zentralblatt a Mr. B. V. Struve has a long article on your book; I must agree with him in this one point, that for me, too, the present capitalistic phase of development in Russia appears an unavoidable consequence of the historical conditions as created by the Crimean War, the way in which the change of 1861 in agrarian conditions was accomplished, and the political stagnation in Europe generally. Where he is decidedly wrong is in comparing the present state of Russia with that of the United States in order to refute what he calls your pessimistic views of the future. He says the evil consequences of modern capitalism in Russia will be as easily overcome as they are in the United States. There he quite forgets, that the U.S. are modern bourgeois from the very origin;  that they were founded by petits bourgeois and peasants who ran away from European feudalism to establish a purely bourgeois society.  Whereas in Russia we have a groundwork of a primitive communistic character, a precivilisation Gentilgesellschaft, crumbling to ruins, it is true, but still serving as the groundwork, the material upon which the capitalistic revolution (for it is a real social revolution) acts and operates. In America, Geldwirtschaft has been fully established for more than a century in Russia Naturalwirtschaft was all but exclusively the rule. Therefore it stands to reason that the change, in Russia, must be far more violent, far more incisive, and accompanied by immensely greater sufferings than it can be in America.

But for all that it still seems to me that you take a gloomier view of the case than the facts justify. No doubt the passage from primitive agrarian communism to capitalistic industrialism cannot take place without terrible dislocation of society, without the disappearance of whole classes and their transformation into other classes; and what enormous suffering, and waste of human lives and productive forces that necessarily implies, we have seen – on a smaller scale – in Western Europe. But from that to the complete ruin of a great and highly gifted nation there is still a long way. The rapid increase of population to which you have been accustomed may be checked; the reckless deforestation combined with the expropriation of the old landlords as well as the peasants may cause a colossal waste of productive forces; but after all, a population of more than a hundred millions will finally furnish a very considerable home market for a very respectable grande industrie, and with you as elsewhere, things will end by finding their own level – if capitalism lasts long enough in Western Europe.

You yourself admit that "the social conditions in Russia after the Crimean War were not favourable to the development of the form of production inherited by us from our past history." I would go further, and say, that no more in Russia than anywhere else would it have been possible to develop a higher social form out of primitive agrarian communism unless – that higher form was already in existence in another country, so as to serve as a model. That higher form being, wherever it is historically possible, the necessary consequence of the capitalistic form of production and of the social dualistic antagonism created by it, it could not be developed directly out of the agrarian commune, unless in imitation of an example already in existence somewhere else. Had the West of Europe been ripe, 1860-70, for such a transformation, had that transformation then been taken in hand in England, France, etc., then the Russians would have been called upon to show what could have been made out of their commune, which was then more or less intact. But the West remained stagnant, no such transformation was attempted, and capitalism was more and more rapidly developed. And as Russia had no choice but this: either to develop the commune into a form of production from which it was separated by a number of historical stages, and for which not even in the West the conditions were then ripe – evidently an impossible task – or else to develop into capitalism; what remained to her but the latter chance?

As to the commune, it is only possible so long as the differences of wealth among its members are but trifling. As soon as these differences become great, as soon as some of its members become the debt-slaves of the richer members, it can no longer live. The kulaki and miroyedy (kulaks and parasites) of Athens, before Solon, have destroyed the Athenian gens with the same implacability with which those of your country destroy the commune. I am afraid that institution is doomed. But on the other hand, capitalism opens out new views and new hopes. Look at what it has done and is doing in the West. A great nation like yours outlives every crisis. There is no great historical evil without a compensating historical progress.  Only the modus operandi is changed.  Que les destinees s'accomplissent! [Only the mode of operation is changed. Let fate be accomplished.]
 


1893 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to W. Borgius










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1894



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1894
Engels to Borgius[1]

Abstract


Source: Marx and Engels Correspondence;
Publisher: International Publishers (1968);
First Published: Gestamtausgabe;
Translated: Donna Torr;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan in 2000;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

London, January 25, 1894

Here is the answer to your questions!
(1) What we understand by the economic conditions, which we regard as the determining basis of the history of society, are the methods by which human beings in a given society produce their means of subsistence and exchange the products among themselves (in so far as division of labour exists). Thus the entire technique of production and transport is here included. According to our conception this technique also determines the method of exchange and, further, the division of products, and with it, after the dissolution of tribal society, the division into classes also and hence the relations of lordship and servitude and with them the state, politics, law, etc.  Under economic conditions are further included the geographical basis on which they operate and those remnants of earlier stages of economic development which have actually been
transmitted and have survived – often only through tradition or the force of inertia; also of course the external milieu which surrounds this form of society.
If, as you say, technique largely depends on the state of science, science depends far more still on the state and the requirements of technique. If society has a technical need, that helps science forward more than ten universities. The whole of hydrostatics (Torricelli, etc.) was called forth by the necessity for regulating the mountain streams of Italy in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. We have only known anything reasonable about electricity since its technical applicability was discovered.  But unfortunately it has become the custom in Germany to write the history of the sciences as if they had fallen from the skies.
(2) We regard economic conditions as the factor which ultimately determines historical development. But race is itself an economic factor. Here, however, two points must not be overlooked:
(a) Political, juridical, philosophical, religious, literary, artistic, etc., development is based on economic development. But all these react upon one another and also upon the economic base. It is not that the economic position is the cause and alone active, while everything else only has a passive effect.  There is, rather, interaction on the basis of the economic necessity, which ultimately always asserts itself. The state, for instance, exercises an influence by tariffs, free trade, good or bad fiscal system; and even the deadly inanition and impotence of the German petty bourgeois, arising from the miserable economic position of Germany from 1640 to 1830 and expressing itself at first in pietism, then in sentimentality and cringing servility to princes and nobles, was not without economic effect. It was one of the
greatest hindrances to recovery and was not shaken until the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars made the chronic misery an acute one. So it is not, as people try here and there conveniently to imagine, that the economic position produces an automatic effect. Men make their history themselves, only in given surroundings which condition it and on the basis of actual relations already existing, among which the economic relations, however much they may be influenced by the other political and ideological ones, are still ultimately the decisive ones, forming the red thread which runs through them and alone leads to understanding.
(b) Men make their history themselves, but not as yet with a collective will or according to a collective plan or even in a definitely defined, given society.  Their efforts clash, and for that very reason all such societies are governed by necessity, which is supplemented by and appears under the forms of accident.  The necessity which here asserts itself amidst all accident is again ultimately economic necessity. This is where the so-called great men come in for treatment. That such and such a man and precisely that man arises at that particular time in that given country is of course pure accident. But cut him out and there will be a demand for a substitute, and this substitute will be found, good or bad, but in the long run he will be found. That Napoleon, just that particular Corsican, should have been the military dictator whom the French Republic, exhausted by its own war, had rendered necessary, was an accident; but that, if a Napoleon had been lacking, another would have filled the place, is proved by the fact that the man has always been found as soon as he became necessary: Caesar, Augustus, Cromwell, etc. While Marx discovered the materialist conception of history, Thierry, Mignet, Guizot, and all the English historians up to 1850 are the proof that it was being striven for, and the discovery of the  same  conception  by Morgan proves that the time was ripe for it and that indeed it had to be discovered.
So with all the other accidents, and apparent accidents, of history.  The further the particular sphere which we are investigating is removed from the economic sphere and approaches that of pure abstract ideology, the more shall we find it exhibiting accidents in its development, the more will its curve run in a zig-zag. So also you will find that the axis of this curve will approach more and more nearly parallel to the axis of the curve of economic development the longer the period considered and the wider the field dealt with.
In Germany the greatest hindrance to correct understanding is the irresponsible neglect by literature of economic history. It is so hard, not only to disaccustom oneself of the ideas of history drilled into one at school, but still more to rake up the necessary material for doing so. Who, for instance, has read old G. von Gülich, whose dry collection of material nevertheless contains so much stuff for the clarification of innumerable political facts!
For the rest, the fine example which Marx has given in the Eighteenth Brumaire should already, I think, provide you fairly well with information on your questions, just because it is a practical example. I have also, I believe, already touched on most of the points in Anti-Dühring I, Chapters 9-11, and II, 2-4, as well as in III, I, or Introduction, and then in the last section of Feuerbach.
Please do not weigh each word in the above too carefully, but keep the connection in mind; I regret that I have not the time to work out what I am writing to you so exactly as I should be obliged to do for publication.


1. This letter was first published without any mention of the addressee in the journal Der socialistische Akademiker No 20, 1895, by its 
contributor H. Starkenburg.  As a result Starkenburg was wrongly 
identified as the addressee in all previous editions.— from Progress Publishers, 1968
 


1894 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Engels to W. Sombart







Letters:  Engels To W. Sombart March 11, 1895


Engels To W. Sombart
In Breslaun
London, March 11, 1895

First published: in the Beitrage zur Geschichte der deutscher Arbeiterbewegung No. 3, 1961;
Source: Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Volume 3, pp. 504-506;
Transcribed: by Steve Palmer.

Dear Sir,
Replying to your note of the 14th of last month, may I thank you for your kindness in sending me your work on Marx; I had already read it with great interest in the issue of the Archiv[1] which Dr. H. Braun was good enough to send me, and was pleased for once to find such understanding of Capital at a German University. Naturally I can’t altogether agree with the wording in which you render Marx’s exposition. Especially the definitions of the concept of value which you give on pages 576 and 577 seem to me to be rather all-embracing: I would first limit them historically by explicitly restricting them to the economic phase in which alone value has up to now been known, and could only have been known, namely, the forms of society in which commodity exchange, or commodity production, exists; in primitive communism value was unknown. And secondly it seems to me that the concept could also be defined in a narrower sense. But this would lead too far, in the main you are quite right.
Then, however, on page 586, you appeal directly to me, and the jovial manner with which you hold a pistol to my head made me laugh. But you need not worry, I shall “not assure you of the contrary.” The logical sequence by which Marx deduces the general and equal rate of profit from the different values of s / C = s / (c + v) produced in various capitalist enterprises is completely foreign to the mind of the individual capitalist. Inasmuch as it has a historical parallel, that is to say, as far as it exists in reality outside our heads, it manifests itself for instance in the fact that certain parts of the surplus value produced by capitalist A over and above the rate of profit, or above his share of the total surplus value, are transferred to the pocket of capitalist B whose output of surplus value remains as a rule below the customary dividend. But this process takes place objectively, in the things, unconsciously, and we can only now estimate how much work was required in order to achieve a proper understanding of these matters. If the conscious co-operation of the individual capitalists had been necessary to establish the average rate of profit, if the individual capitalist had known that he produces surplus value and how much of it, and that frequently he has to hand over part of his surplus value, then the relationship between surplus value and profit would have been fairly obvious from the outset and would presumably have already been described by Adam Smith, if not Petty.
According to Marx’s views all history up to now, in the case of big events, has come about unconsciously, that is, the events and their further consequences have not been intended; the ordinary actors in history have either wanted to achieve something different, or else what they achieved has led to quite different unforeseeable consequences. Applied to the economic sphere: the individual capitalists, each on his own, chase after the biggest profit. Bourgeois economy discovers that this race in which every one chases after the bigger profit results in the general and equal rate of profit, the approximately equal ratio of profit for each one. Neither the capitalists nor the bourgeois economists, however, realise that the goal of this race is the uniform proportional distribution of the total surplus value calculated on the total capital.
But how has the equalisation been brought about in reality? This is a very interesting point, about which Marx himself does not say much. But his way of viewing things is not a doctrine but a method. It does not provide ready-made dogmas, but criteria for further research and the method for this research. Here therefore a certain amount of work has to be carried out, since Marx did not elaborate it himself in his first draft. First of all we have here the statements on pages 153-156, III, I, [2] which are also important for your rendering of the concept of value and which prove that the concept has or had more reality than you ascribe to it. When commodity exchange began, when products gradually turned into commodities, they were exchanged approximately according to their value. It was the amount of labour expended on two objects which provided the only standard for their quantitative comparison. Thus value had a direct and real existence at that time. We know that this direct realisation of value in exchange ceased and that now it no longer happens. And I believe that it won’t be particularly difficult for you to trace the intermediate links, at least in general outline, that lead from directly real value to the value of the capitalist mode of production, which is so thoroughly hidden that our economists can calmly deny its existence. A genuinely historical exposition of these processes, which does indeed require thorough research but in return promises amply rewarding results, would be a very valuable supplement to Capital.[3]
Finally, I must also thank you for the high opinion which you have formed of me if you consider that I could have made something better of volume III. I cannot share your opinion, and believe I have done my duty by presenting Marx in Marx’s words, even at the risk of requiring the reader to do a bit more thinking for himself. ...

1. The reference is to Sombart’s article “Zur Kritik des ökonomischen Systems von Karl Marx” (Critique of the Economic System of Karl Marx), published in the journal Archiv für sociale Gesetzgebung und Statistik, Vol VII, 1894.
2. See Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1966, pp. 170-75.
3. In May 1895 Engels wrote his Supplement to “Capital,” Volume Three: “Law of Value and Rate of Profit” and “The Stock Exchange” (see Karl Marx, Capital Vol III, Moscow 1966, pp. 887-910).
 


1895 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive


