MARX & ENGELS
COLLECTED WORKS
VOLUME 7
Marx and Engels 1848    
=====第1页=====
file:///G|/Temp/menewisbns/intros/meint_7.htm [31/08/2011 18:35:21]KARL MARX
FREDERICK ENGELS
Volume
7 
Marx and Engels 1848
2010
Lawrence & Wishart
Electric Book
=====第2页=====
file:///D|/Temp/menewisbns/me7.htm [09/12/2010 14:41:09]Editorial commissions:
GREAT BRITAIN: Jack Cohen, Maurice Cornforth, MauriceDobb, E. J. Hobsbawm, James Klugmann, Margaret Mynatt.USA: James S. Allen, Philip S. Foner, Dirk J. Struik, William W.Weinstone.USSR: N. P. Karmanova, V. N. Pavlov, M. K. Shcheglova, T. Y.
Solovyova, Y. V. Yeremin, P. N. Fedoseyev, L. I. Golman, A. I.
Malysh, A. G. Yegorov, V. Y. Zevin.
Digital Edition Copyright © Lawrence & Wishart 2010Digital production: Electric BookISBN 978-1-84327-951-8 All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of
private study, research, criticism or review, no part of thispublication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, electrical,
chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner.
=====第3页=====
Contents 
Preface XV 
KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
March-November 1848 
1. Karl Marx and  Frederick  Engels. Demands of the Communist Party 
in Germany 3 
2. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Letter to Etienne Cabet, Editor of 
the Populaire  8 
3. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. To the Committee of the German 
Democratic Society in Paris 10 
4. Karl Marx. To the Editor of the Newspaper L'Alba 11 
KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
ARTICLES FROM THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
June  1-November  7, 1848 
June 
5. Statement of the Editorial Board of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung  15 
6. The Assembly at Frankfurt 16 
7. Hüser 20 
8. The Latest Heroic Deed of the House of Bourbon 24 
9. The Democratic Party 27 
10. Camphausen's Statement at the Session of May 30 30 
11. Defeat of the German Troops at Sundewitt 34 
12. Questions of Life and Death 36 
13. The Camphausen Government 39 

=====第4页=====
VI Contents-
14. The Question of Union 41 
15. TheWarComedy 42 
16. The Reaction 45 
17. Comité  de sûreté générale in Berlin  46 
18. The Programmes of the Radical-Democratic Party and of the 
Left at Frankfurt 48 
19. The Agreement Debates in Berlin 53 
20. The Agreement Debates 57 
21. The Question of the Address 62 
22. A New Partition of Poland 64 
23. The Shield of the Dynasty 66 
24. Cologne in Danger 68 
25. An Admission of Incompetence by the Assemblies of Frankfurt 
and Berlin 72 
26. The Berlin Debate on the Revolution 73 
27. The Position of the Parties in Cologne 87 
28. The Agreement Assembly of June 15 89 
29. The Prague Uprising 91 
30. Valdenaire's Arrest—Sebaldt 94 
31. The Agreement Assembly Session of June 17 96 
32. The Stupp Amendment 101 
33. A New Policy in Posen  104 
34. The Downfall of the Camphausen Government 106 
35. The Downfall of the Camphausen Government 107 
36. The First Deed of the German National Assembly in 
Frankfurt 109 
37. The Hansemann Government Ill 
38. The Neue Berliner Zeitung on the Chartists 113 
39. Threatof the Gervinus Zeitung  115 
40. Patow's Redemption Memorandum 117 
41. The Democratic Character of the Uprising 119 
42. News from Paris 121 
43. Reichensperger 122 
44. News from Paris 123 
45. Details about the 23rd of June 124 
46. News from Paris 128 
47. The Northern Starabout the Neue Rheinische Zeitung  129 
48. The 23rd of June 130 
49. The 24th of June 134 
50. The 25th of June 139 
51. The June Revolution 144 

=====第5页=====
Contents VTT 
July 
52. The Kölnische Zeitung on the June Revolution 150 
53. The June Revolution (The Course of the Paris Uprising) 157 
54. Germany's Foreign Policy 165 
55. Marrast and Thiers 168 
56. The Agreement Debates 170 
57. Arrests 176 
58. Arrests 177 
59. The Agreement Debates 180 
60. Legal Proceedings against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung  186 
61. The Berlin Agreement Debates 189 
62. The Government of Action 194 
63. The Agreement Debate 195 
64. The Ministerial Crisis 199 
65. The Agreement Session of July 4 (Second Article) 200 
66. Legal Proceedings against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung  208 
67. German Foreign Policy and the Latest Events in Prague 212 
68. The Agreement Debates of July 7 216 
69. Herr Forstmann on the State Credit 223 
70. The Agreement Debates 226 
71. The Debate on Jacoby's Motion 232 
72. The Suppression of the Clubs in Stuttgart and Heidelberg 248 
73. The Prussian Press Bill 250 
74. The Faedrelandon the Armistice with Denmark 253 
75. The Civic Militia Bill 256 
76. The Armistice with Denmark 266 
77. The Armistice "Negotiations" 270 
78. The Concordia of Turin 271 
79. The Agreement Debates on the District Estates (Agreement 
Session of July 18) 273 
80. The Bill on the Compulsory Loan and Its Motivation 278 
81. Armistice Negotiations with Denmark Broken Off 287 
82. The Dissolution of the Democratic Associations in Baden 288 
83. The Bill Proposing the Abolition of Feudal Obligations 290 
August 
84. The Kölnische Zeitungon the State of Affairs in England 296 
85. The Agreement Debate about the Valdenaire Affair 301 
86. The Milan Bulletin 305 

=====第6页=====
VIII Contents 
87. The Russian Note 307 
88. Miscellaneous 314 
89. Bakunin 315 
90. The Hansemann Government and the Old-Prussian Criminal 
Bill 317 
91. The Kölnische Zeitung on the Compulsory Loan 319 
92. Proudhon's Speech against Thiers 321 
93. Dr. Gottschalk  325 
94. Debate about the Existing Redemption Legislation 327 
95. The "Model State" of Belgium : 333 
96. The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 337 
97. The Danish Armistice and Hansemann 382 
98. The German Citizenship and the Prussian Police 383 
99. The Italian Liberation Struggle and the Cause of Its Present 
Failure 385 
100. Charles Albert's Betrayal 388 
101. The Attempt to Expel Schapper 390 
102. Geiger and Schapper 393 
103. The Kölnische Zeitung about Italy 395 
104. The Zeitungs-Halle on the Rhine Province 399 
September 
105. Mediation and Intervention. Radetzky and Cavaignac 402 
106. The Antwerp Death Sentences 404 
107. The Conflict between Marx and Prussian Citizenship 407 
108. The Danish Armistice 411 
109. Editorial Note Accompanying the Article "The Financial Project 
of the Left" 416 
110. The Fall of the Government of Action 417 
111. His Successors 420 
112. The Danish-Prussian Armistice 421 
113. Arrests 426 
114. The Crisis and the Counter-Revolution 427 
115. Army Order, Election Candidates, Semi-Official Comments on 
Prussian Ambiguity 434 
116. Freedom of Debate in Berlin 436 
117. Ratification of the Armistice 439 
118. The Uprising in Frankfurt 442 
119. The Faedrelandon the Armistice 446 

=====第7页=====
Contents IX 
120. The Government of the Counter-Revolution 448 
121. The Cologne Committee of Public Safety 450 
122. Public Prosecutor Hecker Questions People Who Had Attended 
the Worringen Meeting 451 
123. Counter-Revolution in Cologne 452 
124. An Attempt to Arrest Moll 454 
125. State of Siege in Cologne 455 
October 
126. Editorial Statement Concerning the Reappearance of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung 456 
127. Revolution in Vienna 457 
128. The Latest News from the "Model State" 459 
129. The "Revolution of Cologne" 462 
130. The Pfuel Government 466 
131. Thiers' Speech Concerning a General Mortgage Bank with a 
Legal Rate 467 
132. The Frankfurter Oberpostamts-Zeitung and the Viennese Revolu­
tion '. 472 
133. Reply of the King of Prussia to the Delegation of the National 
Assembly 474 
134. Reply of Frederick William IV to the Delegation of the Civic 
Militia 476 
135. The Réforme on the June Insurrection 478 
136. English-French Mediation in Italy 480 
137. The "Model Constitutional State" 482 
138. Public Prosecutor "Hecker" and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung  485 
November 
139. "Appeal of the Democratic Congress to the German People" 490 
140. The Paris Réforme on the Situation in France 493 
141. The Viennese Revolution and the Kölnische Zeitung 496 
142. The Latest News from Vienna, Berlin and Paris 498 
143. Our Bourgeoisie and Dr. Nuckel  500 
144. News from Vienna 501 
145. The Victory of the Counter-Revolution in Vienna 503 
146. Frederick  Engels. From Paris to JBerne 507 
I. Seine and Loire ^11 
II. Burgundy 524 

=====第8页=====
Contents 
APPENDICES 
1. Receipts of the Central Authority of the Communist League for 
Money Received and Paid Out 533 
2. To All Workers of Germany 535 
3. Marx's Application for Prussian Citizenship 537 
4. Account of a Statement Made by Karl Marx to the Cologne Police 
Inspector 538 
5. Prospectus for the Founding of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung  539 
6. Minutes of the Meeting of the Cologne Community of the 
' Communist League 542 
7. Articles of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung Company 543 
8. Legal Investigation against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung  554 
9. Legal Proceedings against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung  555 
10. Report of the Speeches Made by Marx and Engels at the General 
Meeting of the Democratic Society in Cologne on August 4, 
1848 556 
11. Announcement of the Convocation of the Rhenish District 
Congress of Democratic Associations 558 
12. The Legal Proceedings against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung  560 
13. Karl Marx to Police Superintendent Geiger  561 
14. From the Minutes of the General Meeting of the Democratic 
Society in Cologne Held on August 11, 1848 562 
15. Protest of the Democratic Society in Cologne against the 
Incorporation of Posen in the German Confederation 554 
16. The Legal Investigation against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung  566 
17. Record of Engels' Speech at the Public Meeting of the First 
Congress of Rhenish Democrats Held at Cologne on August 13, 
1848 567 
18. Note in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung on Marx's Departure for 
Vienna 568 
19. From a Newspaper Item Listing the Names of Visitors Who Had 
Just Arrived in Vienna 569 
20. Newspaper Reports of Marx's Speech in the Vienna Democratic 
Association on August 28, 1848 570 
21. Newspaper Reports of Marx's Speech in the First Workers' 
Association of Vienna on August 30, 1848 572 
22. Report of Marx's Lecture on Wage Labour and Capital at the 
Meeting of the First Workers' Association of Vienna on Sep­
tember 2, 1848 573 
23. Report of Platoon Leader Mentes of the Cologne Civic Militia 574 
24. Reply 575 
25. Legal Proceedings against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung  576 

=====第9页=====
Contents XI 
26. Address to the German National Assembly in Frankfurt Adopted 
by a Public Meeting Held in Cologne on September 7, 1848 577 
27. Minutes of the Committee Meeting of the Cologne Workers' 
Association Held on September 11, 1848 579 
28. Letter Written by von Kühlwetter, Minister of the Interior, to 
Karl Marx 581 
29. Mass Meeting and the Committee of Public Safety 582 
30. Mass Meeting in Worringen 586 
31. Decision of the Mass Meeting 588 
32. Announcement of the Responsible Publishers of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung 590 
33. Announcement of the Responsible Publishers of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung 591 
34. Invitation to Subscribe to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 592 
35. Warrant for the Arrest of Heinrich Bürgers and Friedrich 
Engels 593 
36. Black List 594 
37. From the Minutes of the Committee Meeting of the Cologne 
Workers' Association on October 16, 1848. Entry of Marx's 
Speech in Connection with His Assumption of the Presidency 595 
38. From the Minutes of the General Meeting of the Cologne 
Workers' Association on October 22, 1848 597 
39. From the Minutes of the Committee Meeting of the Cologne 
Workers' Association on November 6, 1848. Entry Relating to 
Marx's Report on the Events in Vienna 598 
NOTES AND INDEXES 
Notes 601 
Name Index 654 
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 681 
Index of Periodicals 693 
Subject Index 699 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
Demands of the Communist Party in Germany, leaflet published in 
Cologne in 1848 5 
First page of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 1 21 
First page of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung containing Marx's article 
"The June Revolution" 145 
Plan of Paris in June 1848 146-47 

=====第10页=====
XII Contents 
Passport used by Karl Marx in 1848 and 1849 408-09 
First page of Engels' travel notes "From Paris to Berne" 509 
Map sketched by Engels, showing his route from Auxerre to Le 
Locle 508-09 
Articles of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung Company 545 

=====第11页=====
TRANSLATORS 
GREGOR BENTON: Articles 11, 14, 34, 43, 77, 81, 86, 88, 
93, 97, 100-02,109, 111, 113,115,119,121-24,128, 
143 
CLEMENS DUTT: Articles 42, 44; Appendices 2, 6, 8, 9, 11, 
12, 14-16, 20-22, 24, 25, 29-32, 34-39 
BARBARA RUHEMANN: Article 3; Appendices l, 5, 7, 10, 
13, 17, 18, 23, 26-28, 33 
SALO RYAZANSKAYA: Articles 5, 6, 9, 18, 26, 29, 41, 46, 
51, 53, 54, 71, 76, 83, 84, 89, 96, 99, 104-06, 112, 
114, 116-18, 127, 140, 142, 144, 145; Appendices 
3, 4, 19 
KAI SCHOENHALS: Articles 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 15-17, 19-25, 
27, 28, 30-33, 35-40, 45, 47-50, 52, 55-70, 72-75, 
78-80,  82, 85, 87, 90-92, 94, 95, 98, 103, 107, 108, 
110, 120, 125, 126, 129-39, 141 
CHRISTOPHER UPWARD: Article 146 

=====第12页=====
Preface 
The seventh volume of the Collected Works of Karl Marx* and 
Frederick Engels covers the period from March to November 1848. 
It is the first of three volumes (Vols. 7-9) containing their writings 
during the revolutionary years 1848 and 1849. 
The series of revolutions of this period arose primarily from the 
crisis of feudalism and absolutism, which still prevailed in a 
considerable part of Europe. Emerging bourgeois society needed to 
rid itself of feudal relics and abolish such legacies of the feudal age as 
the political dismemberment of Germany and Italy and the national 
oppression of the Poles, Hungarians and other European nations 
that were striving for independence. 
Feudalism had already been swept away in France by the 
revolution of 1789-94. But another bourgeois revolution became 
inevitable when the rapacious rule of the financial aristocracy, the 
top crust of the bourgeoisie, and the political monopoly it enjoyed 
began to hamper the further development of capitalism. 
Unlike previous bourgeois revolutions, those of 1848 and 1849 
took place when fundamental social contradictions had already 
developed within bourgeois society and when the proletariat had 
already entered the political arena. The deepening conflict between 
proletariat and bourgeoisie — a conflict which became especially 
acute in France, and also in England, the most advanced capitalist 
country at that time — left its imprint on the revolutionary events of 
that period, influenced their course and determined their specific 
character. 
Marx and Engels in these years made clear the organic unity of 
their revolutionary theory and practice. They were by no means 
merely detached observers, but played a very active and practical 
part in the revolutionary events themselves. They demonstrated 
their qualities as dedicated revolutionary writers, pamphleteers and 

=====第13页=====
XVI Preface 
true tribunes of the people, who organised and led the democratic 
and proletarian movements and headed the vanguard of the 
working class. 
The revolutions of 1848-49 were indeed the first crucial practical 
test for Marxism both as the scientific world outlook of the working 
class and as a political movement. Revolutionary epochs, with their 
rapidly and drastically changing situations, the sharp demarcations 
of class forces and the powerful rise of the revolutionary activities of 
the masses are always testing times for party doctrines and 
ideologies. For Marxism this test in 1848-49 demonstrated the solid 
foundation and viability of its theoretical and tactical principles. 
Equally it exposed sectarian and dogmatic features of petty-
bourgeois Utopian socialism and the theoretical and tactical weak­
nesses of many of the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois democrats. 
Before 1848 what had been of paramount importance in Marxism 
had been the creation of its general theoretical basis — its 
philosophy, the working out of its dialectical and materialist method 
to analyse social phenomena. But now immediate problems of 
political strategy and tactics had urgently to be solved. And Marx and 
Engels were able accurately to define the intrinsic nature of the 
tempestuous events of the revolutionary years by clearly revealing 
the class forces at work, and in many cases to predict the further 
course and the after-effects of the events. The political programme 
they put forward at various stages of the revolution expressed the 
basic requirements of social change. It was a programme to prepare 
the ground for further social advance by a consistent and complete 
bourgeois-democratic revolution. 
The analysis of current events by Marx and Engels in 1848-49 
permanently enriched revolutionary theory with new conclusions 
and general principles derived from actual experience of the class 
struggle waged by the masses and, in particular, by the prole­
tariat. Lenin was later to emphasise that "their participation in 
the mass revolutionary struggle of 1848-49 ... was their point of 
departure when determining the future pattern of the workers' 
movement and democracy in different countries. It was to this point 
that they always returned in order to determine the essential nature 
of the different classes and their tendencies..." (V. I. Lenin,  Collected 
Works, Vol. 13, Moscow, 1962, p. 37). 
The volume opens with the "Demands of the Communist Party in 
Germany" drawn up by Marx and Engels in the name of the Central 
Authority of the Communist League. This set forth concrete political 
objectives for the proletariat in the German revolution which began 

=====第14页=====
Preface XVII 
with uprisings in Prussia and other German states in March 1848. 
And running like a single thread throughout was the sense of the 
indissoluble connection of the class interest of the proletariat with 
the national interest. The first demand was for the establishment of a 
single and indivisible German republic. Marx and Engels saw in the 
abolition of the economic and political dismemberment of the 
country, which was divided into some three dozen large and small 
states,  and in the creation of a single democratic German state the 
necessary precondition for further progress. This demand was then 
closely linked with another — for the abolition of feudal oppression, 
the liberation of the peasants from all feudal services and the 
destruction of the whole economic base of the rule of the nobility. 
The full programme of the "Demands" provided for the démocra­
tisation of the entire economic and political system of the coun­
try—the creation of a truly democratic and representative legislative 
assembly, the introduction of universal suffrage, fundamental 
legal reforms, universal free education, and universal arming of 
the people as the sure means to defend their democratic rights. 
Marx and Engels looked forward to the heightening and 
intensification of the revolutionary wave, carried forward by the 
resolute and rising struggle of the German proletariat, the lower 
middle class in the towns and the small peasants. These they saw as 
the social forces which could carry through a successful bourgeois-
democratic revolution. And this viewpoint was a very important 
element of the emerging Marxist doctrine of permanent revolution, 
for which the starting point was the sweeping away of all survivals of 
feudalism but for which the goal was the overthrow of the capitalist 
system effected in the interests of the working class and of all 
exploited people. They saw in the successful bourgeois-democratic 
revolution the prologue to a proletarian revolution. And accordingly 
they outlined in the "Demands" a number of transitional measures, 
such as the transformation of feudal estates into state property and 
the organisation of large-scale agriculture on these confiscated lands, 
the nationalisation of the mines and of all means of transport, 
provision of work for all workers and state maintenance for those 
unable to work. 
Thus in the "Demands of the Communist Party in Germany" the 
general propositions just announced in the Manifesto of the 
Communist Party were already expressed in concrete terms adapted 
to the specific situation in one country and the particular conditions 
of the German revolution of 1848-49. 
The bulk of the volume consists of articles by Marx and Engels 
written after their return to Germany and published in the Neue 
L>-3447 

=====第15页=====
XVIII Preface 
Rheinische Zeitung between June 1 and November 7, 1848. These 
were articles not just to record and interpret but to influence events. 
They reflect Marx's and Engels' direct participation in the revolu­
tionary struggle and the tactics they used during the German and the 
European revolution. 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung was an organ of democracy—but, as 
Engels wrote, of "a democracy which everywhere emphasised in 
every point the specific proletarian character" (see "Marx and the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 1848-1849" written in 1884). This trend of 
the paper was determined by the specific historical features of the 
German revolution, the actual alignment of class forces, in which the 
level of development reached by the German proletariat, its 
weakness and lack of organisation, made it impracticable to set up 
immediately a mass proletarian party. Two or three hundred 
members of the Communist League, scattered throughout the 
country, could not exert any substantial influence on the broad 
masses of the people. Marx and Engels, accordingly, decided to 
take their stand on the extreme Left wing of the democratic move­
ment. 
Although the Neue Rheinische Zeitung carried the banner of 
democracy, it was nevertheless the official organ of no particular 
democratic organisation. From the very first days of the revolution 
Marx and Engels criticised the weaknesses and errors of the German 
democrats, their inconsistencies and vacillations, and also their 
inclination to go to extremes and to engage in "revolutionary 
adventures". Even before returning from Paris, Marx and Engels 
strongly opposed a scheme drawn up by Herwegh, Bornstedt and 
other petty-bourgeois democrats to invade Germany with a volun­
teer corps in order to start a republican uprising. The documents 
published in this volume (e.g. "Letter to Etienne Cabet, Editor of 
the Populaire" and "To the Committee of the German Democratic 
Society in Paris") show up the real nature of this plan. As a matter of 
principle, Marx and Engels repudiated any such adventurous and 
conspiratorial schemes to "export the revolution". They consistently 
upheld the proletarian point of view within the general democratic 
movement. And so they tried to draw the petty-bourgeois democrats 
into the genuine revolutionary mass struggle and get them to adopt a 
firmer and more consistent course. At the same time they drew their 
followers' attention to the importance of organising workers' 
associations and the political education of the proletariat, indispensa­
ble prerequisites for the creation of a workers' mass party. 
Marx and Engels defended their line against, in particular, the 
sectarian views of Gottschalk and his supporters. These had 

=====第16页=====
Preface XIX 
completely failed to understand the tasks facing the proletariat in the 
bourgeois-democratic revolution, and had come out against the 
workers taking any part in the general democratic movement. They 
were against the struggle for democratic political demands and 
against joint action with the democrats. The beginning of the conflict 
between Marx, together with those who shared his convictions, and 
Gottschalk is reflected in the "Minutes of the Meeting of the Cologne 
Community of the Communist League" (see this volume, p. 542). 
Marx and Engels likewise rejected the tactics of Stephan Born, who 
wanted to circumscribe the fight of the working class by setting it 
stricdy occupational economic goals, which would in fact have 
diverted the proletariat from the general political tasks that 
confronted the German people. Though they did not publicly 
criticise Born's opportunism, since his endeavour to unite the various 
workers' associations helped to consolidate the forces of the 
proletariat, they emphatically protested against any attempt to 
equate Born's programme and tactics with the course pursued by the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung (see "The Concordia of Turin"). 
The editorial board of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, which was 
headed by Marx, became the true headquarters of the militant 
proletariat. It became in effect the leading centre of the Communist 
League, directing the political activity of its members throughout 
Germany during the revolutionary period. The paper's revolution­
ary propaganda, its unmasking of the counter-revolutionary forces 
and their abettors, and its defence of democratic demands, won the 
editors immense prestige in democratic circles of Germany and 
beyond her borders as courageous fighters for the interest of the 
people. "Outside, throughout the Reich," Engels wrote later, 
"wonder was expressed that we carried on our activities so 
unconcernedly within a Prussian fortress of the first rank, in the face 
of a garrison of  8,000  troops and in the face of the guardhouse" 
(Marx and Engels, Selected Works in three volumes, Vol. 3, Moscow, 
1970,  p. 171). 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung's stand against the arbitrary behaviour 
of the courts, the police and the military, against the victimisation of 
those who took part in the revolutionary movement and against 
attempts to muzzle the press (see for example the articles "Hiiser", 
"Arrests", "The Attempt to Expel Schapper", "Public Prosecutor 
'Hecker' and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung", and others) found 
widespread support. The paper's great popularity was largely due to 
its brilliant journalism, its militancy, its precise language, the wide 
use it made of political exposure, and the devastating sarcasm with 
which it attacked the enemies of the revolution. 
2* 

=====第17页=====
XX Preface 
Not only did the Neue Rheinische Zeitung disseminate revolutionary 
ideas,  it also promoted the organisation of the masses and helped 
them acquire courage, endurance and readiness for resolute action. 
The example its editors themselves set by their practical activity in 
the workers' and democratic organisations of the Rhineland (such as 
the Cologne Workers' Association and the Cologne Democratic 
Society), and their constant efforts, by means of the newspaper 
and through personal contacts, to exert a revolutionary influence 
on the German proletarian and democratic movement also played 
a great part in rallying people around the revolutionary standard. 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung carried comments not only on vital 
questions of the German revolutionary movement but also on those 
of the European one. In their articles Marx and Engels sought to 
analyse all important aspects of social development during the 
revolutionary epoch. They saw the revolution in broad historical 
perspective, as a phase of universal history, and so understood the 
interconnectedness of widely dispersed events as separate links in a 
single chain. 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung, supporting as it did the revolutionary 
actions in many countries, was rightly regarded as the revolutionary 
organ not only of German democracy, but also of European 
democracy. It was the first influential popular newspaper to voice 
the class interests of the European proletariat and to formulate the 
democratic and socialist aims of the international proletarian 
struggle for emancipation. No wonder that progressive leaders of 
the contemporary European labour movement expressed their 
admiration for its consistent revolutionary trend. The Chartist 
Northern Star of June 24, 1848, for instance, wrote: "The Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung ..., which announces itself 'the organ of democra­
cy', is conducted with singular ability and extraordinary boldness; 
and we hail it as a worthy, able, and valiant comrade in the 
grand crusade against tyranny and injustice in every shape and 
form." 
The paper's proletarian and internationalist attitude became 
especially evident during the uprising of the Paris workers in June 
1848.  It was the only newspaper in Germany, and practically in the 
whole of Europe, that from the very outset firmly sided with the 
insurgents, and fearlessly took their part against the slander and 
abuse showered on them by the ruling classes and their press. 
A series of articles and comments by Engels is devoted to the June 
uprising, as is also one of the most powerful of Marx's articles, "The 
June Revolution". These articles, which were written while the 
events were still in progress or immediately afterwards, are imbued 

=====第18页=====
Preface XXI 
with fighting spirit and at the same time they contain a profound 
analysis of the causes of the uprising and of its historical significance. 
In his article on "The June Revolution" Marx shows the 
fundamental difference between this uprising and all previous 
revolutions. It was aimed at the system of exploitation  itself,  and was 
the first major manifestation of the profound class contradictions 
inherent in bourgeois society, "civil war in its most terrible aspect, 
the war of labour against capital" (see this volume, p. 147). Marx 
states that the uprising was the predictable consequence of 
developments in France after February 22 to 24, when the workers 
and artisans of Paris toppled the July monarchy and set up a 
bourgeois republic; it was the proletarian masses' reply to the 
bourgeois attack on their rights. The June events, as Marx 
demonstrates, destroyed the illusion that universal brotherhood and 
harmony prevailed in bourgeois society. They revealed the irrecon­
cilable contradictions between the capitalist class and the proletariat, 
and proved that the only way to emancipate the workers was by the 
revolutionary overthrow of capitalism. It was this that constituted the 
world-historic significance of the June uprising, despite the serious 
defeat the workers suffered. 
The military aspects of the June events were examined in Engels' 
articles, "Details about the 23rd of June", "The 23rd of June", "The 
24th of June", "The 25th of June", "The Kölnische Zeitung on the 
June Revolution" and "The June Revolution (The Course of the 
Paris Uprising)", which describe the June uprising as "the first 
decisive battle of the proletariat" (see this volume, p. 143) and which 
contain a number of important observations about the nature, the 
significance and the methods of street and barricade fighting under 
the conditions existing at that time. These articles provided the basis 
of the Marxist theory of armed insurrection. Engels admired not 
only the heroism and selflessness of the barricade fighters, but also 
the ability of the Paris workers to acquire the necessary practical 
military skill and knowledge. He wrote: "It is quite remarkable how 
quickly the workers mastered the plan of campaign, how well-
concerted their actions were and how skilfully they used the difficult 
terrain" (see this volume, p. 159). 
Marx and Engels realised from the start that the June uprising in 
Paris was an event of European importance and regarded it as a 
turning-point in the European revolution. They pointed out that the 
insurgents' victory would have radically changed the balance of 
forces to the advantage of the revolution in all countries. Their 
defeat, on the other hand, encouraged the counter-revolutionaries 
everywhere. The French bourgeoisie, by crushing the insurrection, 

=====第19页=====
XXII Preface 
fought in fact on the same side as feudal and absolutist reaction in 
Europe, which was beginning to lift up its head again. 
After June 1848 Marx and Engels continued attentively to follow 
events in France and to discuss them in the pages of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung ("Proudhon's Speech against Thiers", "The Paris 
Réforme on the Situation in France", and other articles). Their 
articles on France show that they still expected a new revolutionary 
upsurge, in which the French proletariat was to play a leading part. 
Marx and Engels stressed the connection and interdependence 
existing between the revolutions in the different European coun­
tries.  And for this very reason they judged that a victory of the 
French workers would be of decisive importance, for it would give a 
new and powerful impetus to the revolutionary struggles of the 
people in the other European countries. They hoped that this victory 
would make it easier to carry through to the end the bourgeois-
democratic revolution in Germany and would pave the way for a 
proletarian revolution throughout Europe. 
Engels wrote later that their expectations at that time of a 
proletarian revolution in the near future were due to some extent to 
their having overestimated the level of economic development in 
Europe and also the degree of organisation and class consciousness 
reached by the proletariat at that time. But neither the objective 
nor the subjective prerequisites of the revolution were then 
mature enough for the liquidation of the capitalist mode of pro­
duction. 
The attention of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was, however, 
invariably focussed on Germany, on the course of the revolution in 
the German states and the driving forces of the German revolu­
tionary movement and its perspectives. 
In their analysis of the immediate outcome of the German March 
revolution of 1848 Marx and Engels emphasised that the revolution 
had not been carried through to the end (e.g. in the articles on "The 
Berlin Debate on the Revolution", "The Debate on Jacoby's Motion" 
and "The Suppression of the Clubs in Stuttgart and Heidelberg"). 
Although in Vienna on March 13, in Berlin on March 18 and 19, and 
also in various other German states the people forced the monarchs 
to make a number of concessions (they promised to adopt 
constitutions, to convene national assemblies and to form liberal or 
semi-liberal governments) they failed to achieve a decisive victory 
over feudalism. The entire political structure and the entire civil 
service and police apparatus were left intact. "The Bastille ... has not 
yet been stormed," wrote the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, stressing that 
the decisive battle had not yet been won (see this volume, p. 89). 

=====第20页=====
Preface XXIII 
The reason for this half-heartedness of the German revolution 
was, according to the founders of Marxism, the policy pursued by 
the liberal bourgeoisie after it had attained power. The German 
bourgeoisie, scared by the determination of the masses, and 
especially by the revolutionary action of the French proletariat, 
betrayed the interests of the people. "The big bourgeoisie, which was 
all along anti-revolutionary, concluded a defensive and offensive 
alliance with the reactionary forces, because it was afraid of the 
people, i.e. of the workers and the democratic bourgeoisie" (see this 
volume, p. 74). In the articles which dealt with the debates in the 
Prussian National Assembly and analysed the policy of the Camp-
hausen-Hansemann Ministry and the Auerswald-Hansemann 
Ministry, which replaced it in July 1848, Marx and Engels firmly 
opposed the "agreement theory", which the leaders of the Prussian 
liberal bourgeoisie advanced to justify their compromises with the 
feudal and monarchical forces (see, inter alia, "The Government of 
Action", "The Crisis and the Counter-Revolution"). 
Marx and Engels clearly foresaw that two antithetical courses were 
possible after the March uprising. One was that designed to carry the 
revolution further in the interest of the broad masses of the people, 
by radically abolishing all feudal and monarchical institutions, all 
vestiges of feudalism, first of all in agriculture, just as they had been 
abolished by the French revolution between 1789 and 1794. 
The other, pursued by the German liberals, was designed to 
curtail the revolutionary movement and to come to an arrange­
ment with the feudal aristocracy. The second course, the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung warned, would inevitably lead to a monarchical 
counter-revolution and to the partial or complete restoration of the 
state of affairs which had existed before the March revolutionary 
events. 
Marx and Engels waged a tireless struggle to solve the principal 
task facing the German revolution — the national unification of the 
country. In a number of articles (e.g. "The Programmes of the 
Radical-Democratic Party and of the Left at Frankfurt", "The 
Zeitungs-Halle on the Rhine Province") they expressed their 
opposition to plans hatched by the German liberals to unite Germany 
under the hegemony of Prussia or Austria, and likewise to the setting 
up of a federal state on Swiss lines, a project that had found wide 
support in democratic circles. Marx and Engels demonstrated that 
only the establishment of a truly united and truly democratic state 
could entirely abolish the economic division and political fragmenta­
tion of Germany, together with all survivals of medieval particular­
ism and local isolation. Such centralisation, carried through on a 

=====第21页=====
XXIV Preface 
really democratic basis, would, they thought, create favourable 
conditions for a genuine consolidation of the German proletariat, 
and of the German revolutionary movement, too, which was greatly 
hampered by separatist tendencies and by parochial narrow-
mindedness. They advocated the unification of Germany "from 
below". It should be brought about by the revolutionary onslaught of 
the people on the decaying absolutist system in the states of the 
German Confederation, and above all in Prussia and Austria. 
"Germany," Engels wrote, "must become  one  state not only in word 
but in deed. And to bring this about it is necessary above all that 
there should be 'neither an Austria nor a Prussia' " (see this volume, 
p. 400). 
Marx and Engels pointed out that Germany's unification was a 
European problem, and that it could only be achieved in the course 
of a struggle waged by the revolutionary forces of the European 
countries against the internal and external forces of reaction, and 
above all against the counter-revolutionary rulers of Britain and 
against Russian Tsarism then acting as the principal gendarme of 
Europe. 
It was from this revolutionary point of view that they approached 
the question of Schleswig-Holstein. According to the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, the national liberation movement in the duchies of Schleswig 
and Holstein, which were ruled by the Danish King and inhabited 
mainly by Germans, had become part of the struggle for the 
unification of Germany into a single democratic state. The Prussian 
Government, which by the logic of events was involved in the 
Schleswig-Holstein war waged by the German Confederation against 
Denmark, tried to come to an arrangement with the Danish 
Government; it was prepared to sacrifice German national interests, 
not only in response to the pressure exerted by Britain and Russia, 
who supported the Danish Crown, but also because it wanted to 
disengage the Prussian troops so as to be able to employ them against 
the masses of the people in Prussia  itself.  This treacherous policy of 
the Prussian Government, carried on with the collusion of the 
Prussian and German liberal bourgeoisie, was unequivocally exposed 
by Marx and Engels, who regarded it as a fatal concession to the 
counter-revolutionary powers and an obstacle to German unity. 
"Prussia, England and Russia," wrote Engels in the article "The 
Danish-Prussian Armistice", "are the three powers which have 
greater reason than anyone else to fear the German revolution and 
its first result — German unity: Prussia because she would thereby 
cease to exist, England because it would deprive her of the 
possibility of exploiting the German market, and Russia because it 

=====第22页=====
Preface XXV 
would spell the advance of democracy not only to the Vistula but 
even as far as the Dvina and the Dnieper. Prussia, England and 
Russia have conspired against Schleswig-Holstein, against Germany 
and against the revolution" (see this volume, pp. 424-25). 
A revolutionary war against Tsarism and the other reactionary 
forces in Europe was regarded by Marx and Engels not only as a 
means to defend the revolution but as a condition of its further 
development. They reasoned that in the course of such a war the 
resistance of the people to the counter-revolutionary forces within 
the country was also bound to grow and that the preconditions for 
revolutionary outbursts could come into being even in those 
countries where popular discontent had not yet led to overt 
revolutionary action. The news about Russia's unstable internal 
situation — disturbances taking place in various districts, rising 
discontent in St. Petersburg  etc.  — received in Germany and printed 
in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (see "The Russian Note") justified the 
hope that, in the event of such a war, a revolutionary outbreak might 
occur even in the Tsarist Empire. 
For Marx and Engels power was the fundamental question in 
every revolution. And in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung they firmly 
upheld the concept of the sovereignty of the people and the 
establishment of a people's democratic government as conditions 
indispensable for the consolidation of the victory of the revolu­
tionary masses and the implementation of the tasks facing the 
revolutionary movement. These ideas run through "The Assembly 
at Frankfurt", one of their first articles to appear in the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. Subsequently the concept of the people's 
sovereignty was continually returned to by them and, on the basis of 
the experience gained in the revolutionary struggle, further 
developed and made more concrete at every stage in the German 
revolution — at the time of the political crisis in Prussia caused by the 
action of the people in Berlin on June 14, during the intensification 
of the fight between the counter-revolutionary and the democratic 
forces in September, and during the October uprising in Vienna and 
the ensuing events. 
Already the experience of the first months of the revolution 
convinced Marx and Engels of the necessity to abolish all the old 
administrative, military and judicial authorities, thoroughly purge 
the entire government apparatus, and end the rule of the 
bureaucracy, which was especially powerful in Prussia (see "The 
Agreement Session of July 4" and other articles). They saw in the 
arming of the people, who stood up against the counter­
revolutionary soldiery, the principal guarantee of the sovereignty of 

=====第23页=====
XXVI Preface 
the people (see "The Agreement Assembly Session of June 17", 
"The Civic Militia Bill" and other articles). 
Marx and Engels, who regarded mass revolutionary struggle as the 
decisive factor in carrying through the revolution, vigorously 
supported all who fought in the revolutionary battles, e.g. the 
Viennese workers who fought again on the barricades in May 1848 
to compel the ruling circles to make new concessions; the workers of 
Berlin who in June 1848 stormed the arsenal to obtain weapons and 
to repulse the counter-revolutionary conspirators; and the in­
surgents in Frankfurt am Main who rose in September 1848 in 
protest against the ratification of the infamous armistice with 
Denmark by the Frankfurt Assembly. 
On the other hand, Marx and Engels emphasised again and again 
that a premature or badly prepared uprising would only result in 
defeat and thus strengthen the counter-revolutionary forces. For 
example, in the articles "Cologne in Danger" and "The 'Revolu­
tion of Cologne' " they urged the Cologne workers not to allow the 
Prussian Government to provoke them to action, but to preserve 
their forces for the decisive battle. The explanatory campaign 
conducted by Marx and Engels and their comrades-in-arms in 
Cologne in fact prevented the destruction of the democratic 
movement in the Rhine Province during the September crisis. 
According to the editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, revolution­
ary action from below must be matched by a vigorous policy in the 
representative institutions created by the revolution, which should 
act as constituent assemblies in the name of the people. Marx and 
Engels fought for the creation of democratic representative bodies, 
which would reflect the will of the masses, be closely connected with 
them and rely on their support. By stressing that deputies elected by 
the people should be accountable to the people and carry out its 
wishes, they upheld the right of the revolutionary people to exert 
pressure on elected assemblies and to demand that they adopt 
effective revolutionary decisions and take steps to implement them 
("Freedom of Debate in Berlin" and other articles). 
In a number of articles dealing with the German National 
Assembly and also in a series devoted to the debates in the Prussian 
National Assembly, Marx and Engels sharply criticised the conduct 
of the liberal majorities. Because all drastic measures were sabotaged 
by the liberals, the Frankfurt and Berlin assemblies, which failed to 
appeal to the masses and never assumed real power, engaged only in 
futile verbal disputes and became merely pitiable imitations of 
representative assemblies. The deputies representing the democratic 
bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie, who formed the Left wing in 

=====第24页=====
Preface XXVII 
these assemblies, failed to display sufficient energy either. Marx and 
Engels often rebuked the parliamentary leaders of the "Left" and 
the leaders of democratic organisations for their indecision and their 
refusal openly to side with the people. (See, for example, Marx's 
article "Appeal of the Democratic Congress to the German People".) 
They stressed the detrimental effect of the constitutional illusions in 
the grip of which many Left-wing politicians still remained, and their 
unfounded hope of carrying through radical measures by par­
liamentary means alone, without the support of the revolutionary 
masses. 
During the September days Marx and Engels, who were convinced 
that the conciliatory policy of the Berlin and Frankfurt assemblies 
merely led to ever increasing concessions to the counter-revolution, 
coined the slogan of the revolutionary dictatorship of the people to 
express the concept of the people's sovereignty during the revolu­
tion. In the article "The Crisis and the Counter-Revolution" Marx 
wrote: "Every provisional political set-up following a revolution 
requires a dictatorship, and an energetic dictatorship at that" (see 
this volume, p. 431). For the editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
this dictatorship constituted power genuinely wielded by the people: 
this power is by its very nature democratic and at the same time bold 
and vigorous, capable of crushing all counter-revolutionary conspi­
racies,  of abolishing the monarchy and feudal landownership, and of 
ensuring the complete victory of the bourgeois-democratic revolu­
tion. That Marx and Engels firmly rejected the sectarian interpreta­
tion of revolutionary power as the arbitrary dictatorship of a small 
group of men is evident from the speech against Weitling which 
Marx made at the meeting of the Cologne Democratic Society on 
August 4, 1848 (see this volume, pp. 556-57). 
The participation of the masses of the peasantry in the revolution­
ary struggle was regarded by Marx and Engels as a most important 
condition for the extension and consolidation of the democratic 
front. They thought that the spontaneous actions of the peasants 
which were taking place all over Germany should be rendered 
organised and purposeful. In such articles as "Patow's Redemption 
Memorandum", "Debate about the Existing Redemption Legisla­
tion" and others Marx and Engels set forth the agrarian programme 
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. They called upon the peasants to fight 
for the immediate and complete abolition without compensation of 
all feudal services. They vehemently denounced the Prussian liberal 
bourgeoisie, which was betraying the peasants "who are its natural 
allies,.... without whom it cannot stand up to the aristocracy" (see this 
volume, p. 295), because it was afraid that to abolish feudal property 

=====第25页=====
XXVIII Preface 
might lead to attacks on bourgeois property. Marx and Engels, who 
spoke for the proletariat, the consistently revolutionary class, were 
convinced champions of the anti-feudal peasant movement, which 
they regarded as one of the principal motive forces of the 
bourgeois-democratic revolution. 
The struggle for the liberation of the oppressed nations was 
likewise in the eyes of Marx and Engels integrally connected with this 
revolution. They welcomed with enthusiasm the upsurge of the 
national liberation movement among the Poles, Czechs, Hungarians 
and Italians, and saw in them allies in the fight against feudal and 
absolutist counter-revolution. 
In the articles "Germany's Foreign Policy", "German Foreign 
Policy and the Latest Events in Prague" and others, Marx and Engels 
took their stand for the genuine freedom and the brotherhood of all 
nations and again denounced the German bourgeoisie, which 
carried on the oppressive national policy of the Hohenzollerns and 
the Habsburgs. "A revolutionised Germany ought to have re­
nounced her entire past," wrote Engels, "especially as far as the 
neighbouring nations are concerned. Together with her own 
freedom, she should have proclaimed the freedom of the nations 
hitherto suppressed by her" (see this volume, p. 92). According to 
Marx and Engels the German people could become a free 
democratic nation only if they supported the liberation movements 
of the oppressed nations. "Germany will liberate herself to the extent 
to which she sets free neighbouring nations" (see this volume, p. 166). 
The founders of Marxism fought resolutely and consistently for 
the restoration of an independent Poland and pressed for an alliance 
of German democrats with the revolutionary wing of the Polish 
movement, which was fighting not only for national resurrection and 
liberation but also for the radical democratic reorganisation of 
Poland. The policy of the Prussian Government, which first 
provoked a national uprising in Posen and then crushed it, and 
which under the pretext of "reorganisation" had formally incorpo­
rated the greater part of Posen into Germany, was castigated by 
Engels, in particular in the series of articles entided "The Frankfurt 
Assembly Debates the Polish Question". Marx and Engels con­
demned the attitude of the liberal majority in the Frankfurt National 
Assembly which sanctioned the new partition of Poland. 
In the just-mentioned series of articles on the Polish question, 
Engels showed that the restoration of the Polish state on a 
democratic basis would be in the interest of German and 
international democracy. It would, moreover, strike a heavy blow at 
the three counter-revolutionary powers — Prussia, Austria, and 

=====第26页=====
Preface XXIX 
Russia — who had shared in the partitioning of Poland. Thus it 
would help bring about a change in the balance of power in favour of 
the revolution; and this in turn would make it easier for the Germans 
"to eradicate patriarchal feudal absolutism in Germany" (see this 
volume, p. 351). 
The national liberation struggle waged by the Czech people in the 
summer of 1848 was enthusiastically supported by the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. The potential revolutionary significance of this 
uprising against the arbitrary rule of the Austrian Government and 
the Czech feudal aristocracy was stressed by Engels in "The Prague 
Uprising" and "The Democratic Character of the Uprising". The 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung bitterly denounced the massacre of the 
Prague insurgents which the brutal Austrian soldiery carried 
through with the connivance of the German liberal bourgeoisie, 
and pointed out that the crushing of the uprising was bound to 
have serious consequences for the Czech democratic movement 
and the German revolution. And it is true that after the tragic 
events in Prague the leadership of the Czech movement passed 
entirely into the hands of liberal aristocrats and bourgeois, who 
looked to the Austrian monarchy and the Russian Tsar for assis­
tance. 
Warm sympathy for the Italian people, which was fighting for its 
freedom and independence, was expressed in a letter written by 
Marx to the editorial board of the Italian democratic newspaper Alba 
and in several articles of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in which the 
revolutionary events in Italy were analysed. The Italian revolution, 
which began with the popular uprising in Sicily in January 1848, was 
confronted with serious problems. The country consisted of a 
conglomeration of large and small states, a considerable number of 
which were oppressively ruled by Austria. The progressive develop­
ment of Italy was only possible if she liberated herself from foreign 
domination and abolished the feudal and monarchical regimes. But 
the Italian liberals, who at the time controlled the Italian movement, 
were trying to unite the country "from above" within the framework 
of a constitutional monarchy to be headed by Charles Albert, the 
King of Sardinia. Marx and Engels called upon the Italian people to 
take the leadership of the national liberation movement into their 
own hands, to free themselves from the tutelage of the liberals and 
monarchists and to frustrate all dynastic intrigues. In many of his 
articles Engels demonstrated that the self-seeking policy of Charles 
Albert and his supporters, which counteracted the truly popular 
resistance to the Austrians, was largely responsible for the reverses 
the Italians suffered during the Austro-Italian war. He observed that 

=====第27页=====
XXX Preface 
only a revolutionary people's war could end Austrian domination 
over Italy. 
The articles on the national question which Marx and Engels wrote 
in 1848 constitute, in sum, an important set of statements making 
clear their internationalist attitude towards national liberation 
movements. 
Among the most important events of the German and European 
revolution was the uprising of the Viennese people in October 1848, 
when for three weeks the workers, students and democratic 
intellectuals withstood the onslaught of numerically stronger reac­
tionary forces. Marx and Engels believed that the outcome of this 
rising was bound to affect substantially the fate of the revolution not 
only in Germany but also in Europe. Marx called the June uprising 
in Paris the first act of the revolutionary drama, and the October 
uprising in Vienna the second act (see this volume, p. 505). He 
emphasised that the Viennese workers had played an outstanding 
part in this revolutionary battle (ibid., p. 595). 
A number of articles published in this volume ("Revolution in 
Vienna", "The Frankfurter Oberpostamts-Zeitung and the Viennese 
Revolution", "The Viennese Revolution and the Kölnische Zeitung", 
"The Latest News from Vienna, Berlin and Paris" and "The Victory 
of the Counter-Revolution in Vienna") and also the speeches 
delivered by Marx at the committee meetings of the Cologne 
Workers' Association on October 16 and November 6, 1848, are 
devoted to the Viennese uprising and analyse the causes which led to 
its defeat. The principal cause, according to Marx, was the fact that 
the liberal bourgeoisie in Austria and in Germany deserted the 
revolution. Vienna was captured "only as a result of the manifold 
betrayal on the part of the bourgeoisie" (see this volume, p. 598). 
Marx concluded, moreover, that the failure of the German 
democrats to organise and lead a popular movement in support of 
the Viennese insurgents had disastrous consequences. The Viennese 
events confirmed, indeed, Marx's and Engels' conviction that the 
treacherous tactics of the bourgeoisie had urgently to be countered 
by rallying all truly revolutionary forces for the decisive battle against 
the counter-revolutionary offensive. 
Marx and Engels also paid attention to those European countries 
which, although not directly involved in the revolutionary upheaval, 
were in one way or another affected by it. In "The Kölnische Zeitung 
on the State of Affairs in England" and other articles about Britain, 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung exposed the social conflicts which existed 
in Britain behind the façade of bourgeois and aristocratic security 
and stability, and the intensification of these conflicts as the result of 

=====第28页=====
Preface XXXI 
the revolutionary upsurge in the whole of Europe. It stressed the 
magnitude of the class movement of the British workers who were 
fighting under the Chartist banner, and it described this fight against 
the official British establishment as the war of "the organised party 
of the proletariat against the organised political power of the 
bourgeoisie" (see this volume, p. 297). It was in the true spirit of 
proletarian internationalism that Marx and Engels supported the 
Chartists, who were persecuted by the authorities in 1848, and 
defended them against the slanderous accusations made by the 
bourgeois press. They also backed the fight for an independent 
Ireland, one of the principal hotbeds of revolutionary discontent in 
the British Isles (see "Cologne in Danger", "The Neue Berliner 
Zeitung on the Chartists"). 
The articles "The 'Model State' of Belgium" and "The Antwerp 
Death Sentences" outline the consequences of capitalist development 
in Belgium, where it was proceeding in an apparently peaceful and 
constitutional way. But the rule of the liberal bourgeoisie, which was 
able to crush the incipient republican movement in 1848, had, as is 
pointed out in these articles, caused the conditions of the workers to 
deteriorate substantially, and pauperism and criminality to increase. 
It also strengthened political reaction in the country, so that brutal 
repressive measures were taken against democrats and socialists, 
with arrests and deportations of political emigrants. Marx and 
Engels adduce the example of this bourgeois "model" state to show 
that in order to preserve its domination and prevent a revolution the 
ruling bourgeoisie is prepared to resort to the most arbitrary and 
subtle police methods, which can compete with any that are practised 
under feudal and absolutist monarchies. 
Engels' unfinished sketch "From Paris to Berne" is published at 
the end of this volume. After being compelled to leave Germany at 
the end of September 1848, and after his subsequent deportation 
from Belgium to France, Engels decided to walk from Paris to 
Switzerland, where he wrote these travel notes. Considerable space is 
devoted to a description of the French peasants and their way of life 
and thinking. Engels notes the antipathy of the French peasants to 
the revolution of 1848 and to the revolutionary movement in the 
towns, and especially in Paris, together with their Bonapartist 
sympathies and illusions. This he attributes to the peasants' 
parochialism and political backwardness. And he adds that the 
demagogic exploitation of the peasants' proprietary instincts by the 
bourgeoisie, and the fiscal policy of the Provisional Government, 
which went against the interests of the peasants and alienated them 
from the revolution, were also largely responsible for this antipathy. 

=====第29页=====
XXXII Preface 
The Appendices contain a number of documents which illustrate 
the many-sided revolutionary activity of Marx and Engels in 1848 
and their practical work among the people. They comprise papers 
relating to the Communist League, the Cologne Democratic Society 
and the Cologne Workers' Association, among the leaders of which 
were Marx and Engels and their comrades-in-arms. Reports of 
speeches delivered by Marx and Engels in these organisations and at 
public meetings are also included: though brief and incomplete, 
these give some idea of the content of the speeches. The Appendices 
comprise also a series of documents showing how the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung came into being, and throwing light on the police and court 
proceedings against its editors and the difficult conditions (they were 
persecuted by the government authorities and slandered by the 
"loyal" press) in which Marx and Engels published this newspaper of 
the revolutionary proletariat. 
* * * 
The collection of articles written by Marx and Engels in 1848 and 
1849 which is presented in Volumes 7 to 9 of this edition is more 
complete than any previously published. Not only the writings of 
Marx and Engels which appeared in Volumes 5 and 6 of the Russian 
and German editions of their Collected Works are included, but also 
many articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung which more recent 
research carried out in the USSR and the GDR has shown to 
have been also written by them. Included, too, are a number of 
documents relating to their activity in workers' and other democratic 
organisations. This volume contains 16 articles and notes — e.g. 
"Defeat of the German Troops at Sundewitt", "The Question of 
Union", "The Downfall of the Camphausen Government", 
"Reichensperger", "The Milan Bulletin", "Miscellaneous", "The 
Cologne Committee of Public Safety"—which have never before 
been published in any edition of the Collected Works of Marx and 
Engels. Of the 146 articles forming the main section of the volume, 
103 are published in English for the first time. The Appendices 
consist entirely of material not previously published in English-
A specific feature of this volume is the fact that in a number of 
cases it has not been possible to establish whether a given article was 
written by Marx or by Engels. Since most of the articles published in 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung are unsigned and none of the manu-

=====第30页=====
Preface XXXIII 
scripts have been preserved, the question of which of them wrote it is, 
indeed, generally difficult to answer. And many of the articles seem 
in any case to be their joint work. In those cases where up to now it 
has proved impossible to ascertain which one of them wrote a 
particular item, no name is given at the end of the article. 
The titles of the articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung are 
printed according to the table of contents given in the paper. Those 
supplied by the editors are in square brackets. Those works included 
in this volume which have been previously published in English are 
given either in new or in carefully revised translations. Peculiarities 
in the presentation of the text of some articles, in particular the 
manuscripts, are described in the notes. 
All the texts have been translated from the German except where 
otherwise indicated. 
The volume was compiled and the preface, notes and subject 
index written by Tatyana Vasilyeva and edited by Lev Golman (Insti­
tute of Marxism-Leninism of the CC CPSU). The indexes of names 
and of books and periodicals mentioned or quoted were prepared by 
Galina Kostryukova (Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the CC 
CPSU). 
The translations were made by Gregor Benton, Clemens Dutt, 
Barbara Ruhemann, Salo Ryazanskaya, Kai Schoenhals and Chris­
topher Upward, and edited by Margaret Mynatt and Barbara 
Ruhemann (Lawrence & Wishart), Salo Ryazanskaya, Yelena Chis-
tyakova, Margarita Lopukhina and Maria Shcheglova (Progress 
Publishers) and Vladimir Mosolov, scientific editor (Institute of 
Marxism-Leninism of the CC CPSU). 
The volume was prepared for the press by Lyudgarda Zubrilova 
(Progress Publishers). 

=====第31页=====
KARL MARX 
and 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
March-November 1848 

=====第32页=====

=====第33页=====
3 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
DEMANDS OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY 
IN GERMANY ' 
"Workers of all countries, unite!" 
1. The whole of Germany shall be declared a single and indivisible 
republic. 
2. Every German, having reached the age of 21, shall have the 
right to vote and to be elected, provided he has not been convicted of 
a criminal offence. 
3. Representatives of the people shall receive payment so that 
workers, too, shall be able to become members of the German 
parliament. 
4. Universal arming of the people. In future the armies shall be 
simultaneously labour armies, so that the troops shall not, as 
formerly, merely consume, but shall produce more than is necessary 
for their upkeep. 
This will moreover be conducive to the organisation of labour. 
5. Legal services shall be free of charge. 
6. All feudal obligations, dues, corvées, tithes etc., which have 
hitherto weighed upon the rural population, shall be abolished 
without compensation. 
7. Princely and other feudal estates, together with mines, pits, and 
so forth, shall become the property of the state. The estates shall be 
cultivated on a large scale and with the most up-to-date scientific 
devices in the interests of the whole of society. 
8. Mortgages on peasant lands shall be declared the property of 
the state. Interest on such mortgages shall be paid by the peasants to 
the state. 
9. In localities where the tenant system is developed, the land rent 
or the quit-rent shall be paid to the state as a tax. 

=====第34页=====
4 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
The measures specified in Nos. 6, 7, 8 and 9 are to be adopted in 
order to reduce the communal and other burdens hitherto imposed 
upon the peasants and small tenant farmers without curtailing the 
means available for defraying state expenses and without imperilling 
production. 
The landowner in the strict sense, who is neither a peasant nor a 
tenant farmer, has no share in production. Consumption on his part 
is, therefore, nothing .but abuse. 
10. A state bank, whose paper issues are legal tender, shall replace 
all private banks. 
This measure will make it possible to regulate the credit system in 
the interest of the people as a whole, and will thus undermine the 
dominion of the big financial magnates. Further, by gradually 
substituting paper money for gold and silver coin, the universal 
means of exchange (that indispensable prerequisite of bourgeois 
trade and commerce) will be cheapened, and gold and silver will be 
set free for use in foreign trade. Finally, this measure is necessary in 
order to bind the interests of the conservative bourgeoisie to the 
Government.3 
11. All the means of transport, railways, canals, steamships, roads, 
the posts etc. shall be taken over by the state. They shall become the 
property of the state and shall be placed free at the disposal of the 
impecunious classes. 
12. All civil servants shall receive the same salary, the only 
exception being that civil servants who have a family to support and 
who therefore have greater requirements, shall receive a higher 
salary. 
13. Complete separation of Church and State. The clergy of every 
denomination shall be paid only by the voluntary contributions of 
their congregations. 
14. The right of inheritance to be curtailed. 
15. The introduction of steeply graduated taxes, and the abolition 
of taxes on articles of consumption. 
16. Inauguration of national workshops. The state guarantees a 
livelihood to all workers and provides for those who are 
incapacitated for work. 
17. Universal and free education of the people. 
It is to the interest of the German proletariat, the petty bourgeoisie 
and the small peasants to support these demands with all possible 
energy. Only by the realisation of these demands will the millions in 
a The leaflet published in Cologne has "cause of the revolution" instead of 
"Government".— Ed. 

=====第35页=====
jr o r li r r u n  fi e n 
ber 
&ommumfttfd)en fyattti 
in 
„Proletarier aller ïànber Bereinigt (Sua)!" 
1. ©an; Dcutfôïanb »irb ju einer einigen, unheilbaren Stepublit 
erflàrt. 
2. 3eber Deutfaje, ber 21 3«$« «It, tft SBä&ter unb »ä$lbar, »or-
ausgefegt baf) er feine Rriminalftrafe erlitten $at. 
3. Die SBolWrertreter »erben befotbei, bamit auä) bei ärieiter im 
Parlament be« beutfct)en SBolfe« fîÇen fönne. 
4. allgemeine SBolt«be»affmmg. Die Armeen ftnb in 3«t« nft 8"' 
gleich, ärbeiter-Slmteen, fo bafj ba« Jpeer ntr^t Mo«, »iefrütier, Berjebrt, 
fonbern nocb me&r probujirt, al« feine linterbattungsfoften betragen. 
Diefj ift aufjerbem ein Mittet jur Drganifation ber arbeit. 
5. Die ©erecbtigieiWpflege ift unentgeltlid). 
6. ïltte geuballaften, alle abgaben, grofcnben, 3«$nten,ic., biebisber 
auf bem Sanboolte tafteten, »erben ol)ne irgenb eine Sntfcf/àbigung ab« 
gefcbafft. 
7. Die fürftlicben unb anbern feubaten Sanbgüter, alle SBergwerfe, 
©ruben, u. f. »., »erben in Staatseigentum umgewandelt. Sluf biefen 
Sanogiitcrn »irb ber acferbau im ©rofien unb mit ben mobernften 
§ilf«mitteln ber SBiffenfctjaft jum Cortheit ber ©efammtbeit betrieben. 
8. Die £9BOtt)efen auf ben Bauerngütern »erben für ©taat«eigen= 
tyum erKart. Die 3ntereffen für jene Jpçpott)eren »erben »on ben 
Bauern an ben Staat gejabjt. 
9. 3n ben ©egenben, »o ba« $act)t»efen entwictett ift, »irb bie 
©runbrente ober ber ^adjtfayiling al« ©teuer an ben Staat gejault. 
SStle biefe unter 6, 7, 8 unb 9 angegebenen 27raa§regetn »erben ge= 
fafjt, um öffentliche unb anbere îaften ber Bauern unb Keinen ^Säcbter ju 
»erminbern, obne bie jur SBeftreitung ber StaatSfoften nötigen 3J?ittet 
ju formalem unb oI>ne bie frobuftion felbft ju geführten. 
Der eigcntlidje ©runbeigentljûmer, ber »eber Sauer nocb Siebter ifl. bat an ber production gar reinen SKntbcil. ©eine Ronfumtion ift badei 
ein bfofjer Wiflbrauti). 
10. Sin bie ©teile aller •pripatbanfen tritt eine ©taattibaitf, beren 
papier gefefclict/en Sur« bat. 
Diefe 3)?a|jregcl maebt e« möglich, da« Ärebtttoefen im 3ntereffe be» 
ganjen SSolre« ju regeln unb untergrabt bamit bie Jperrfciaft ber gro­
ßen ©elbmanner. 3«bem fie naa) unb nacb. Papiergeld an bie Stelle 
»on ©olb unb Silber fetjt, »er»oc>lfeilert fie ba« rnientbebrlïà)e 3nftru-
ment be« bürgerlichen Serfebj:«, ba« allgemeine Xaufd)tnittei, unb er< 
laubt, ba« ©olb unb Silber nad) aufen bin »irfen ju taffen. Diefe 
SWaafjregel ift fd)lief lid) notwendig, um bie 3ntereffen ber fonfersati» 
»en Bourgeois an bie 9?c»olution ju fnüpfen. 
11. äße Transportmittel: (Sifcnbabnen, Kanäle, Datnpffd)iffe, 
2Bege, Soften, ic, nimmt ber ©taat in feine §anb. ©te »erben in 
©taat«eigentb.um umgewanbclt unb ber unbemittelten Waffe jur unent-
geltlicben SBerfügung geftellt. 
12. 3n ber Befolbung fämmtlid)er Staatsbeamten finbet lein anbe-
rer Unterfd)ieb ftatt, al« ber, pajj biejenigen mit Jamilie, alfo mit mehr 
Sebürfniffen, audi ein böbereä ®et)alt bejieben al« bie Uebrigen. 
13. SBoflige îrenming ber Rircbe »ont Staate. Die ©eiftlicben aller 
Äonfeffionen »erben lebiglia) Bon ibjrcr freiwilligen ©emtinbe befolget. 
14. Befchrànfung be« 8rbrcn)t«. 
15. Einführung Mit ftarten ^rogreffroftettera unb abfebaffung ber 
flonfumtion«fteuern. 
16. (ïrricbtung von ')iational»erfftätten. Der ©taat garantirt allen 
Arbeitern ihre Sriftenj unb »erforgt bie jur arbeit Unfähigen. 
17. allgemeine, unentgeltliche Solfäcrjicbung. 
g« liegt im 3»tereffe be« bcutfd)en proletariat«, be« Keinen Sürger-
unb Sauernftanbc«, mit alltr Energie an berDure^feÇung obiger  2Haafj-
regeln jn arbeiten. Demi nur buret) SerwirHicJung berfelben lönnen 
ci« ïltittionen, bie bisher in Deutfd)lanb »on einer Keinen 3<>bl au«ge= 
beutet mürben unb bie man weiter inberllnterbrücfung ju erbalten fuiben 
roirb,  ju ibrem Siecryt unb ju berjenigen Waa)t gelangen, bie t^nen, al« 
ben Jperoorbringern alle« 3îeta)t|um«, gebührt. 
Pas «Lomite: 
SarlTOan. Äarl ©cbapper. ip. Bauer, g. Sngel«. 
3. SWofl. 3». 333 oIff. 
Demands of the Communist Party in Germany, 
leaflet published in Cologne in 1848 

=====第36页=====

=====第37页=====
Demands of the Communist Party in Germany 7 
Germany, who have hitherto been exploited by a handful of persons 
and whom the exploiters would like to keep in further subjection, 
win the rights and attain to that power to which they are entitled as 
the producers of all wealth. 
The Committee: 
Karl Marx, Karl Schapper, H. Bauer, F. Engels, 
J. Moll, W. Wolff 
Written between March 21 and 24, 1848 
First published as a leaflet in Paris on 
March 24 or 25, 1848, in the supplement 
to the Berliner Zeitungs-Halle No. 82, on 
April 5, 1848, and in a number of other 
German newspapers; it was repeatedly 
reprinted during the revolution and after 
its defeat, in particular as a leaflet in Co­
logne issued not later than September 10, 
1848 Printed according to the text of the 
Berliner Zeitungs-Halle collated with 
the leaflet issued in Cologne 

=====第38页=====
8 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
LETTER TO ETIENNE CABET, EDITOR 
OF THE POPULAIRE 2 
Citizen Cabet, 
Would you be so kind as to insert the attached Declaration in the 
next number of the Populaire. The point is not to let the Communist 
Party be made responsible for an enterprise and conduct which have 
already reawakened in a part of the German nation the old national 
and reactionary prejudices against the French people. The Alliance 
of German Workers, 3 an association of various workers' societies in 
all European countries, which counts among its members 
Mr. Harney and Mr. Jones, the English Chartist leaders, is composed 
entirely of communists and openly professes itself communist. The 
so-called German Democratic Society in Paris3 is essentially 
anti-communist insofar as it claims not to recognise the antagonism 
and struggle between the proletarian and bourgeois classes. It is, 
therefore, a question of making a protest and a declaration in the 
interests of the Communist Party. And it is this which makes us 
anticipate your compliance. (This note is strictly confidential.) 
Fraternal greetings, 
Frederick Engels 
Karl Marx 
The undersigned committee considers it its duty to inform the 
various branches of the Alliance of German Workers in the different 
European countries that it has in no way participated in the 
proceedings, posters and proclamations to appeal to the French 
This refers to the Communist League.— Ed. 

=====第39页=====
Letter to Etienne Cabet, Editor of the Populaire 9 
citizens for clothes, arms and money. The German Workers' 
Club4  is the only one in Paris which maintains relations with the 
Alliance, and it has nothing in common with the society in Paris, 
called the Society of German Democrats, whose leaders are Herr 
Herwegh and Herr von Bornstedt. 
The Central Committee of the Alliance of German Workers 
(signed) K. Marx, K. Schapper, H. Bauer, 
F. Engels, J. Moll, W. Wolff 
Written at the end of March 1848 
First published in English in the journal 
Science and Society, 1940, Vol. IV, No. 2 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Translated from the French 

=====第40页=====
10 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
[TO THE COMMITTEE OF THE GERMAN 
DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY IN PARIS] 
To Herr Bornstedt and Others 5 
Paris,  April 1, 1848 
22 rue Neuve Saint Augustin 
Copy 
The following will serve as a reply to the note of Herr Bornstedt 
and others which was this morning left with Marx: 
1. Marx has not the least intention of rendering anybody an 
account for any German newspaper article. 
2. Marx has not the least intention of giving an account to any 
committee or deputation of the German Democratic Society with 
which he has nothing to do. 
3. If Herr Bornstedt and Herr Herwegh demand explanations in 
their personal capacity and not as members of any committee or 
society, then Herr Bornstedt has already once before privately and 
also once publicly been told to whom they should address 
themselves. 
First published in Russian in: Marx and 
Engels, Collected Works, first ed., Vol. XXV, 
Moscow, 1934 Printed according to a copy in 
Engels' hand 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第41页=====
11 
Karl Marx 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE NEWSPAPER L'ALBA* 
Dear Sir, 
A new daily newspaper will be published in Cologne from the first 
of June; it will be called Neue Rheinische Zeitung and will be edited by 
Herr Karl Marx. This paper will advocate in these latitudes the same 
democratic principles that L'Alba represents in Italy. There can 
therefore be no doubt about the line we shall take on the questions 
now pending between Italy and Austria. We shall defend the cause 
of Italian independence, we shall fight to the death Austrian 
despotism in Italy as in Germany and Poland. We extend a fraternal 
hand to the Italian people and want to prove to them that the 
German nation entirely repudiates the policy of oppression which in 
your country is carried through by the same men who in our country 
too have always combated freedom. We shall do our utmost to 
promote the union of, and good understanding between, two great 
and free nations which have, until now, been led to believe by a 
nefarious system of government that they were each other's enemy. 
We shall therefore demand the immediate withdrawal from Italy of 
the brutal Austrian soldiery, and that the Italian people be placed in 
a position to express its sovereign will in the question of the form of 
government which it wants to choose. 
In order to enable us to follow Italian affairs, and in order to give 
you the opportunity of judging the sincerity of our promises, we 
suggest an exchange of papers. Thus we propose to send you the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung every day and to receive from you L'Alba 
regularly. We hope that you will accept this proposal and ask you to 
start sending us L'Alba as soon as possible so that already in our first 
issues we can make use of it. 

=====第42页=====
12 Karl Marx 
If you wish to send us other information as well we should be 
pleased to receive it, and assure you that anything likely to serve the 
cause of democracy in any country will be given our most careful 
consideration. 
Fraternal greetings. 
For the editorial board of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Dr. Karl Marx, Editor 
Written at the end of May 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the newspaper Translated from the Italian 
L'Alba No. 258, June 29, 1848 

=====第43页=====
13 
KARL MARX 
and 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
ARTICLES 
FROM THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
June  1-November  7, 1848 

=====第44页=====

=====第45页=====
Unir îll)ftnifd)r Jritung. 
ttgoii  brr rrawfrattc. 
A? 1. UM«, »«uirtfU», 1. 3sm 1848. 
[STATEMENT OF THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
OF THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG] 7 
Originally the date of publication of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
was to be the first of July, and arrangements with correspondents 
etc. were made with that date in view. 
But since the renewed insolence of the reactionaries foreshadows 
the enactment of German September Laws8 in the near future, we 
have decided to make use of every available day and to publish the 
paper as from June the first. Our readers will therefore have to bear 
with us if during the first days we cannot offer the abundant variety 
of news and reports that our widespread connections should enable 
us to do. In a few days we shall be able to satisfy all requirements in 
this respect too. 
Editorial Board: 
Karl Marx, editor-in-chief 
Heinrich Bürgers 
Ernst Dronke 
Friedrich Engels editors 
Georg Weerth 
Ferdinand Wollt 
Wilhelm Wolff 
Written not later than May 31, 1848 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 1, June 1, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 

=====第46页=====
16 
THE ASSEMBLY AT FRANKFURT9 
Cologne, May 31. For a fortnight Germany has had a Constituent 
National Assembly elected by the German people as a whole. 
The German people won its sovereign status by fighting in the 
streets of almost all cities and towns of the country, and especially on 
the barricades of Vienna and Berlin. It exercised this sovereignty in 
the elections to the National Assembly. 
The first act of the National Assembly should have been to 
proclaim loudly and publicly this sovereignty of the German people. 
Its second act should have been the drafting of a German 
Constitution based on the sovereignty of the people and the 
elimination from the regime actually existing in Germany of 
everything that contradicted the principle of the sovereignty of the 
people. 
During the whole of its session the Assembly ought to have taken 
all necessary measures to frustrate any reactionary sallies, to 
maintain the revolutionary basis on which it depends and to 
safeguard the sovereignty of the people, won by the revolution, 
against all attacks. 
Though the German National Assembly has met about a dozen 
times already, it has done none of these things. 
But it has ensured the salvation of Germany by the following great 
deeds. 
The National Assembly realised that it must have rules, for it knew 
that when two or three Germans get together they must have a set of 
rules,  otherwise chair legs will be used to decide matters. And now 
some schoolmaster had foreseen this contingency and drawn up 
special standing orders for this High Assembly. A motion was 

=====第47页=====
The Assembly at Frankfurt 17 
submitted to adopt this scheme provisionally; though most deputies 
had not read it, the Assembly adopted it without more ado, for what 
would become of Germany's representatives without regulations? 
Fiat reglementum partout et toujours! a 
Herr Raveaux of Cologne tabled a quite simple motion dealing 
with conflicts between the assemblies at Frankfurt and at Berlin. 
But the Assembly debates the final standing orders, and although 
Raveaux's motion is urgent, the standing orders are still more 
urgent. Pereat mundus, fiat reglementum! 6 However, the elected 
philistines in their wisdom cannot refrain from making a few 
remarks concerning Raveaux's motion, and while they are debating 
whether the standing orders or the motion should take precedence, 
they have already produced up to two dozen amendments to this 
motion. They ventilate the thing, talk, get stuck, raise a din, waste 
time and postpone voting from the 19thc to the 22nd of May. The 
matter is brought up again on the 22nd, there is a deluge of new 
amendments and new digressions, and after long-winded speeches 
and endless confusion they decide that the question, which was 
already placed on the agenda, is to be referred back to the sections. 
Thus the time has happily slipped by and the deputies leave to take 
their meal. 
On May 23 they first wrangle about the minutes, then have 
innumerable motions read out again, and just when they are about to 
return to the agenda, that is, to the beloved standing orders, Zitz of 
Mainz calls attention to the brutal acts of the Prussian army and the 
despotic abuses of the Prussian commandant at Mainz.d  What had 
occurred was an indubitable and successful sally on the part of 
reaction, an event with which the Assembly was especially competent 
to deal. It ought to have called to account the presumptuous soldier 
who dared threaten to shell Mainz almost within sight of the National 
Assembly, it ought to have protected the unarmed citizens of Mainz 
in their own houses from the atrocities of a soldiery which had been 
forced upon them and incited against them. But Herr Bassermann, 
the waterman of Baden, e declares that these are trifles. Mainz must 
be left to its fate, the whole is more important, the Assembly meets 
here to consider a set of standing orders in the interests of Germany 
Let there be regulations everywhere and always.— Ed. 
Engels paraphrases a motto of the German Emperor Ferdinand I: " Fiat justitia et 
pereat mundus" (let justice be done, though the world perish).— Ed. 
c The Neue Rheinische Zeitung has "the 18th", evidently a misprint.—Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 20 and  23.—Ed. 
e A pun on the words Bassermann and Wassermann (waterman).—Ed. 
3* 

=====第48页=====
18 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
as a whole — indeed, what is the shelling of Mainz compared with 
this!  Pereat Moguntia, fiat reglementum!* But the Assembly is 
soft-hearted, it elects a commission that is to go to Mainz to 
investigate matters and — it is again just the right time to adjourn 
and dine. 
Finally, on May  "24, we lose the parliamentary thread altogether. 
The standing orders would seem to have been completed or to have 
got lost, at any rate we hear nothing more about them. Instead we 
are inundated by a veritable flood of well-intentioned motions in 
which numerous representatives of the sovereign people obstinately 
demonstrate the limited understanding of a loyal subject.11 Then 
follow applications, petitions, protests etc., and in the end the 
national torrent of hog-wash finds an outlet in innumerable speeches 
skipping from one subject to another. The fact, however, that four 
committees have been set up should not be passed over in silence. 
Finally Herr Schlöffel asked for the floor. Three German citizens, 
Esselen, Pelz and Löwenstein, had been ordered to leave Frankfurt 
that very day, before 4 p.m. The wise and all-knowing police asserted 
that these gentlemen had incurred the wrath of the townspeople by 
their speeches in the Workers' Association and must therefore clear 
out. And the police dare to do this after the German right of 
citizenship was proclaimed by Preparliament 12 and even 
after it was endorsed in the draft Constitution13  of the seventeen 
"trusted men" (hommes de confiance de la diète). 13 The matter is 
urgent. Herr Schlöffel asks to be allowed to speak on this point. He is 
refused permission. He asks for the floor to speak on the urgency of 
the subject, which he is entitled to do according to the standing 
orders, but on this occasion it was a case of fiat politia, pereat 
reglementuml c Naturally, for it was time to go home and eat. 
On the 25th, the flood of tabled motions caused the thought-laden 
heads of the deputies to droop like ripe ears of corn in a downpour. 
Two deputies then attempted once more to raise the question of the 
expulsion, but they too were not allowed to speak, even about the 
urgency of the matter. Some of the documents received, especially 
one sent by Poles, were much more interesting than all the motions 
of the deputies. Finally the commission that had been sent to Mainz 
was given the floor. It announced that it could not report until the 
following day; moreover it had, of course, arrived too late:  8,000 
Let there be regulations, though Mainz perish.—Ed. 
F. Weichsel, Deutschlands Einheit und der Entwurf des Deutschen Reichsgrund­
gesetzes. —Ed. 
Let polity prevail, though the regulations perish.— Ed. 

=====第49页=====
The Assembly at Frankfurt 19 
Prussian bayonets had restored order by disarming 1,200 men of the 
civic guard. Meantime, there was nothing for it but to pass on to the 
agenda. This was done promptly, the item on the agenda being 
Raveaux's motion. Since in Frankfurt this had not yet been settled, 
whereas in Berlin it had already lost all significance because of 
Auerswald's decree,14 the National Assembly decided to defer the 
question till the next day and to go and dine. 
On the 26th innumerable new motions were introduced and after 
that the Mainz commission delivered its final and very indecisive 
report. Herr Hergenhahn, ex-people's representative and pro 
tempore Minister, presented the report. He moved an extremely 
moderate resolution, but after a lengthy debate the Assembly 
concluded that even this mild proposal was too strong and resolved 
to leave the citizens of Mainz to the tender mercies of the Prussians 
commanded by a Hüser, and "in the hope that the Government 
will do its duty" the Assembly passed on to the agenda, that is the 
gentlemen left to have a meal. 
Finally, on May 27, after lengthy preliminaries over the minutes, 
Raveaux's motion was discussed. There was some desultory talk until 
half past two and then the deputies went to dine, but this time they 
assembled again for an evening session and at last brought the 
matter to a close. Because of the extreme tardiness of the National 
Assembly, Herr Auerswald had already disposed of Raveaux's 
motion, therefore Herr Raveaux decided to support an amendment 
proposed by Herr Werner, which settled the question of the people's 
sovereignty neither in the affirmative nor in the negative. 
Our information concerning the National Assembly ends here, but 
there is every reason to assume that after having taken this decision 
the meeting was adjourned and the deputies went to dine. If they 
were able to do this so early, they have to thank Robert Blum, who 
said: 
"Gentlemen, if you decide to pass on to the agenda today, then the whole agenda of 
this Assembly may be cut short in a very curious manner." 
Written by Engels on May 31, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 1, June 1, 1848 

=====第50页=====
20 
HÜSER 
Cologne, May 31. With the aid of old fortress regulations and 
antiquated confederate laws Herr Hüser in Mainz has invented a 
new method to turn Prussians and other Germans into still greater 
slaves than they were before May 22, 1815. 16 We are advising Herr 
Hüser to take out a patent for his new invention which would 
undoubtedly be very profitable. For according to this method two or 
more drunken soldiers are sent out, who of course will, of their own 
accord, pick a quarrel with citizens. The authorities intervene and 
arrest the soldiers; this is sufficient to enable the commandants of 
each fortress to declare a state of siege for their respective towns, to 
confiscate all weapons and to leave the inhabitants to the mercy of 
the brutal soldiery. This plan would be particularly lucrative in 
Germany since there are more fortresses here directed against the 
internal enemy than against the enemy from abroad. It would be 
especially lucrative here since any publicly paid fortress comman­
dant, a Hüser, a Roth von Schreckenstein or a similar feudal name, 
may dare more than even a king or an emperor, since he can 
curb the freedom of the press, since he can, for example, 
forbid the citizens of Mainz (who are not Prussians) to express their 
antipathy against the King of Prussia and the Prussian political 
system. 
Herr Hüser's project is only part of the grand plan of the Berlin 
reactionaries who seek to disarm as rapidly as possible all civic guards 
(particularly along the Rhine), thus step by step annihilating the 
nascent popular armed forces and delivering us defenceless into 
the hands of an army that consists mostly of soldiers from other 

=====第51页=====
îlnif It h r î ri t fd) r  Jritung. 
fcrgtm  for Fatwttatit. 
Ml gMu, Iraacrßag, 1. 3wù 1848. 
tx JSttnt  gtttinif*« 3«I«»«J  <rWffM  M« 1. 3«i u r4a)li«. 
Or «tnanalliTll bflrlo,!: î»r ra« Wmrljatr « Mn 1 IW'. 15 ®»r.; fb ni« uhijen Ont Vm|ciH) 2 HI,. 3 @ar. g <pf. *up,Mb ^irufirnil 
.JufrRia M fmaarn  jtimnjtfnt'i. 
Ca« Itimnl fut m »oaal 3aai fa» nur «M »to*«tnïiKT tVfhimt M uMHha Caartall (3nli, laa.aH , S<pmnktt) gtfdithtn. tw  frti* 
loiliaVa HMavm brtrtfl: Mr Mu 2 ï«r. ; aaftaôrM 2 î«i. » 6jr. 
»an anmairt »ri aï« <P*ft«fUIlCT> un tSuiMntliinacn or» 3» «» ladant«; — fur Scia in «r SrarNiio» »r 3tiwna foc 
ajni. B. Cirait. Si. ««.alla 12, «Ma. ,,\,« , 
Strom Wwn^niavani axita »«Mm tnwntra m an HnKttlawi Mt 3«img. »aaio ân^i 1 
3nf»«ioii»flrtiibr»ii. 
ai . . .  1 ®jr. 6 Cf. I otbftni, lid) rbrnftUa borten franco lu i 
jjtr ait nrrfMlmjr tytrtjinlt tb» 
Cie «mtfcitioii ttr ..»»mu .llbriaiifAtn Stilting." 
IM erfûVintu ttr «turn Blirinifdirn M-
I««« Mr urfaTiimiid) luf »tu rejtro *Ui 
(tfatfitL 9k XrrtBjrmrnl« nit ten ttx-
rff«*üiniltii K. nmrrn iuf tirftn Cmnin 
gUrrtT». 
V« jcwd) M trat trnratnt frtdim  3luf-
Irrlrn Mr Htikfim kutfdK acitra^rgcrctr 
m muyr Xuafidil Men, fo h«bcn wir jrtirn 
frritn Ct| bmHtyn »»Um, und rrfditinm 
fd|ra «it to rtfUn Juni «nfrt irfrr 
•er»» n un* «If« nod)frl)fii mufftn, »ran 
»ir in ten rrtlrn  C*frn  an IlodiridMrn unk 
nunmjfalhgrn eorrtfpor&tnit-n nod) ntdjt 
t» rridiWliflt Jnoltrial lirfern, «xnu unfrrr 
o»«8rtfl)rt(m VrrbinDungcn um arfiljijfii. 3n 
wenig Cagrn werten mir aud| ajirrin »Um 
Xnfrrttrungen genügen krönen. 
9ltbattion«-9.omUi. 
Karl JBorr, ttrtaklrar ™  Chef. 
•Vinridi Bürge», , 
Crnft Irankr, I 
irirtri* entriß «r>ateurr. 
€fc«rg WrrrÜi, I 
irrt-murt HHIfT» l 
«HUtd»  »«iff,  > • [DfMMt,  (MbrB,  (MH.  - «I*VUI 1 
I.rff.*.4ri4t<>. 
Hmttiâft  flméftidfttm. 
ï>i- MÇtri& ^riMt-Dccml, Dr. jar. Srrnrr.  bwtfribjl, 
»at aufarorpt«rl.n)t«i froftffor in brr i«rtfhF>VB jahütal t 
pirftijrn UarmfitJi triaiw  werbt«. 
» 1 f « mi*i 
dm Bmni»Wtaa$ tri ZMntrf,  Mffa>a Mt MrffOHbr aal kit |a krt-
• ' 1  IUHMM  Btip«  ,«r BtfrUM  M JUaUlttW«  OtfeltrM .._ , r_ _ .|n(tfr  flt%L ^ 
AatctMOi itlftffra, »*• 
r») <Z«*»M  Iff**«,  ft 'in rrti 
... .... ._ J  «•••«>  iiMul MnMa Bmtinr ki 
,K Va*t|(tl bra < JtitV«<t>«rt. 
** till,  31.  9R«. Sni »irrjt^ ïaflni M>|t DfBtf<t!«b 
rise NafhtntnAt 9tatMMlwifaMnIuu, t>riiwTgMaMrK «•« brr 
TM brt(«K »»If  *«H*  H i» *n etiAfnj f af) »Utr grof» 
«•« Rttaca Sttfclt kH  fotrf,  ub fsriirl «f ft» Vamfaftra 
Ma fBtn aab Vkrlix Jtiac Sowtfaiattdt rrtWrt 5#  •>*»<•  bwft 
•SwMrmartdl w bn "B«l>ltB |ir <Rih»Hl»nfamUM «atarabt. 
V f n n%t SN bfr WihoMlvnfamiliM  «*#tr  fna,  >tr(f  S»m-
»naiMUl tt* ftratf#ca f3*[(rt Uat aaft •jhîtliÀ ja proflaMirni 
3t)t |Mtm «ft »apt  f«a r few  ftratfo>t  »rrfaffanfl uf  «r»«*-
iMc WT StmfMmaiMtft aiaiiartntra,  •»* <a< br« faftif<> bf-
fh|«a»ta 3aftebc 3>«lf4)laatM Mrtj«  ntffTwi,  iM<bcai  |hrta-
)ie b« SelttfHvnoiittàl »ibnfBTad). 
SIMtnab i*m oat^ni ©rffipi Ma|tr  fir bic ••t^ign Wa|rrafl« 
ertjrrifrB, i* «Bt StrtftùarfMr [•<<)« yi  ttrnttl*,  aai bra rrvola-
tioaairta  Sobri,  iaf bn S«  flrH,  |a W^apir* , aai hit ffrr»t-
•nifAaft brt  Slrwraiin,  *w B»l(*feiWT«i«f(it, sot «Bn  Kagnf-
fra fta>"  )• ftrlra. 
Z)i( «ntftV. Hatwaalverfunalaa« Ut aai fo>M ta  CM 2>a|tafe 
etUMn  «kiain,  aab Mwibri Mm fiia>M trtM«. 
ZMftr «in Oat  fa  bol btü tntf^mH bar« fpfanbe 9rtf • 
mt« MrtafMt : 
Die RariaMlMrfaatwlaa« tTfaaa»,  ba| fit na StcflnKat («bra 
•rift, braa  fa  »aftr,  «» |»ti «btr brn CratfoV |«(«8i«Mm  fiab, 
U mifn fa m »rglrauM  |abra,  f«i|t tatfoWtW« bit So)tait(< 
>ràt. ffiR *4tt« irjt»b ria Séalwtifar btrfta gaS  »*il)«sf-
r Mtifaa Dcpan ^i'^^'Ü-J".  ^.iff.  *$iUK-™$*:i Cm 9*#tvn  vu Mm UVM rata  AM,  awcrfiaali^w «tv 
tro| »rstn bn fMMfmttJHt mif^tti bn ^«nffaim an» Vn< 
lian «nftHMdaaa. tbn bit SmnuiUM bnétfe bal fttfaariM 
SUtjlnatat, aa» »hatbt Staanat *atn«  nil,  fa till »*# fbalt' 
mnt b»a>  a*a>  nuftr.  IVri-at  maiM,  lal rrthMMtM VtuM* 
«ter faaa bu WrabtM m anMblira Waôtbàratr fia)  •>•* »"• 
fafita, aaa) dia^r« akn bta ataMaat'faVa «aftaj |a brarrfta, 
aa» «labibli«, mUtnt aua ai>4 kara»n f»nÉ)t, •» b«t) 3b|lf 
ant fbn bn Satiag MratV«  f»fl*a,  »rebayn M WrrtM aa bù 
(wi Catrab HwabnMRM |« bitft« Salt4«t. Maa amtnMt 
ti4 b*nâVn, aua ifné*, aiaa hltibt flttfra. aaa  lataH,  «as vwr-
tribtll bit  3«-il  aab »nta«i bit *bfia>«aaj *«• |i aaf Wn 
Ti. flat. Hai ». faauat bit Si*f »itbn rn, ti ttpn «tat 
alawabnataM, atat )lbf«t»tifaa*)fa, aab aa# lanatw Sftbta aab 
WfMaaVw t?ar*t«Mab« btf«li«it  aiaa,  bit Urtia oaf  bar ta-
•rtfttaaaa, 4tftt>tt ^raat -«a ttt HbtbtilaaotB jinnf {a Mnmfn. 
Caaiil ifl bit 3rd jlatflia) beraat aafe »it t>tTrra Z^ratirtta at-
kta tfat. 
*ai 23. «at |aaft »an Üe> rrj abn ta« VnUM ; baan aiaiMl 
aua »ifbtr labBoft (atngt 1a (Empfang, aar baaa aril aw« «Ht* 
fttr ,ut ïïjr««rbaun|, aaatiid) ^ •» ritlajriitbtta tttrjltMtM 
abnürbtn,  dl« 3i( aa« naw) bit tfrataliiitn bt« brtà>faVi 
Wilitaira» aab bit bt(»otifo>a llfarvahawa bt< brtafifaV«  *•«-
aiaabaalrn ta ^Raia) |ar Sfraajt  brtaal.  Çtn IM  fia ««VftTtl' 
l«fT, t.« arl.aatatr Mtartttaavnfaa) m, «a )al, btr «a«) 
fKlitB iar Mtrnpttni fetr Striaaiailaaj geftattt. M fait, bra 
abnaiHlbiat« e«l»atra »r «t*taf*afl i«  yvOm,  bn H  w*H* 
naiR) fJ« anitr bra Aaan ftn «JaiitaalBtrfaawitaB* mil *tm 
»»Mbarbrmrat ju  btbtebrn,  U «.alt,  tit ratwaffBttra 4lM|n in 
iffTta fijtnra ^lafrtu  MT  bta $m*lnb«tt« twrt ibat« «afgt-
brlaaif», riatr qrata fa aafvbrwra SalbairCta ia fo>i«*a. «bn 
tr. édffnrMaa, brt babrfibt Safanaaaa trf lart b4< litt« far fllri-
•••jftiltB;  aiaanafr Waiat, fnnm S*<ff4la»*TUfai,tMtH«ait«tbt 
"" * "  '"""  " * "' "' "' ..«mtifr *aa «aa) 
SS. *•*al MaiwitM,  «at raj ' 
t*t« bn|,  rrvablt 
»fr «amfa^ra M, vta» fa-a, lu aao> fVaiaj «tbta aab bit Sa«V «BtrTfa^ra M, «ab 
rt t|t n4tta. witbtT 3n( bit &ifin$ ^a fa>lufrB nab rfftB )« 
*• 34.  «tai t«bl.o> grbl 
rrta.  Z-a« «r^lracat f*t 
rMtata \u (na, irbtafdll« V»rta 
IfAMn  »*H«Mia*i 1 fAtiat fertig gnrarbtB i 
« btata jablrri*« 1 * ftibt« *a 
a«n.  rZr 
flati-ty  «fen 
bt« ftBartaiata «Mft« 
-(*rjaftfa UatRrbaeta»nfl«Bbt« bthiabrtra. 
i« raaita Stalaafr, ftatwat«, fraWfa a, f. ».,  «** tublid) 
i bn SatMjMlfpmlid>t ia aabBafn Xrara tut tta t>aa*nt#tn 
î*af«abfa arWabt« CtbMày. t)e* barf «Mb« wrfa>«Hrata 
.._ w. e " iattié'# traanal  »Bib«. 
Çwrr ®a)|»fftl ba« «art. t>rn brttf*f 
totaartbargtr, hcjbi 
fVftH  rrMliti,  Jraaffart aaa)  aa' braiftibtB Zi 
•Äaibwiita^* |, aat «n 4 Ubr 
_ . . . '  ?**>¥*  btMb-
j^trrta  Wita bard) ttrbtn im IMnttfvnràt brn 
!P»ri|tTf*»ft «Bf fat «rlabtn «ab nufrtt« brtbdlb 
rrlaabt  (t* btr fflij«.  «a«bnn U4 btatjaV  fUat«-
ai StrrbarlaaitBl prnldatirt, BaObriB r« fflbfl in 
•>unori0ifnK 9ti|t«i «• ^*" btntf**« 
r ffmara bar«) I 
r CMWraflffft .„ v_, ,. ... oaVnbvallr*. eaabbaaMta, j|irbn«wffn 
UMaftlitlr aa» ébaliaV fntfefntigt JBffni«»«ft MaBiBMra ia b«l 
I»T »«MiaMaft Btbra  f*hnm  aab frw*n<  t*-)*.  »«« 
raffant Prtifafa aairniata »«« fait; «inb b*«T«I' W «•**<»-f4lra)lra 3< 
, ._ . T lübrl.*, 
bm t?rat  kattr  aod)  "»BUT  tiar  rotbt  flafr 
' " -••-'• naeiaifrirfrai 
ftafluj trepftr ibrli«; 
3«f««fl. 
Krfa.  Waa Ub i»i 
brn fflal |Bc Jhrdjf anrtfi Wt«i«br«BrfaVBf  «ira.  Ptr 
_ U# WtratBrHb 
ttiat Vtrattiva  tia^r-
ER? *•!•#«. • tairai if ifra »3* I US" rrrfi* f.. 
. «rr.IadcM «aablia) frufjtt er fr**  9t*\ l jawlf 
Syn fxni  «x.itr. 
BBarlrgtnrr (»BiBira, 
_ . . «adHalln «it aa»tr» 
4mi «««brad. 
•rr t)m frtif .... <tt vat «rb^tli* Bi*fjn «warbt 
laktiali«  «agtr,  bn fa«f) (•  Ml* «««.  »"  b*«»f«fa  *" 
' aha,  anttratDaitnbta SairraMwa h 
fdMtfn «I« fruljn Mi bar t-ttBaag 
Riaa, rt  t)iag ' 
laVC.  *a_bta 
irrraata. ^it f>«U r têitmt 
-, i*a*br 
Imrr (jm frtif 
nakriailiO 
fp'ïni • 8a.rraw.ya hatlta aRta t»l«a| 
• ~  aaa.  »« *a(t, aab >«« n»n 
1 b>aab, ja mbé^Iig biaab 
j Rltibna be« tbrtaiatrtkra 
t^BbtltbtrTta, bw, Bia)l |a »ttfjrfaa, aaa) w b<> u. Jtbri 
an« btr «tabt *H (aBflfnliflflra «Itr &4ni 
iBbrt n* ita)t, arl^t Snaabmaata fai \ tm «i 
rrft 
fa>Nva«)t ttrafajtB fit p. ÏTB| briaab  jrfagf. 
<k nab alarfl.o) Irb 
Wabia ftbiaftab  bn *««)t; 8r^' 
I »all erbot 
! lag U u 
, MM i lorar« J«lt 
a Mira wn »aft«,  fo la« 
.* »rafOrt fiab mu, fa)Mv aao  rtr8t>«i^. 
ntabra »ir bit t>iabt ; Mira mr fa ta bit ï*l*r, fo «*f*«* 
i|rna  Praiaata, »it ba«  tfabr  br» Safaaj.  »aa*i «%H 
t.r«»,«.. «^^•Ä 
-if •BfA ipb<f4t «trti 
iaa> BOO)  fa (+lrt>l  frin,  tit tfang» 
hm Viru) tB br*  «aa)l}al'"  f"< 
fral)H bitfn, ,„.abn bit «lmfn>i*ii 
rr btr ftnlaiMttr  f»i«i,  fa Wjtt bit «anaotl 
lUinrfr or«  Vna|ibal*-
•ai lut  aiM ftiata. |?ma, »ra*«flral («Via. "-^^•L^^kÄ.%1. 
-•si* r .m.,.  ,. J,....  «.,  »ai 
9td4lkfil.  tr»T4fa» fir a 
Wirawit - ••• « »raijftfa.  »IT  hrfica kam aa» l»»ira.  • 
Itairrc »•« >.r »aaaihfc. 3<ft<rt.a »am •« ml l«M 
aln «Salt, »il »« |a|nr«a >ar<a rail  aa«.  Jrr«ca» an I 
fatrraL akftwaa^a wir «„ira. rratfjtra» lag ai» Jahafl 
I an« — *a fa)la|l »M rtrKa4>lr Kraalnliaa (iaria! ,,„Ua> aaf«  S, 
m ». 
I»ia«i r .t"H eaiawt«) faira oaf  « a|,"" 
ÄÄ^ÄIÄ iN«" 
... ,...  0*l«<f  i(t OB*. > aafar ,_.,. 
araa fab  «a»« aaf fr.arai  Paarr,  anA ^rfara rraa-Hf .aV nat 
ÖaiUoiTar aab ria SttirlFad '«t""> «ara faVaanli'' - «aitrr. 
€>o>n>rifttrirfrnb rnr«d)t nun an Worjei anb  faftt  ma. ..  bra ©bit-
arl, ba fllaaH  DM a nara  !•»•  Aillera  Arfa»an  y» ftbr«.  ABB« 
fad>r*t  •«• IHrbrt, «jrlimji titfr« baa)  frllta,  brna Bak)ntiA*aBatT 
~ htmmit*  tfrln+ua^ta t« 
Holt iBBBttlt  BIBB  BB«iBrarli4  ant bra  (ktt*t. 
aticfl.djr »«rmblru 5rB  Ha**  braiani «un frwr  flrr. 
tttnafe rrôffart  BMB  irbra^ruf,  traa t* id  BUT  jBwabrîc 
iafi irgrab «art: „„«it rraariar«!  i>nirB""  obn  .„.^*  |i 
a bit traariajr -Sinbairar-ajfrif'" »btr ,„,*« bna t»aa»j t 
Mitnifa brbaarr i*"" Pftrr ma irgrab tian anferrH bat 
r-brafr  brsianrn «Hrb gaOitrn folgra jafttt< 
battra fa  aar ttaffn *fitffra an» ^rroaVtr <im tJi»  -|f.frfr*-  l'" 
fabra  «»«««.  »«,«  ir»r*  Vaair f-"™ -»» "»"  *«'t«-
alt f«Bt»tlt man iw  «.Dir.  ,-r, 3abrr abrr î-rrfjUf^ t>r 
Blf,q^Bltwfi«i ^rrBatt  BB»  a>rul«afi-j|tfa «aonwaabtrn paatttn 
nara an mn in & at rat fnarn ëurfrlfu«)*. flafiraar bkibrn 
aal, bir, a»rl*r natrrfra:  3«!  14 ««Bat. »narr rrjat ft***» 
«adjbaii  aia-  brlta««  faa  «nr ria Itobnt «atairt ttn aobtr« 
4»f brr €>trafa ^rfet  BMB  nabn »it na CrxWabilin, orrbebm 
son robrn ^rolttarma,  »tnt*  argraafft »»« amranfattra 9*U. 
jlaf ttrr  «Orfr ill t*  >ltfi  »w atm-B ia tttv* Knafrtrr. «a« 
ferrt tit «aafr an bra «Unttn (rabtrla, MtXttaara rwM «« 
Vxr angrfaXaaratB aitbuar« Rourft. 0, iynx t*n\, —t r? 
btia^ri*.*  «arbra  P.. " " "- " *-—-
Hht na traatrflbn Jal . 
in) (tajrab aaf «rtarM .jM.Mnrfa«K" 
First page of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 1 

=====第52页=====

=====第53页=====
Hüser 23 
parts who can easily be stirred up, or are already stirred up, 
against us. 
. This has happened in Aachen, Trier, Mannheim and Mainz and 
can also occur elsewhere. 
Written by Engels on May 31, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 1, June 1, 1848 

=====第54页=====
24 
[THE LATEST HEROIC DEED OF THE HOUSE 
OF BOURBON] 
The House of Bourbon has not yet reached the end of its glorious 
career. True, its white flag has recently been rather besmirched and 
its withering lilies are drooping sadly enough. Charles Louis of 
Bourbon bartered away one dukedom3 and had to abandon a second 
oneb  ignominiously; Ferdinand of Bourbon lost Sicily and in Naples 
was forced to grant a Constitution to the revolution. Louis Philippe, 
although only a crypto-Bourbon, nevertheless went the way of all 
French-Bourbon flesh across the Channel to England. But the 
Neapolitan Bourbon has avenged the honour of his family 
brilliantly. 
The Chambers are convened at Naples. The opening day is to be 
used for the decisive battle against the revolution. Campobasso, one 
of the main police chiefs of the notorious Del Carretto, is sur­
reptitiously recalled from Malta. Large bands of armed Sbirri, led by 
their old ringleaders, again patrol Toledo Street for the first time in 
a long while. They disarm the citizens, rip off their coats and force 
them to cut off their moustaches. May 14, the opening day of the 
Chambers, draws near. The King demands that the Chambers 
should pledge themselves under oath not to change anything in the 
Constitution he has granted. They refuse. The national guard 
declares itself for the deputies. Negotiations take place, the King 
gives way and the Ministers resign. The deputies demand that the 
King should publicise his concessions in the form of an ordinance. 
The King promises such an ordinance for the following day. During 
Lucca.— Ed. 
Parma.— Ed. 

=====第55页=====
The Latest Heroic Deed of the House of Bourbon 25 
the night, however, all troops stationed in the vicinity of Naples move 
into the city. The national guard realises that it has been betrayed 
and throws up barricades which are manned by  5,000  to 6,000 men. 
But they are opposed by 20,000 soldiers, partially Neapolitans and 
partially Swiss, equipped with 18 cannon. Between them stand the 
20,000 lazzaroni17 of Naples who are not participating for the time 
being. 
On the morning of the 15th, the Swiss are still declaring that they 
will not attack the people. One of the police agents, however, who 
has mingled with the people, fires upon the soldiers in the Strada de 
Toledo. Thereupon fort St. Elmo at once hoists the red flag and on 
this signal the soldiers rush at the barricades. A horrible massacre 
begins. The national guards defend themselves heroically against the 
superior strength of four to one and against the cannon shots of the 
soldiers. Fighting rages from 10 a.m. until midnight. The people 
would have won in spite of the numerical superiority of the soldiery 
had the miserable conduct of the French Admiral Baudin not 
induced the lazzaroni to join the royal side. 
Admiral Baudin was lying with a fairly large French fleet before 
Naples. A simple but timely threat to fire upon the castle and the 
forts would have forced Ferdinand to yield. But Baudin, one of 
Louis Philippe's old servants who was used to the earlier period of 
the entente cordiale 18 when the existence of the French fleet was 
merely tolerated, remained inactive, thereby causing the lazzaroni, 
who were already leaning towards the people, to join the troops. 
This action of the Neapolitan lumpenproletariat decided the 
defeat of the revolution. Swiss guardsmen, Neapolitan soldiers and 
lazzaroni combined pounced upon the defenders of the barricades. 
The palaces along Toledo Street, which had been swept clean with 
grape-shot, collapsed under the cannon-balls of the troops. The 
frantic mob of victors tore into the houses, stabbed the men, speared 
the children, violated the women only to murder them afterwards, 
plundered everything in sight and then set fire to the pillaged 
dwellings. The lazzaroni proved to be the greediest and the Swiss the 
most brutal. The base acts and barbarities accompanying the victory 
of the well-armed and four times stronger Bourbon mercenaries and 
the always sanfedistic19 lazzaroni over the nearly destroyed national 
guard of Naples, are indescribable. 
Eventually, things went too far even for Admiral Baudin. Droves 
of refugees arrived on his ships and told of the events in the city. The 
French blood of his sailors was brought to boiling point. Now at last, 
when the victory of the King was assured, he contemplated a 
bombardment. The slaughter gradually came to an end. One no 

=====第56页=====
26 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
longer murdered in the streets but limited oneself to pillage and 
rape.  The prisoners, however, were led off to the forts and shot 
without further ado. It was all over by midnight. Ferdinand's 
absolute rule was restored in fact and the honour of the House of 
Bourbon was purified with Italian blood. 
That is the latest heroic deed of the House of Bourbon and as 
always it is the Swiss who are fighting the people on behalf of the 
Bourbons. On August 10, 1792, on July 29, 1830, and during the 
Neapolitan battles of 1820,20  everywhere we find the descend­
ants of Tell and Winkelried serving as mercenaries in the pay of the 
royal family whose name has for years been synonymous throughout 
Europe with that of absolute monarchy. Now all this will of course 
soon come to an end. After long disputes, the more civilised cantons 
have succeeded in prohibiting the military capitulations. 21 The 
sturdy sons of the original free Swiss League will have to give up 
kicking Neapolitan women with their feet, revelling in the pillage of 
rebellious towns and, in case of defeat, being immortalised by 
Thorwaldsen's lions like the fallen of August 10. 
The House of Bourbon, however, may for the time being breathe 
a sigh of  relief.  Nowhere has the reaction which set in again after 
February 24a  achieved such a decisive victory as at Naples and this in 
spite of the fact that the first of this year's revolutions began precisely 
in Naples and Sicily. The revolutionary tidal wave, however, 
which has inundated Old Europe, cannot be checked by absolutist 
conspiracies and coups d'état. By his counter-revolution of May 15, 
Ferdinand of Bourbon has laid the cornerstone of the Italian 
republic. Already Calabria is in flames, in Palermo a Provisional 
Government has been formed and the Abruzzi will also erupt. The 
inhabitants of all the exploited provinces will move upon Naples and, 
united with the people of that city, will take revenge on the royal 
traitor and his brutal mercenaries. And when Ferdinand falls he will 
at least have had the satisfaction of having lived and died a true 
Bourbon. 
Written by Engels on May 31, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 1, June 1, 1848 time 
On February 24, 1848, Louis Philippe was overthrown.— Ed. 

=====第57页=====
27 
THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY 
Cologne, June 1. Every new organ of public opinion is generally 
expected to show enthusiasm for the party whose principles it 
supports, unqualified confidence in the strength of this party, and 
constant readiness either to give the principles the cover of real 
power, or to cover up real weaknesses with the glamour of principles. 
We shall not live up to these expectations, We shall not seek to gild 
defeats with deceptive illusions. 
The democratic party has suffered defeat; the principles which it 
proclaimed at the moment of victory are called in question; the 
ground it has actually won is being contested inch by inch; much has 
been lost already and soon the question will arise—what is left? 
What is important for us is that the democratic party should 
understand its position. People may ask why we are concerned with a 
party, why we do not concentrate on the aims of the democratic 
movement, the welfare of the people, the happiness of all without 
distinction. 
For such is the law and usage of struggle, and only from the 
struggle of parties can the future welfare arise—not from seemingly 
clever compromises or from a hypocritical alliance brought about 
despite conflicting views, interests and aims. 
We demand of the democratic party that it grasp the significance 
of its position. This demand springs from the experience of the past 
months. The democratic party has allowed the elation of its first 
victory to go to its head. Intoxicated with the joy of being able at last 
to proclaim its principles openly for all to hear, it imagined that one 
had merely to proclaim these principles for them to be immediately 
realised. It did not go beyond this proclamation after its first victory 
and the concessions which directly followed it. But while the party 

=====第58页=====
28 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
was lavish with its ideas and treated as a brother everyone who did 
not immediately dare to challenge them, the others — those who 
retained or obtained power — were active. And their activity is not to 
be made light of. Keeping their principles to themselves and 
divulging only those parts that were directed against old conditions 
already overthrown by the revolution, they carefully held the 
movement in check, ostensibly in the interests of the evolving legal 
system and the establishment of formal order. They made seeming 
concessions to the advocates of the old order to secure their support 
for their own plans; then they gradually built up the basic elements 
of their own political system and thus succeeded in occupying an 
intermediate position between the democratic party and the 
defenders of absolutism, on the one hand advancing and on the 
other retarding the movement, being at once progressive — as 
regards the absolutists — and reactionary — as regards the demo­
crats. 
This is the party of the prudent, moderate bourgeoisie, and by this 
party the people's party, in its first intoxication, allowed itself to be 
taken in till finally it began to see things in their true light after 
having been contemptuously spurned, after all sorts of reprehensible 
intentions had been imputed to it, and its members denounced as 
agitators.23 Then it perceived that it had actually achieved nothing 
but what the gentlemen of the bourgeoisie regarded as compatible 
with their own well-understood interests. Set in conflict with itself by 
an undemocratic electoral law and defeated in the elections, the 
party now has against it two elected bodies; the only doubtful thing 
about them is, which of them will more strongly oppose its demands. 
Consequently, the enthusiasm of the party has of course melted away 
and has been replaced by the sober recognition of the fact that a 
powerful reaction has gained control, and this, strangely enough, 
happened before any revolutionary action took place. 
Although all this is undoubtedly true, it would be dangerous if the 
bitter feeling engendered by the first and partly self-induced defeat 
were to impel the democratic party now to revert to that wretched 
idealism, which is unfortunately characteristic of the German 
temperament, and according to which a principle that cannot be put 
into practice immediately is relegated to the distant future while for 
the present its innocuous elaboration is left to the "thinkers". 
We must clearly warn against those hypocritical friends who, while 
declaring that they agree with the principles, doubt whether they are 
practicable, because, they allege, the world is not yet ready for them, 
and who have no intention of making it ready, but on the contrary 
prefer to share the common lot of the wicked in this wicked earthly 

=====第59页=====
The Democratic Party 29 
life. If these are the crypto-republicans whom the Hofrat Gervinus 
fears so much, then we whole-heartedly agree with him: "Such men 
are dangerous."3 
Written by Marx on June 1, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 2, June 2, 1848 
a Shakespeare, Julius Caesar, Act I, Scene  2.—Ed. 

=====第60页=====
30 
CAMPHAUSEN'S STATEMENT 
AT THE SESSION OF MAY 30 24 
Cologne, June 2. Post et non propter,* in other words Herr 
Camphausen did not become Prime Minister because of the March 
revolution but after that revolution. On May 30, 1848, in a most 
solemn manner and with many protestations, displaying as it were a 
mysterious carriage of the body to cover the defects of the spirit, b 
Herr Camphausen has revealed this subsequent significance of his 
Ministry to the Berlin Assembly which sprang from an agreement 
between him and the indirect electors. 
The thinking friend of history states that "the Government which was formed on 
March 29 met soon after an occurrence whose significance has not been and will not be 
misjudged by it". 
Herr Camphausen's assertion that he did not form a Government 
before March 29 finds confirmation in the issues of the Preussische 
Staats-Zeitung published during the last few months. It may be 
assumed with confidence that a date, which indicates at least the 
chronological point of departure of Herr Camphausen's ascension 
into heaven, possesses great "significance", particularly for Herr 
Camphausen. What comfort it must be for the fallen barricade 
fighters to know that their cold corpses serve as visible sign and index 
finger pointing to the Government of March 29! Quelle gloire! d 
After and not because of.— Ed. 
Laurence Sterne, The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, Vol. I, ch. 
XI.—  Ed. 
An ironical allusion to the subtitle of Karl von Rotteck's Allgemeine  Geschichte  vom 
Anfang der historischen Kenntniss bis auf unsere Zeiten. Für denkende Geschichtsfreunde 
(General History from the Beginning of Historical Knowledge Until Our Time. For 
Thinking Friends of History).—Ed. 
What honour!—Ed. 

=====第61页=====
Camphausen's Statement at the Session of May 30 31 
In one word: after the March revolution, a Camphausen Ministry 
was formed. This same Camphausen Ministry recognises the "great 
significance" of the March revolution, at least it does not misjudge it. 
The revolution itself is a trifle — its significance is what matters! It 
signifies precisely the Camphausen Ministry, at least post festum* 
"This occurrence" — the formation of the Camphausen Ministry or the March 
revolution?—"belongs to the most essential contributing factors in the transforma­
tion of our internal political structure." 
Is this passage supposed to mean that the March revolution is "an 
essential contributing factor" to the formation of the Government of 
March 29, i.e. the Camphausen Government; or is it supposed 
merely to say: the Prussian March revolution has revolutionised 
Prussia! Such a solemn tautology may perhaps be expected from a 
"thinking friend of  history'''! 
"The Government recognises that we stand at its beginning" (namely of the 
transformation of our internal political conditions) "and that we have a long road 
ahead of us." 
In a word, the Camphausen Ministry recognises that it still has a 
long way to travel, i.e. it is looking forward to a long life. Brief is art, 
i.e. the revolution, and long is life, 6 i.e. the Ministry that came after. 
It gratuitously recognises  itself.  Or is one to interpret Camphausen's 
words in some other way? One would certainly not attribute to the 
thinking friend of  history  the trivial explanation that nations who stand 
at the beginning of a new historical epoch stand at the beginning and 
that the road which lies  ahead  of every epoch will be just as long as the 
future. 
So much for the first part of the laborious, grave, ceremonious, 
thorough and considered oration of Prime Minister Camphausen. It 
may be summarised in the following three statements: After the 
March revolution — the Camphausen Ministry. The Camphausen 
Ministry has great significance. A long road lies ahead of the 
Camphausen Ministry! 
Now for the second part. 
"By no means have we judged the situation to be such," lectures Herr 
Camphausen, "that a complete upheaval has resulted from this occurrence" (the 
March revolution), "that the entire structure of our state has been overthrown, that 
everything that exists has ceased to be legal and that all conditions must be placed on a 
new legal basis. On the contrary. The Government agreed from the moment of its 
initial meeting to regard it as essential for its own future that the then convoked 
After the event.— Ed. 
Modified quotation from Goethe's Faust, Erster Teil, "Nacht". —Ed. 

=====第62页=====
32 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
United Diet meet in reality, regardless of the petitions received opposing such a 
course, and that the new constitution evolve from the existing structure with the 
legal machinery offered by it without the bond which ties the old to the new being 
severed. This incontestably correct policy has been maintained. The electoral law has 
been submitted to the United Diet and passed with its advice. Later on, the attempt 
was made to induce the Government to alter this law on its own authority, in particular 
to change the indirect electoral system into a direct one. The Government did not yield. 
The Government did not act in a dictatorial way; it could not and would not act in such 
a way. The electoral law has in fact been implemented strictly according to the letter. It 
was on the basis of this electoral law that the electors and deputies were chosen. You 
are here on the basis of this electoral law with the power to agree with the Crown on a 
Constitution which it is to be hoped will endure in the future." 
A kingdom for a doctrine! A doctrine for a kingdom!3 
First there is the "occurrence"—a bashful euphemism for 
revolution. Afterwards there comes the doctrine and dupes the 
"occurrence". 
The illegal "occurrence" turned Herr Camphausen into the 
responsible  Prime Minister, i.e. into a creature that had no place and 
no meaning within the old state of affairs, within the existing 
structure. We override the old by a salto mortale and, fortunately, we 
find a responsible Minister. The responsible Minister however is 
even more fortunate in discovering a doctrine. With the first breath 
of life of a  responsible  Prime Minister the absolute monarchy died and 
rotted. Among the latter's victims was to be found primarily the 
blessed " United Diet", that disgusting mixture of Gothic delusion and 
modern deception. 0 The "United Diet" was the "dear faithful 
follower", the "pet" of the absolute monarchy. Just as the German 
republic can only celebrate its entry over the body of Herr Venedey, 
so the responsible Ministry can only enter over the body of the "dear 
faithful follower". The responsible Minister now picks out the lost 
body or conjures up the ghost of the dear faithful "United Diet", the 
ghost indeed makes an appearance, but unfortunately hovers 
suspended in the air, going through all sorts of bizarre capers 
because it can no longer find any ground under its feet, since the old 
foundation of  law and trusthas been swallowed up by the "occurrence" 
of the earthquake. The master magician reveals to the ghost that he 
has summoned it so as to settle its estate and to be able to act the loyal 
heir. The ghost cannot find enough praise for these polite manners 
because in ordinary life the deceased are not permitted to issue 
posthumous testaments. The most highly flattered ghost nods like a 
pagod to all that the master magician orders, takes a bow at the exit 
Modified quotation from Shakespeare's King Richard III, Act V, Scene 4.— Ed. 
Heinrich Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput XVII.— Ed. 

=====第63页=====
Camphausen's Statement at the Session of May 30 33 
and disappears. The law on indirect elections26 is its posthumous 
testament. 
The doctrinal trick by which Herr Camphausen "has evolved the 
new constitution from the existing structure with the legal machinery 
offered by it" develops as follows: 
An illegal occurrence turns Herr Camphausen into an illegal 
person within the meaning of the "existing structure" and of the 
"old state of affairs": that is into a responsible Prime Minister, a 
constitutional Minister. The constitutional Minister illegally trans­
forms the anti-constitutional, dear faithful " United Diet", based on the 
estates, into a constituent assembly. The dear faithful "United Diet" 
creates unlawfully the law of indirect elections. The law of indirect 
elections creates the Berlin Chamber, the Berlin Chamber draws up 
the Constitution and the Constitution produces all successive 
chambers from here to eternity. 
Thus,  a goose is transformed into an eeg and an egg into a goose. 
Thanks to the Capitol-saving cackling,2  the nation soon realises, 
however, that the golden eggs of Leda, which it laid in the 
revolution, have been stolen. Not even Deputy Milde seems to be the 
bright conspicuous Castor, son of Leda. 
Written by Marx on June 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 3, June 3, 1848 

=====第64页=====
34 
DEFEAT OF THE GERMAN TROOPS AT SUNDEWITT 
Schleswig. So the German troops have once again been beaten, 
once again the German-Prussian policy has suffered a brilliant 
defeat! This is the outcome of all those solemn promises of a strong, 
united Germany! — The time that could have been used to press 
home the initial victory they let slip by in useless negotiations which 
the enemy only entered into under duress in order to gain time for 
renewed resistance. And when Russia declared that she would 
intervene if Jutland were not evacuated, they still failed to recognise 
what lay behind the offer of an armistice, they lacked the courage to 
accept the impending conflict, the long-awaited and unavoidable 
conflict with Russia. Indeed, the proponents of a policy of force were 
at a loss, they gave in like cowards and during the  retreat  the "brave" 
guards were defeated by the "little" Danes! If this is not a case of 
open treason, then it is a manifestation of such immense incompe­
tence that in any case the management of the whole affair must be 
placed in other hands. Will the National Assembly in Frankfurt at 
last feel compelled to do what it should have done long since, that is 
take over foreign policy itself? Or will it here too—"in the trust that 
governments perform what are the duties of their office"—proceed 
to the order of the day? 
There follows the report of the Danish attack at Sundewitt, 3 taken 
from the Schleswig-Holsteiner Zeitung. 
Rendsburg, May 29. Yesterday (Sunday, the 28th) was assigned to the relief of 
confederate troops on outpost duty outside Alsen. This information must have 
The Danish name is Sundeved.— Ed. 
The Danish name is  Als.—Ed. 

=====第65页=====
Defeat of the German Troops at Sundewitt 35 
reached the Danes, who are generally well served by their spies in that region. 
Considerably reinforced by troops that in the last few days had once more been 
brought over from Fünen a to Alsen, they carried out a landing on this side of the river 
the full significance of which the Germans do not seem to have grasped, since their 
attention was taken up with the coming on and off guard of their own troops. Soon 
after the stationing of the new pickets the Germans suddenly found themselves under 
heavy attack beneath the Düppel Heights from a greatly superior force of Danish 
infantry and artillery, while at the same time the appearance of a number of ships and 
gunboats west of Erkensund (near Alnver and Treppe) gave the impression that a 
landing was also to be carried out there. Clearly this was an attempt by the Danes to 
split the German forces, but they achieved only a slight measure of success. On the 
Düppel Heights a fierce battle ensued in which both sides suffered heavy casualties, 
some of them fatal, as a result of cannon-fire (it is not yet possible to give figures). The 
Danes fought famously. Their numbers are put at  8,000  men, who took up 
battle-stations under cover of the deck-guns and flanked by cannon on land, while our 
men can scarcely have numbered 7,000. It was several hours before the battle was 
decided, when at last, around 7 o'clock in the evening, the German troops were forced 
to begin the retreat via Gravenstein northwards to Quars, while the Danes got to 
within an hour's march of Gravenstein, where our rearguard had stopped. 
Written by Engels on June 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspapei 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 3, June 3, 1848 time 
a The Danish name is  Fyn.—Ed. 
b The Danish name is Dybbjzfl.—Ed. 

=====第66页=====
36 
QUESTIONS OF LIFE AND DEATH 
Cologne, June 3. The times are changing and we are changing with 
them. That is a short saying with which our Ministers Camphausen 
and Hansemann are also well acquainted. Oh, what they had to put 
up with from government officials and marshals 29 when they were 
still modest deputies sitting on the school bench of a provincial diet! 
And how they were kept on a leash like fifth formers in the Rhenish 
Provincial Diet by His Most Serene Highness, form-master Solms-
Lich! Although they were permitted to indulge in a few exercises in 
elocution after they had been promoted to the sixth form, to the 
United Diet,30  how they were even then disciplined by their 
schoolmaster, Herr Adolf von Rochow, with the cane presented to 
him from on high! How meekly they had to take the impertinences 
of a Bodelschwingh, how attentively they had to admire the broken 
German of a Boyen, and how limited an understanding of a loyal 
subject they were obliged to display in face of the crude ignorance 
of a Duesberg! 
Things have changed now. The 18th of March has put an end to 
all the pedantic political schooling and the pupils of the Provincial 
Diet have announced their graduation. Herr Camphausen and Herr 
Hansemann have become Ministers and are delighted to feel their 
great importance as "indispensable persons". 
Everybody that has come in contact with them has been made to 
feel just how "indispensable" they consider themselves to be and 
how audacious they have become since their release from school. 
They immediately began to re-establish provisionally their old 
schoolroom, the United Diet. It was here that the grand act of 
transition from bureaucratic grammar school to constitutional 

=====第67页=====
Questions of Life and Death 37 
university was to take place, the solemn presentation, with all due 
formality, to the Prussian people of their certificate of maturity. 
The people declared in numerous memoranda and petitions that 
they did not want to have anything to do with the United Diet. 
Herr Camphausen replied (e.g. during the session of the 
Constituent Assembly on May 30 a) that the convocation of the Diet 
was of vital importance to the Ministry and that was that. 
The Diet met, a dejected, contrite assembly which despaired of the 
world, of God and of  itself.  The Diet had been given to understand 
that it was merely to adopt the new electoral law; but Herr 
Camphausen demanded of it not only a paper law and indirect 
elections, but also twenty-five million in cash. The curiae become 
confused, they begin to doubt their competence and stammer 
disjointed objections. There is nothing they can do, however, since 
after deliberation Herr Camphausen has made up his mind, and if 
the money is not granted and the "vote of confidence" is withheld 
Herr Camphausen will depart for Cologne and abandon the 
Prussian monarchy to its fate. The thought of such a possibility 
brings cold sweat to the foreheads of the gentlemen of the Diet, all 
resistance ceases and the vote of confidence is passed with a 
bitter-sweet smile. These twenty-five million—currency in the airy 
realm of dreams b—clearly show where and how they were enacted. 
The indirect elections are proclaimed. A wave of speeches, 
petitions and deputations rises against them. The ministerial 
gentlemen reply: the Ministry stands or falls with the indirect 
elections. After that everything becomes calm once more and both 
parties can go to sleep. 
The Agreement Assembly0  meets. Herr Camphausen is resolved 
that an address should be made in reply to his speech from the 
throne. Deputy Duncker is to make the proposal. A discussion begins 
during which a pretty lively opposition to the address emerges. Herr 
Hansemann is bored by the everlasting, confused cross-talk of the 
clumsy assembly; it becomes unendurable to his sense of parliamen­
tary tact and he declares curtly that they could be spared all this: 
either an address is forthcoming and in that case all is well, or no 
address is made and the Ministry resigns. Nevertheless, the debate 
goes on and finally Herr Camphausen himself steps up to the 
rostrum to confirm that the question of the address is of vital 
importance to the Ministry. Finally, when this also has no effect, 
a See this volume, pp. 30-32.—Ed. 
Heinrich Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput  VII.—Ed. 
c i.e. the Prussian National Assembly convened on May 22, 1848.—Ed. 

=====第68页=====
38 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Herr Auerswald also rises and asserts for the third time that the 
Ministry stands or falls with the address. The assembly was now 
sufficiently convinced and, of course, voted for the address. 
Thus,  our "responsible" Ministers have, within two months, 
already acquired that experience and self-possession necessary for 
the conduct of an assembly which M. Duchâtel, who certainly is not 
to be belittled, gained only after several years of intimate dealing 
with the last but one French Chamber of Deputies. For some time 
past M. Duchâtel, too, when the Left bored him with its lengthy 
tirades, used to declare: the Chamber is free to vote for or against, 
but we shall resign if it votes against. Thereupon, the timorous 
majority, for which M. Duchâtel was the "most indispensable" man 
in the world, flocked around its threatened ringleader like a flock of 
sheep in a thunderstorm. M. Duchâtel was a frivolous Frenchman 
and played this game until it became too much for his fellow 
countrymen. Herr Camphausen is a stalwart and composed German 
and he will know how far he can go. 
Of course, one can save both time and arguments by this method if 
one is as sure of one's supporters as Herr Camphausen is of the 
"agreers". The opposition is pretty effectively silenced if every issue 
is made a question of*confidence. That is why this method is most 
suitable for determined men like Duchâtel and Hansemann who 
know once and for all what they want and who find all further 
useless palaver unbearable. This little earthly expedient, however, as 
our Prime Minister will find out by experience, is not at all suitable 
for men with debating skills who love "to expound and exchange 
their views about the past, the present, and the future as well, in 
great debates" (Camphausen, session of May 31), for men who stand 
their ground on principles and grasp the meaning of current events 
with the acumen of philosophers, for elevated minds such as Guizot 
and Camphausen. He should let his Duchâtel-Hansemann handle 
such matters and keep to the more elevated sphere where we take 
such a delight in observing him. 
Written on June 3, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 4, June 4, 1848 time 

=====第69页=====
39 
THE CAMPHAUSEN GOVERNMENT 31 
Cologne, June 3. It is well known that the French National 
Assembly of 1789 was preceded by an assembly of notables which 
was composed of the estates like the Prussian United Diet. In the 
decree by which he convoked the National Assembly, Minister 
Necker referred to the expressed desire of the notables to call 
together the Estates-General. Thus, Minister Necker held a signifi­
cant advantage over Minister Camphausen. He did not have to wait 
for the storming of the Bastille or the overthrow of the absolute 
monarchy in order afterwards to link the old and new in a 
doctrinaire fashion so that he could laboriously maintain the illusion 
that France had achieved the new Constituent Assembly by the legal 
machinery of the old constitution. He possessed still other 
advantages. He was Minister of France and not Minister of Lorraine 
and Alsace, whereas Herr Camphausen is not Minister of Germany 
but Minister of Prussia. And in spite of all these advantages Minister 
Necker did not succeed in transforming a revolutionary movement 
into a tranquil reform. The serious malady could not be cured by 
attar of roses. 3 Herr Camphausen will succeed even less in changing 
the character of the movement by an artificial theory that draws a 
straight line of succession between his Ministry and the old 
conditions which prevailed in the Prussian monarchy. No device can 
transform the March revolution and the German revolutionary 
movement as a whole into incidents of more or less consequence. Was 
Louis Philippe elected King of the French  because  he was a Bourbon? 
a Heinrich Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput XXVI (para­
phrased).—Ed. 

=====第70页=====
40 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Was he chosen although he was a Bourbon? One may remember that 
this question divided the parties shortly after the July revolution.32 
And what did the question prove? It proved that the revolution itself 
was called in question and that the interests of the new ruling class 
and its political representatives were not the interests of the 
revolution. 
The same significance must be ascribed to the statement of Herr 
Camphausen that his Government had been brought into the world 
not by the March revolution but after the March revolution. 
Written by Marx on June 3, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 4, June 4, 1848 

=====第71页=====
41 
THE QUESTION OF UNION 
Throughout the whole of North Italy various plots and schemes 
are being hatched, on the one hand to unite the smaller states with 
Sardinia and on the other to prevent that union. These intrigues are 
very similar to those for hegemony in Germany. Charles Albert is 
seeking to establish an Italian Prussia "on the broadest possible 
basis",  from Nice to Trieste. The affair is of absolutely no national 
importance; on both sides it is a question of local interests and the 
gratification of provincial vanities, such as can only be removed 
through the creation of a united and indivisible Italy. Until then, the 
decisive factor will continue to be the needs of the moment, and 
these are for union, since this would bring about, at least in some 
measure, a certain concentration of forces for the struggle against 
Austria. 
Written by Engels on June 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 4, June 4, 1848 time 

=====第72页=====
42 
THE WAR COMEDY 
Schleswig-Holstein. Indeed, the annals of all history know of no 
such campaign, no such striking alternation between the force of 
arms and diplomacy as our current unitedly-German-national war 
against little Denmark! All the great deeds of the old imperial army 
with its six hundred commanders, general staffs and military 
councils, the mutual chicaneries of the leaders of the 1792 coalition, 
the orders and counter-orders of the blessed Royal and Imperial 
War Council, are serious and touchingly tragic events compared to 
the warlike comedy which the new German federal army 33 is 
performing in Schleswig-Holstein to the resounding laughter of all 
Europe. 
Let us briefly trace the plot of this comedy. 
The Danes advance from Jutland and land troops in North 
Schleswig. The Prussians and Hanoverians occupy Rendsburg and 
the Eider line. The Danes, who, in spite of all the German bragging, 
are an alert and brave people, quickly attack and in a single battle 
drive the army of Schleswig-Holstein back towards the Prussians. 
The latter calmly look on. 
At last, Berlin gives the order to advance. The united German 
troops attack the Danes and at Schleswig overwhelm them by their 
numerical superiority. The victory was brought about primarily by 
the Pomeranian guardsmen who handled their rifle-butts as skilfully 
as they had done previously at Grossbeeren and Dennewitz. 34 
Schleswig is conquered once more and Germany is jubilant at the 
heroic deed of her army. 
In the meantime, the Danish fleet which numbers less than twenty 
ships of any size, seizes the German merchant vessels, blockades all 

=====第73页=====
The War Comedy 43 
German ports, and covers the crossings to the islands to which 
the army withdraws. Jutland is abandoned and partially occu­
pied by Prussian troops who demand an indemnity of 2 million 
speciestaler. 
Before a single taler of the indemnity has been received, however, 
England sends proposals for mediation on the basis of a withdrawal 
and the neutrality of Schleswig, and Russia sends threatening Notes. 
Herr Camphausen falls right into this trap and, on his orders, the 
Prussians, drunk with victory, withdraw from Veile to Königsau, to 
Hadersleben, Apenrade 3 and Flensburg. The Danes, who till then 
had vanished, reappear at once. They pursue the Prussians day and 
night, throw their withdrawal into confusion, make landings 
everywhere, defeat the troops of the 10th Federal Corps at Sunde-
witt b and retreat only before superior numbers. In the enga­
gement of May 30, rifle-butts, swung this time by the solid arms 
of Mecklenburgers, again proved decisive. The German inhab­
itants flee with the Prussians, all North Schleswig is • aban­
doned to devastation and plunder, and the Danebrog 0 flies once 
more over Hadersleben and Apenrade. It is obvious that Prussian 
soldiers of all ranks obey orders in Schleswig just as they do in 
Berlin. 
Suddenly there comes an order from Berlin: the Prussians are to 
advance again. Now they merrily advance northward once more, but 
the comedy still has long to run. We want to wait and see where the 
Prussians will this time receive orders to retreat. 
In short, it is a genuine quadrille, a military ballet which the 
Camphausen Ministry is having performed for its own amusement 
and for the glory of the German nation. 
We must not forget, however, that it is the burning villages of 
Schleswig which supply the illumination for the stage and that it is 
the cries for vengeance from Danish marauders and partisans which 
provide the chorus for this performance. 
The Camphausen Ministry has on this occasion demonstrated its 
high calling to represent Germany abroad. Schleswig, twice aban­
doned to Danish invasions through the fault of this Ministry, will 
gratefully remember the first diplomatic experiment of our "respon­
sible"  Ministers. 
a The Danish names are Kongeaa, Haderslev, Aabenraa.—Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 34-35.—Ed. 
c Danish flag.— Ed. 

=====第74页=====
44 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Let us have confidence in the wisdom and energy of the 
Camphausen Ministry! 
Written by Engels on June 4, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 5, June 5, 1848 time 

=====第75页=====
45 
THE REACTION 
Cologne, June 5. The dead ride fast.3  Herr Camphausen disavows 
the revolution and the reaction dares to suggest to the Agreement 
Assembly that the revolution should be stigmatised as a riot. On June 
3, a deputy 6 moved that a monument be erected for the soldiers who 
died on March 18. 
Written on June 5, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 6, June 6, 1848 time 
a Gottfried Bürger, "Lenore".—Ed. 
b Karl Richter.— Ed. 

=====第76页=====
46 
COMITÉ DE SÛRETÉ GÉNÉRALE 
IN BERLIN35 
Cologne, June 5. Now Berlin, too, has its Comité de sûreté générale 
just as Paris had in the year 1793. There is, however, one difference: 
the Paris committee was revolutionary, whereas the one in Berlin is 
reactionary. For according to an announcement which appeared in 
Berlin, "the authorities entrusted with the maintenance of order" 
have found it necessary "to join in a combined effort". They have 
therefore appointed a Committee of Public Safety which has taken 
up residence in Oberwallstrasse. This new administrative body is 
composed as follows: 1. President: Puttkamer, director in the Mi­
nistry of the Interior; 2. Commandant  Aschoff,  the former comman­
der-in-chief of the civic militia; 3. Chief of Police Minutoli; 4. Public 
Prosecutor Temme; 5. Burgomaster Naunyn and two councillors; 
6. The chairman of the City Council and three city councillors; 
7. Five officers and two soldiers of the civic militia. The committee will 
"take notice of all events which disturb or threaten to disturb public order and it 
promises to subject the facts to a profound and thorough investigation. While 
circumventing old and inadequate means and methods, and avoiding unnecessary 
correspondence, the committee will agree upon suitable steps and initiate the rapid 
and energetic implementation of the necessary orders by the various organs of the 
administration. Only such joint co-operation can bring speed and safety, combined 
with the requisite circumspection, into the conduct of business which is often very 
difficult in the present circumstances. In particular, however, the civic militia, which 
has assumed the protection of the city, will be enabled, when  required,  to lend appropriate 
weight to the decisions made with its advice by the authorities. With full confidence  in. the 
participation and collaboration of all inhabitants, particularly the honourable (!) estate 
of artisans and (!) workers, the deputies, free of all party views and aims, begin their 
laborious task and hope that they may be able to fulfil it, preferably by the peaceful 
method of mediation, so that the well-being of all may be assured". 

=====第77页=====
Comité de sûreté générale in Berlin 47 
The very unctuous, ingratiating, humbly pleading language used 
leads one to suspect that what is being formed here is a centre for 
reactionary activities against the revolutionary people of Berlin. The 
composition of this committee changes this suspicion to certainty. 
There is first of all Herr Puttkamer, who as Chief of Police became 
well known for his expulsions. As under the bureaucratic monarchy, 
no high authority without at least one Puttkamer. Then there is Herr 
Aschoff,  who, because he is as rude as a drill-sergeant and on 
account of his reactionary intrigues, came to be so hated by the civic 
militia that it decided to remove him. He has now indeed resigned. 
Then we come to Herr Minutoli, who in 1846 saved the fatherland in 
Posen a by discovering the Polish conspiracy36 and who recently 
threatened to expel the compositors when they were striking because 
of wages disagreements.37 Then there are the representatives of two 
bodies that have become extremely reactionary: the Municipal 
Government and the City Council, and, finally, among the civic 
militia officers the arch-reactionary Major Blesson. We hope that the 
people of Berlin will by no means let themselves be held in tutelage 
by this arbitrarily constituted committee of reaction. 
The committee, by the way, has already started its reactionary 
activity by asking that the popular procession, announced for 
yesterday (Sunday),b to the grave of those killed in March should 
be called off since this would be a demonstration and demonstrations 
in general are held to be an evil. 
Written on June 5, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 6, June 6, 1848 time 
a The Polish name is Poznan. —Ed. 
b June 4, 1848.—Ed. 

=====第78页=====
48 
THE PROGRAMMES 
OF THE RADICAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY 
AND OF THE LEFT AT FRANKFURT38 
Cologne, June 6. Yesterday we acquainted our readers with the 
"reasoned manifesto of the radical-democratic party in the 
Constituent National Assembly at Frankfurt am Main".39 Today they 
will find the manifesto of the Left under the heading Frankfurt. At 
first sight the two manifestos appear to be almost identical except in 
form, as the radical-democratic party has a clumsy editor and the 
Left a skilful one. On closer scrutiny, however, several substantially 
different points stand out. The manifesto of the radicals demands a 
National Assembly to be set up "without any  property  qualification and 
by direct elections", that of the Left wants it to be convened by "free 
universal elections". Free universal elections exclude property qualifica­
tions, but by no means exclude the indirect method of election. In any 
case why use this vague and ambiguous term? 
We encounter once more this greater latitude and flexibility in the 
demands of the Left compared with the demands of the radical 
party. The Left wants 
"an executive Central Authority elected by the National Assembly for a definite 
period and responsible to it". 
It does not say whether this Central Authority has to be elected 
from the ranks of  the National  Assembly,  as the manifesto of the radicals 
expressly states. 
Finally the manifesto of the Left calls for the immediate definition, 
proclamation and maintenance of the basic rights of the German 
people against all possible encroachments by individual govern­
ments. The manifesto of the radicals is not content with this. It 
declares that 
"all political power of the federal state is now concentrated in the Assembly which 
must immediately bring into operation the various forces and political institutions 

=====第79页=====
Programmes of the Radical-Democratic Party & of the Left at Frankfurt 49 
falling within its jurisdiction, and direct the home and foreign policies of the federal 
state". 
Both manifestos agree that the "drafting of the German 
Constitution should be left solely to the National Assembly" and the 
governments debarred from taking part in it. Both agree that 
"without prejudice to the people's rights to be proclaimed by 
the National Assembly" it should be left to the individual states 
to choose their form of government, whether that of a constitu­
tional monarchy or a republic. Both finally agree that Germany 
should be transformed into a confederation or a federative 
state. 
The manifesto of the radicals at least expresses the revolutionary 
nature of the National Assembly. It demands appropriate revolu­
tionary action. Does not the mere existence of a Constituent National 
Assembly prove that  there  is no longer any Constitution? But if there is 
no Constitution, then there is no Government either. And if there is 
no longer any Government, the National Assembly must govern. Its 
first move should have been a decree of seven words: "The Federal 
Diet40 is dissolved for ever." 
A Constituent National Assembly must above all be an active, 
revolutionarily active assembly. The Assembly at Frankfurt is 
engaged in parliamentary school exercises and leaves it to the 
governments to act. Assuming that this learned gathering succeeds, 
after mature consideration, in framing the best of agendas and the 
best of constitutions, of what use is the best agenda and the best 
Constitution if the governments meanwhile have placed bayonets on 
the agenda? 
Apart from the fact that it was the outcome of indirect elections, the 
German National Assembly suffers from a specifically German 
malady. It sits at Frankfurt am Main, and Frankfurt am Main is 
merely an ideal centre, which corresponded to the hitherto ideal, 
that is merely imaginary, German unity. Frankfurt am Main 
moreover is not a big city with a large revolutionary population 
backing the National Assembly, partly defending it, partly spurring 
it on. It is the first time in world history that the Constituent Assemb­
ly of a big nation holds its sessions in a small town. This is the result 
of Germany's previous history. While the French and English natio­
nal assemblies met on volcanic ground—Paris and London—the 
German National Assembly considered itself lucky to find neutral 
ground, where in the most comfortable peace of mind it could 
ponder over the best Constitution and the best agenda. Yet the 
present state of affairs in Germany offered the Assembly an 
opportunity to overcome the drawbacks of its unfortunate physical 
4* 

=====第80页=====
50 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
situation. It only needed everywhere to counter dictatorially the 
reactionary encroachments by obsolete governments in order to win 
over public opinion, a power against which all bayonets and rifle-
butts would be ineffective. Instead Mainz, almost within sight of the 
Assembly, is abandoned to the arbitrary actions of the army, and 
German citizens from other parts of the country are exposed to the 
chicanery of the philistines in Frankfurt.3 The Assembly bores the 
German people instead of inspiring it or being inspired by it. 
Although there is a public which for the time being still looks with 
good-natured humour upon the antics performed by the spectre of 
the resurrected Diet of the Holy Roman Empire,41 there is no  people 
that can find its own life reflected in the life of the Assembly. Far 
from being the central organ of the revolutionary movement, the 
Assembly, up till now, was not even its echo. 
If the National Assembly forms a Central Authority from its own 
midst, little satisfaction can be expected from such a Provisional 
Government, in view of the Assembly's present composition and the 
fact that it let the favourable moment slip by. If it forms no Central 
Authority, it puts its seal to its own abdication and will be scattered to 
the winds at the first stir of a revolutionary current. 
It is to the credit of both the programme of the Left and that of the 
radical group that they have grasped this necessity. Both exclaim 
with Heine: 
"For when I consider the matter with care, 
We don't need an Emperor really." 
Because it is so difficult to decide "who shall be emperor", and 
because there are as many good reasons for an elected emperor as 
there are for an hereditary emperor, even the conservative majority 
of the Assembly will be compelled to cut the Gordian knot by electing 
no emperor at all 
It is incomprehensible how the so-called radical-democratic party 
can advocate, as the ultimate constitutional structure of Germany, a 
federation of constitutional monarchies, small principalities and tiny 
republics, i.e. a federal state consisting of such heterogeneous 
elements, headed by a republican Government—for this is what the 
central body agreed to by the Left really amounts to. 
First of all the German Central Government elected by the Natio­
nal Assembly must undoubtedly be set up  alongside  the governments 
a See this volume, pp. 16-19.—Ed. 
Heinrich Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput  XVI.—Ed. 

=====第81页=====
Programmes of the Radical-Democratic Party & of the Left at Frankfurt 51 
which still actually exist. But its struggle against the separate 
governments begins as soon as it comes into existence, and in the 
course of this struggle either the Central Government and the unity 
of Germany are wrecked, or the separate governments with their 
constitutional princes or petty republics are destroyed. 
We do not make the Utopian demand that at the outset a united 
indivisible German republic should be proclaimed, but we ask the 
so-called radical-democratic party not to confuse the starting point 
of the struggle and of the revolutionary movement with the goal. 
Both German unity and the German Constitution can result only 
from a movement in which the internal conflicts and the war with the 
East will play an equally decisive role. The final act of constitution 
cannot be decreed, it coincides with the movement we have to go 
through. It is therefore not a question of putting into practice this or 
that view, this or that political idea, but of understanding the course 
of development. The National Assembly has to take only such steps 
as are practicable in the first instance. 
Nothing can be more confused than the notion advanced by the 
editor of the democratic manifesto—for all his assurances that 
"everybody is glad to get rid of his confusion"—that the federal state 
of North America should serve as a model for the German 
Constitution. 
Leaving alone the fact that all its constituent parts have a similar 
structure, the United States of America covers an area equal to that 
of civilised Europe. Only a European federation would be analogous 
to it. But in order to federate with other states Germany must first of 
all become one state. The conflict between centralisation and 
federalism in Germany is a conflict between modern culture and 
feudalism. Germany fell into a kind of bourg eoisified feudalism at 
the very moment the great monarchies arose in the West; she was 
moreover excluded from the world market just when this market 
was opened up to the countries of Western Europe. Germany 
became impoverished while the Western countries grew rich; she 
became countrified while they became urbanised. Even if Russia did 
not knock at the gates of Germany, the economic conditions alone 
would compel the latter to introduce rigorous centralisation. Even 
from a purely bourgeois point of view, the solid unity of Germany is 
a primary condition for her deliverance from her present wretched­
ness and for the building up of her national wealth. And how could 
modern social problems be solved in a territory that is split into 39 
small states? 
Incidentally, the editor of the democratic programme does not 
bother about such a minor question as material economic conditions. 

=====第82页=====
52 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
He relies on the concept of federation in his reasoning. Federation is 
an alliance of free and equal partners. Hence Germany must be a federal 
state. But cannot the Germans unite in  one great state without offence 
to the concept of an alliance of free and equal partners? 
Written on June 6, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 7, June 7, 1848 

=====第83页=====
53 
THE AGREEMENT DEBATES IN BERLIN 
Cologne, June 6. The negotiations for an agreement etc. are making 
most satisfactory progress in Berlin. Motions follow motions and 
most of them are even submitted five or six times to make quite sure 
that they are not lost on their long way through the sections and 
committees. At every opportunity the greatest number of prelimi­
nary questions, secondary questions, interpolated questions, sup­
plementary questions, and main questions is raised. Whenever one 
of these great or small questions is taken up, an informal 
conversation ensues between the delegates "on the floor" and the 
President, the Ministers etc., thus creating a welcome pause between 
the demanding "great debates". Especially those anonymous 
agreers whom the stenographer is in the habit of designating as 
"votes",  love to express their opinions during such genial discus­
sions.  These "votes", by the way, are so proud of their right to vote 
that sometimes "they vote both yes and no" as happened on June 2. 
Alongside this idyll, however, there arises with all the grandeur of 
tragedy the battle of the great debate, a battle which is not only 
conducted verbally from the rostrum but is joined by the chorus of 
the agreers with drumming, murmuring, and confused shouting. 
Each time the drama ends, of course, with a victory for the virtuous 
Right and is almost always decided by the conservative army calling 
for a vote. 
During the session of June 2 Herr Jung questioned the Foreign 
Minister about the extradition treaty with Russia. 43 It is known that 
already in 1842, public opinion forced the abrogation of the 
extradition treaty, which was, however, renewed during the reaction 
of 1844. It is known that the Russian Government orders extradited 
persons to be knouted to death or to be exiled to Siberia. It is known 

=====第84页=====
54 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
that the agreed extradition of common criminals and vagabonds 
offers the desired pretext for the delivery of political refugees into 
the hands of the Russians. 
Foreign Minister Arnim replied: 
"Surely, no one will object to the extradition of deserters, since it is an accepted 
practice between friendly states mutually to extradite such people." 
We take notice that according to our Minister Russia and Germany 
are "friendly states". The massive armies which Russia is concentrat­
ing along the Bug and Niémen rivers have no other intention, to be 
sure,  than to liberate "friendly" Germany as soon as possible from 
the terror of the revolution. 
"The decision to extradite criminals, by the way, rests in the hands of the courts so 
that there is every guarantee that the accused will not be extradited before the 
conclusion of the criminal investigation." 
Herr Arnim tries to make the Assembly believe that Prussian 
courts investigate the evidence which has been gathered against the 
accused. The opposite is true. Russian or Russian-Polish judicial 
authorities send a decision to the Prussian judicial authorities, 
indicting the fugitive. The Prussian court is obliged to check merely 
the authenticity of this document and if it proves to be genuine, the 
extradition has to take place. Thus, "there is every guarantee" that 
the Russian Government has only to beckon to its judges in order to 
get hold of every fugitive with the aid of Prussian chains as long as 
the fugitive has not yet been indicted for political offences. 
"It goes without saying that our own subjects will not be extradited." 
"Our own subjects", feudal Baron von Arnim, cannot be 
extradited under any circumstances because there are no longer 
"subjects" in Germany since the people took the liberty of 
emancipating themselves on the barricades. 
"Our own subjects"! Are we, who elect assemblies and prescribe 
sovereign laws to kings and emperors, "subjects" of His Majesty the 
King of Prussia? 
"Our own subjects"! If the Assembly had even a spark of the 
revolutionary pride to which it owes its existence, it would have 
drummed the servile Minister off the rostrum and the ministerial 
bench in a single outburst of indignation. Instead it calmly allowed 
the stigmatising expression to go unchallenged. Not the slightest 
protest was heard. 
Herr Rehfeld questioned Herr Hansemann about the Seehand-
lung's 44 renewed buying up of wool and about the advantages enjoy­
ed by British buyers over German buyers as a result of the discount 

=====第85页=====
The Agreement Debates in Berlin 55 
offered to the British. The wool industry, depressed by the general 
crisis,  expected to gain at least some small benefit by purchasing at 
this year's very low wool prices. Along comes the Seehandlung and 
drives up the price of wool by its enormous purchases in bulk. At the 
same time it offers to facilitate considerably the purchases of British 
buyers by discounting bills of exchange drawn on London—a 
measure which is also quite apt to raise the price of wool by attracting 
new buyers and which gives significant advantages to foreign over 
domestic purchasers. 
The Seehandlung is a legacy of absolute monarchy which used it for 
all sorts of purposes. For twenty years it has caused the 1820 Law on 
Government Debts 45 to remain an illusion and it has meddled in 
trade and industry in a most disagreeable fashion. 
The question asked by Herr Rehfeld is basically of little interest to 
democracy. It concerns a profit of several thousand talers more or 
less for either wool producers or wool manufacturers. 
The wool producers are almost exclusively large landed pro­
prietors, i.e. feudal lords from Brandenburg, Prussia, Silesia and 
Posen. 
The wool manufacturers are for the most part big capitalists, i.e. 
gentlemen of the big bourgeoisie. 
Hence, the price of wool is a matter not of general interest but of 
class interests. The question is whether the big landed aristocracy will 
profit to the exclusion of the big bourgeoisie or whether it will be the 
other way around. 
Herr Hansemann who has been sent to Berlin as the representa­
tive of the big bourgeoisie, the party now in power, betrays it to the 
landed aristocracy, the conquered party. 
The only interest which this entire matter holds for us democrats 
lies in the fact that Herr Hansemann has taken up the cause of the 
conquered party, that he does not support the merely conservative 
class but the reactionary class. We admit that we did not expect such 
behaviour from the bourgeois Hansemann. 
Herr Hansemann assures us, to begin with, that he is no friend of 
the Seehandlung and then adds: Neither the purchasing business nor 
the mills of the Seehandlung can be stopped suddenly. Concerning 
wool purchases, there are treaties by which the Seehandlung ... is 
committed to buy up a certain amount of wool this year. I believe 
that if during any year such purchases are not harmful to private 
trade, it is certainly the case this year (?) ... because otherwise the 
prices would drop too low. 
The entire speech shows that Herr Hansemann is not comfortable 
while delivering it. He had been induced to do a favour to the 

=====第86页=====
56 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Arnims, Schaffgotsches and Itzenplitzes to the detriment of the wool 
manufacturers, and he must now defend his rash step with the 
arguments of modern political economy which is so unmerciful to 
the interests of the aristocracy. He knows better than anyone else 
that he is making a fool of the Assembly. 
"Neither the purchasing business nor the mills of the Seehandlung 
can be stopped suddenly." Thus, the Seehandlung buys wool and lets 
its mills work at full speed. If the mills of the Seehandlung "cannot be 
stopped" suddenly then the sales obviously also cannot be ended. 
Thus,  the Seehandlung will put its woollen products on the market, 
glut the already overstocked market and depress the already sinking 
prices even more. In a word, it will make the current commercial 
crisis even worse and take away the last few remaining customers 
from the wool manufacturers in order to supply the landed gentry of 
Brandenburg etc. with money for their wool. 
Concerning the English bills of exchange, Herr Hansemann 
delivers a brilliant tirade describing the enormous advantages which 
will accrue to the entire country when English guineas flow into the 
pockets of the landed gentry of Brandenburg. We will of course not 
discuss these remarks seriously. What we cannot understand is that 
Herr Hansemann was able to maintain a straight face during his 
speech. 
The same session also debated a committee which is to be formed 
because of Posen. Concerning that, tomorrow. 
Written by Engels on June 6, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 7, June 7, 1848 time 

=====第87页=====
57 
THE AGREEMENT DEBATES 
Cologne, June 6. At the Berlin agreement session of the 2nd, Herr 
Reuter moved the appointment of a committee of inquiry into the 
causes of the civil war in Posen. 46 
Herr Parrisius demands an immediate debate on this motion. 
The President3  gets ready to call for a vote when Herr Camphausen 
recalls that there has as yet been no debate on Herr Parrisius' motion: 
"May I remind you that the passage of this" (Reuter's) "motion would mean the 
acceptance of an important political principle which is certainly entitled (sic!) to a test in 
the sections." 
We are put in suspense about the "important principle" contained 
in Reuter's motion, a secret which Herr Camphausen is not disclosing 
for the time being. 
While we have to show patience in this respect, a complacent 
debate develops between the Chairman (Herr Esser, Vice-President) 
and several "votes" as to whether or not a debate is permissible on 
Parrisius' motion. Herr Esser here debates with arguments which 
sound strange in the mouth of the President of a soi-disant National 
Assembly: "I was under the impression that it is permissible to discuss 
any matter that the Assembly is called upon to decide." 
"I was under the impression"! Man proposes and Herr Camp­
hausen disposes by drafting standing orders that nobody can 
understand and having them adopted provisionally by his Assembly. 
Herr Camphausen was gracious this time. He had to have the 
debate. Parrisius' and Reuter's motions might have been passed 
without debate, i.e. an indirect vote of no confidence would have 
a Karl Milde.— Ed. 

=====第88页=====
58 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
been rendered against him. And, still worse, what would have 
become of his "important political principle" without a debate? 
Hence, a discussion takes place. 
Herr Parrisius wants an immediate debate on the main motion so 
that no time is lost and the committee may possibly report before 
the debate on the address. Otherwise judgment would be made in 
the address without any factual knowledge about Posen. 
Herr Meusebach opposes this move although as yet rather mildly. 
But now Herr Ritz rises impatiently to put an end to Reuter's 
subversive motion. He is a royal Prussian Regierungsrat and will not 
tolerate that assemblies, even if they are assemblies for the purpose 
of agreement, meddle in his special field. He knows of but one 
authority entitled to do so: the Oberpräsidium. He prefers the system 
of successive appeals to everything else. 
"What," he exclaims, "do you, gendemen, intend to send a commission to 
Posen? Do you intend to turn yourselves into administrative or judicial authorities? 
Gentlemen, I cannot perceive from this motion what you are trying to accomplish. Are 
you going to demand an inspection of the files of the commanding general" (what 
outrage!) "or the judicial authorities" (horrible) "or perhaps even the administrative 
authorities?" (In contemplating that possibility, the Regierungsrat is at his wits' end.) 
"Do you want the investigation to be conducted by an improvised committee" (which 
perhaps has never taken an examination) "dealing with all these matters which  nobody 
yet clearly understands?" (Herr Ritz probably only appoints committees to investigate 
matters which everybody clearly understands.) "This important issue on which you 
arrogate to yourselves rights which do not belong to you...." (Interruption.) 
What is one to say to this Regierungsrat of sterling worth, to this 
personification of red tape who has no guile! He is like that 
provincial character in Cham's little cartoon who, upon arriving in 
Paris after the February revolution, sees posters with the inscription 
" République française" and runs to the Public Prosecutor-General to 
denounce these agitators against the royal Government. That man 
had slept through the entire period. 
Herr Ritz, too, has been asleep. The thundering words "commit­
tee of inquiry for Posen" roughly shake him awake and, still drowsy 
with sleep, the astonished man exclaims: "Do you wish to arrogate to 
yourselves rights which do not belong to you?" 
Herr Duncker regards a committee of inquiry as superfluous 
"since the committee on the address must demand the necessary 
clarifications from the Ministry". As if it were not precisely the job of 
the committee to compare the "clarifications" of the Ministry with 
the facts. 
Herr Bloem spoke of the urgency of the motion. The question 
ought to be settled before there are deliberations on the address. 
There had been talk about improvised committees. Herr Han-

=====第89页=====
The Agreement Debates 59 
semann had the previous day similarly improvised a question of 
confidence and still a vote had been taken. 
Herr Hansemann, who had probably thought about his new 
financial plan during the entire unedifying debate, was rudely 
awakened from his golden dreams by the mention of his name. He 
evidently had no idea what it was all about but his name had been 
mentioned and he had to speak. Only two points of contact had 
remained in his memory: the speeches of his superior, Camphausen, 
and Herr Ritz. After mouthing a few platitudes about the question of 
the address he composed the following rhetorical masterpiece from 
these two speeches: 
"Precisely because we do not yet know all the tasks which the committee will 
have to perform, whether it will dispatch some of its own members to the Grand 
Duchy, whether it will have to take care of this or that matter, all this proves the great 
importance of the question that is under discussion (!). To decide this question here and 
now right away would mean to decide one of the most important political questions in an 
improvised fashion. I do not believe that the Assembly will want to tread this path and I 
am confident that it will be careful etc." 
What contempt Herr Hansemann must have for the entire 
Assembly to be able to fling such conclusions at this body! We want to 
appoint a committee which will perhaps have to go to Posen and 
maybe not. Just because we do not know whether it must remain in 
Berlin or go to Posen, the question whether a committee ought to 
be appointed at all is of great importance. And because it is of great 
importance, it is one of the most important political questions! 
Which question, however, this most important political question is, 
Herr Hansemann keeps to himself for the time being, just as Herr 
Camphausen does not reveal his important political principle. Let us 
be patient once more! 
The effect of Hansemann's logic is so crushing that everybody at 
once begins clamouring for a termination of the debate. Now the 
following scene ensues: 
Herr Jung demands the right to speak against the closing of the 
debate. 
The President: It seems to me inadmissible to permit you to speak 
on this. 
Herr Jung: It is customary everywhere to have the right to speak 
against the closing of a debate. 
Herr Temme reads out Article 42 of the provisional standing 
orders according to which Herr Jung is correct and the President 
incorrect. 
Herr Jung is allowed to speak: I am against closing the debate 
because the Minister was the last person to speak. The words of a 

=====第90页=====
60 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Minister are of the greatest importance because they attract a great 
party to one side, because a great party does not like to disavow a 
Minister.... 
A general, long-drawn-out aha! aha! arises. A terrific uproar 
begins on the Right. 
Commissioner of Justice Moritz exclaims from the floor: I move 
that Jung be called to order since he has of fended the entire Assembly  by 
resorting to personalities!(!) 
Another voice from the "Right" shouts: I second the motion and I 
protest against.... 
The uproar grows constantly. Jung does his best but finds it 
impossible to make himself heard. He calls upon the President to 
uphold his right to speak. 
President: Since the Assembly has decided, my duties are over.(\\) 
Herr Jung: The Assembly has not decided. You must first call for a 
formal vote. 
Herr Jung is forced to yield. The noise does not abate until he has 
left the rostrum. 
President: The last speaker seems (!) to have spoken against the 
termination of the debate. The question is whether someone else still 
wants to speak for closure. 
Herr Reuter: The debate for and against closure has already 
taken up 15 minutes of our time. Should we not leave it on the 
table? 
Thereupon the speaker again takes up the urgency of setting up a 
committee which compels Herr Hansemann to rise once more and 
to explain at last his "most important political question". 
Herr Hansemann: Gentlemen! We are dealing with one of 
the greatest political questions, i.e. whether the Assembly has the 
desire to venture upon a path that may involve it in considerable 
conflicts! 
At last! Herr Hansemann, as a consistent Duchâtel, promptly 
declares once again that it is a question of confidence. For him all 
questions have only one significance, namely whether they are 
questions of confidence, and a question of confidence is for him 
naturally the "greatest political question". 
This time Herr Camphausen does not seem to be satisfied with this 
simple method of curtailment. He takes the floor. 
"It should be observed that the Assembly could already be informed" (about 
Posen) "if the deputy had chosen to ask the question" (but the deputies wanted to 
ascertain the facts for themselves). "That would be the quickest method of obtaining 
clarification" (but of what kind?).... "I close with the explanation that the motion 
simply means that the Assembly ought to decide whether we should form committees of 

=====第91页=====
The Agreement Debates 61 
inquiry for one or another purpose. I agree entirely that the question must be thoroughly 
considered and examined, but I do not want it so suddenly here and now to become a 
topic for debate." 
Thus,  the "important political principle" turns out to be the 
question whether the Agreement Assembly has the right to form 
committees of inquiry or whether it will refuse itself this right! 
The French Chambers and English Houses have all along formed 
such committees (select committees) to conduct an inquiry (enquête, 
parliamentary inquiry) a and respectable Ministers have never raised 
objections to them. Without such committees, ministerial responsibil­
ity is an empty phrase. But Herr Camphausen contests this right of 
the members of the Agreement Assembly! 
Enough. Talking is easy but voting is difficult. The debate is closed 
and a vote is to be held. Numerous difficulties, doubts, sophistries 
and moral scruples make their appearance. But we shall spare our 
readers the details. After a great deal of speech-making, Parrisius' 
motion is rejected and Reuter's is sent to the sections. May its ashes 
rest in peace. 
Written by Engels on June 6, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 8, June 8, 1848 time 
In the German original the terms "select committees" and "parliamentary 
inquiry" are given in English in brackets after the German.— Ed. 

=====第92页=====
62 
THE QUESTION OF THE ADDRESS 
Cologne, June 7. The Berlin Assembly thus has decided to send an 
address to the King to give the Government an opportunity to 
express its views and to vindicate its administration up to now. It is 
not to be a vote of thanks along the lines of the old Diet, not even an 
attestation of respect: His Majesty, according to the admission of His 
Majesty's "responsible ones", only offers the "most suitable" and 
"best"  occasion  to bring the principles of the majority "into line" with 
those of the Government. 
If in essence the person of the King represents a mere medium of 
exchange — we refer once again to the very words of the Prime 
Minister3—a voucher which merely expedites the business in hand, 
that person is by no means irrelevant to the form of the negotiations. 
In the first place the representatives of the popular will are thereby 
put into direct touch with the Crown, a fact from which, as already 
evident in the debate on the address, it is easy to infer the 
recognition of the agreement theory, the renunciation of popular 
sovereignty. In the second place, however, one would hardly address 
a sovereign to whom one is required to pay one's respect in the same 
manner as one would address the Ministers. Greater reserve of 
expression will prevail and hints will take the place of plain words, 
particularly since it is still up to the Government to decide whether a 
slight censure is compatible with its continued existence. It may well 
be, however, that the difficult questions which throw the contradic­
tions into the boldest relief will be touched upon only superficially or 
not at all. It will be easy to arouse fears of a premature break with the 
Ludolf Camphausen. — Ed. 

=====第93页=====
The Question of the Address 63 
Crown perhaps accompanied by serious consequences, and this 
could be covered up by the assertion that it was not desirable to 
prejudge matters awaiting more thorough discussion at a later date. 
Thus,  sincere respect either for the person of the monarch or the 
monarchical principle in general, apprehension about going too far, 
and fear of anarchical tendencies offer inestimable advantages to the 
Ministry during the debate on the address and Herr Camphausen 
had good reason to call the opportunity "most suitable" and "best" 
for winning a strong majority. 
The question is now whether the people's representatives are 
inclined to enter into this obedient, dependent relationship. The 
Constituent Assembly has already greatly weakened its position by 
failing on its own initiative to call the Ministers to account about their 
provisional government up to now; that should have been its first 
task, for it was ostensibly convoked at such an early date because the 
orders of the Government were to be based upon the indirect will of 
the people. Indeed, it seems now, after it has assembled, that it is 
supposed to be there merely "for the purpose of agreeing with the 
Crown upon a Constitution which, it is hoped, will endure in the 
future". 
But instead of proclaiming its true mission from the very start, by 
proceeding in this way, the Assembly has tolerated the humiliation of 
being compelled by the Ministers to accept a statement of accounts. It 
is remarkable that not a single one of its members countered the 
proposal for the formation of an address committee with a demand 
that the Ministry appear before the Chamber without a special 
"occasion", solely for the purpose of rendering an account of its 
activities up to now. And yet this was the only compelling argument 
against an address, since on all other counts the Ministers were 
completely right to demand one. 
Written on June 7, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 8, June 8, 1848 Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第94页=====
64 
A NEW PARTITION OF POLAND 
Cologne, June 8. The new demarcation line of Herr von Pfuel in 
Posen is a new rape of Poland. It limits the parr that is to be 
"reorganised" to less than a third of the entire Grand Duchy and 
joins the far larger part of Great Poland to the German Confedera­
tion. The Polish language and nationality are to be recognised only 
in a small strip along the Russian border. This strip consists of the 
Wreschen and Pleschen 3 districts and parts of the districts of 
Mogilno, Wongrowiec, Gnesen, Schroda, Schrimm, Kosten, Frau­
stadt, Kröben, Krotoschin, Adelnau and Schildberg. b The other parts 
of these districts as well as the entire districts of Buk, Posen, Obornik, 
Samter, Birnbaum, Meseritz, Bomst, Czarnikow, Chodziesen, Wir­
sitz, Bromberg, Schubin, c and Inowroclaw are transformed without 
more ado into German soil by the decree of Herr von Pfuel. And yet 
there is no doubt that even within this "territory of the German 
Confederation", the majority of the inhabitants still speak Polish. 
The old demarcation line at least gave the Poles the River Warta as 
their frontier. The new one restricts that part of Poland which is to 
be reorganised by another quarter. Both "the desire" of the Minister 
of Ward  to exclude from reorganisation a three to four mile 
strip of territory around the fortress of Posen and the wish of various 
The Polish names are Wrzesnia, Pleszew.— Ed. 
Wa.growiec, Gniezno, Sroda, Srem, Koscian, Wschowa, Krobia, Krotoszyn, 
Odolanöw, Ostrzeszôw. — Ed. 
c Poznan, Oborniki, Szamotuly, Miçdzychôd, Miçdzyrzecz, Eabimost, Czarnkôw, 
Chodziez, Wyrzysk, Bydgoszcz, Szubin.— Ed. 
August Kanitz.— Ed. 

=====第95页=====
A New Partition of Poland 65 
towns such as Ostrowo3 etc. to be joined to Germany, serve as 
convenient pretexts for this measure. 
The desire of the Minister of War is perfectly natural. First one 
steals the city and fortress of Posen which lies ten miles deep inside 
Polish territory; then one finds the new theft of a three-mile strip 
desirable so as not to be disturbed in the enjoyment of the previously 
stolen territory. This further acquisition of land leads again to all 
sorts of small adjustments, and so one has the best occasion to propel 
the German frontier further and further towards the Russian-Polish 
border. 
The desire to be incorporated expressed by "German" towns may 
be explained as follows: all over Poland, Germans and Jews form the 
main part of the artisans and merchants; they are the descendants of 
immigrants who fled their homeland for the most part because of 
religious persecutions. Founding towns in the midst of Polish 
territory, they have shared for centuries all the vicissitudes of the 
Polish realm. These Germans and Jews, a very large minority in the 
country, are trying to make use of the country's present situation to 
gain mastery. They plead their German nature; they are no more 
German than the German Americans: Annexing them to Germany 
would entail the suppression of the language and nationality of more 
than half of Posen's Polish population and especially that part of the 
province in which the national insurrection raged with the greatest 
violence and intensity, i.e. the districts of Buk, Samter, Posen and 
Obornik. 
Herr von Pfuel declares that he will regard the new frontier as 
finally settled as soon as the Ministry ratifies it. He mentions neither 
the Agreement Assembly nor the German National Assembly who 
after all have also a word to say when it comes to settling the 
boundary of Germany. But no matter whether the Ministry, the 
Agreement Assembly, or the Frankfurt Assembly ratify the decision 
of Herr von Pfuel, the demarcation line will not be "finally settled" 
so long as two other powers have not ratified it as well: the German 
nation and the Polish nation. 
Written by Engels on June 8, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 9, June 9, 1848 time 
a The Polish name is Oströw Wielkopolski.—Ed. 

=====第96页=====
66 
THE SHIELD OF THE DYNASTY 
Cologne, June 9. Herr Camphausen, according to the reports of 
German newspapers, poured out his overflowing heart to his agreers 
on the 6th of this month. He gave 
"not so much a brilliant speech as one that flowed from the innermost  recesses  of his 
heart, a speech which reminds one of the passage in St. Paul which reads: 'Though I 
speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as 
sounding brass!'3 His speech was full of that holy emotion that we call love ... it spoke 
inspiringly to the inspired ones, the applause did not seem to come to an end ... and a 
prolonged intermission was necessary to surrender oneself to and absorb its total 
impact". 
And who was the hero of this speech that was full of love and 
flowed from the innermost recesses of the heart? Who was the 
subject that inspired Herr Camphausen so much that he spoke 
inspiringly to the inspired ones? Who was the Aeneas of this Aeneid 
of June 6? 
Who else but the Prince of Prussial 
One can read in the stenographic report how the poetic Prime 
Minister describes the journeys of the modern son of Anchises, how 
he acted on the day when 
—holy Ilium fell in the fighting, 
Priam too, and the folk of the King, skilled javelin-thrower,c 
how after the fall of squirearchical Troy, and after a long odyssey 
on both water and land, he at last arrived at the shores of modern 
* 1 Corinthians  13:1.—Ed. 
Kölnische Zeitung No. 161, June 9, 1848.— Ed. 
c Homer,  Iliad,  IV, 164-65, and VI, 448-49 (paraphrased).—£d. 

=====第97页=====
The Shield of the Dynasty 67 
Carthage where he was received in a most friendly fashion by Queen 
Dido;  how he fared better than Aeneas the First since there was a 
Camphausen who did his utmost to restore Troy and rediscovered 
the sacred "legal basis", how Camphausen finally permitted Aeneas 
to return to his Penates and how joy once more reigns in the halls of 
Troy. 48 One has to read all this as well as countless poetic 
embellishments so as to feel what it means when an inspirer speaks to 
inspired ones. 
This entire epic, by the way, only serves Herr Camphausen as a 
pretext for a dithyramb on himself and his own Ministry. 
"Yes,"  he exclaims, "we believed that we were acting in the spirit of the 
Constitution when we took the place of a high personage, when  we ourselves posed as 
the personages against whom all attacks were to be directed.... And so it happened. We 
placed ourselves as a shield before the dynasty and drew all dangers and attacks upon 
ourselves." 
What a compliment for the "high personage" and what a 
compliment for the "dynasty"! The dynasty would have been lost 
without Herr Camphausen and his six paladins. As what a mighty 
"dynasty deeply rooted in the people" must Herr Camphausen 
regard the House of Hohenzollern, to speak in such a fashion! 
Verily, if Herr Camphausen had spoken less "inspiringly to the 
inspired ones", had he been less "full of that holy emotion that we 
call love", or had he only let his Hansemann speak who is content 
with "sounding brass"—it would have been better for the dynasty! 
"Gendemen, I am not saying this, however, with challenging pride but rather 
with the humility that arises from the conviction that the great task with which you and 
we are entrusted can only be solved if the spirit of  gentleness  and conciliation descends 
also upon this Assembly, if we can find besides your justice also your forbearance." 
Herr Camphausen is correct in pleading for gentleness and 
forbearance from an Assembly which itself is in such need of 
gentleness and forbearance from the public! 
Written on June 9, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 10, June 10, 1848 time 

=====第98页=====
68 
COLOGNE IN DANGER 
Cologne, June 10. The lovely holiday of Whitsuntide had arrived, 
the fields were green, the trees were blossoming 3 and as far as there 
are people who confuse the dative with the accusative,13 preparations 
were made to pour out the holy spirit of reaction over all lands in a 
single day. 
The moment is well chosen In Naples guard lieutenants and Swiss 
mercenaries have succeeded in drowning the young liberty in the 
people's blood.c In France, an Assembly of capitalists fetters the 
Republic by means of Draconic laws49  and appoints General Perrot, 
who ordered the shooting at the Hôtel Guizot on February 23, 
commandant of Vincennes. In England and Ireland masses of 
Chartists and Repealers 50 are thrown into gaol and unarmed 
meetings are dispersed by dragoons. In Frankfurt the National 
Assembly itself now appoints the triumvirate which the blessed 
Federal Diet proposed and the Committee of Fifty rejected.51 In 
Berlin the Right is winning blow by blow through numerical 
superiority and drumming, and the Prince of Prussia declares the 
revolution null and void by moving back into the "property of the 
entire nation".52 
Troops are being concentrated in Rhenish Hesse.; the heroes who 
won their spurs fighting the republican partisans in the Lake district53 
are encamped all around Frankfurt. Berlin is invested, Breslau d is 
a The beginning of Goethe's "Reineke Fuchs" (paraphrased).—Ed. 
An allusion to a grammatical mistake commonly made by people speaking the 
Berlin dialect.—Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 24-26.—Ed. 
The Polish name is Wroclaw.—Ed. 

=====第99页=====
Cologne in Danger 69 
besieged and we shall presently discuss how things stand in the Rhine 
Province. 
The reaction is preparing a big coup. 
While there is fighting in Schleswig, while Russia sends threaten­
ing Notes and gathers 300,000 men at Warsaw, troops are inundating 
Rhenish Prussia even though the bourgeoisie of the Paris Chamber 
once again proclaims "peace at any price"! 
According to the  Deutsche  Zeitung, fourteen entire infantry regiments 
(the 13th, the 15th,* the 16th, the 17th, the 25th, the 26th, the 27th, 
the 28th, the 30th, the 34th, the 35th, the 38th, the 39th, and the 
40th),  i. e. a third of all the Prussian line and guard infantry (45 
regiments), are located in Rhenish Prussia, Mainz and Luxembourg. 
Some of these forces are fully mobilised for war, the rest have been 
reinforced by calling up a third of the reserves. Besides these there 
are three uhlan regiments, two hussar regiments and one dragoon 
regiment as well as a regiment of cuirassiers that is expected to arrive 
shortly. In addition there is the major part of the 7th and 8th 
artillery brigades of which at least half are already mobilised (i.e. 
each battery of foot-artillery has now 121 horses instead of 19, or 8 
instead of 2 horse-drawn cannon). In addition a third company has 
been formed for Luxembourg and Mainz. These troops are drawn up 
in a wide arc which extends from Cologne and Bonn to Koblenz and 
Trier and to the French and Luxembourg frontiers. All fortresses 
are being armed, the moats are stockaded, and the trees of the glacis 
are razed either completely or in the line of fire. 
And what is the situation here in Cologne? 
The forts of Cologne are fully armed. The artillery platforms are 
being extended, the embrasures are being cut and the cannon have 
arrived and are being set up. Work continues on these projects every 
day from 6 in the morning until 6 in the evening. It is even said that 
the cannon were driven out of the city during the night with wheels 
wrapped in rags so as to avoid all noise. 
The arming of the city wall started at the Bayen Tower and has 
already advanced to Bastion No. 6, i.e. half the wall has been 
fortified. On Sector 1, 20 cannon have already been brought up. 
Cannon are installed above the gate of Bastion No. 2 (at the 
Severin gate). They need only to be turned around to bombard the 
city. 
The best proof that these armaments are only ostensibly directed 
against an external enemy but in reality are aimed at Cologne itself lies 
* This is not quite correct since the 13th remains in part and the 15th entirely in 
Westphalia but they are able to get here by train within a few hours.— Note  by Engels. 

=====第100页=====
70 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
in the fact that here the trees of the glacis have everywhere been left 
standing. In the event of the troops having to evacuate the city and 
retreat into the forts, the cannon of the city wall are thereby 
rendered useless against the forts, whereas the mortars, howitzers 
and twenty-four pounders of the forts are in no way hindered from 
lobbing grenades and shells over the trees and into the city. The 
distance of the forts from the city wall is only 1,400 paces and enables 
the forts to pour shells that can travel up to 4,000 paces into any part 
of the city. 
Now as to the measures which are pointed directly against the city. 
The arsenal opposite the government building is being evacuated. 
The rifles are nicely wrapped up in order not to attract attention, 
and are brought into the forts. 
Artillery ammunition is brought into the city in rifle crates and 
deposited in bomb-proof magazines all along the city wall. 
While we are writing all this, rifles with  bayonets  are being distribu­
ted to the  artillery,  although it  is a well-known fact that artillery units in 
Prussia receive no training with these weapons. 
Part of the infantry is already in the forts. All of Cologne knows 
that each company received  5,000  ball-cartridges the day before 
yesterday. 
The following arrangements have been made in case of a clash 
with the people: 
At the first alarm, the 7th (Fortress) Artillery Company is to move 
into the forts. 
Battery No. 37 will then also move out to face the city. This battery 
has already been equipped fully "ready for war". 
The 5th and 8th artillery companies will remain in town for the 
time being. These companies have 20 shells in each of their caissons. 
The hussars are moving from Deutz to Cologne. 
The infantry occupies the Neumarkt, the Hahnen gate and the 
Ehren gate so as to cover the retreat of all troops from the city, and 
thereafter is also to withdraw into the forts. 
The higher officers are moreover doing everything in their power 
to inculcate in these troops the traditional Prussian hatred for the 
new order. Nothing is easier during the present state of mounting 
reaction than to launch, under the pretext of denouncing agitators 4 
and republicans, the most vicious attacks against the revolution and 
the constitutional monarchy. 
Yet Cologne has never  been  calmer than  precisely  in recent times. Except 
for an insignificant gathering in front of the house of the 
Regierungspräsident and a brawl in the Heumarkt, nothing has 
occurred for the past four weeks that so much as even alarmed the 

=====第101页=====
Cologne in Danger 71 
civic militia in any way whatever. Thus all these measures are 
completely unprovoked. 
We repeat: after these otherwise totally incomprehensible meas­
ures,  after the troop concentrations around Berlin and Breslau, 
which have been confirmed to us by letters, after the inundation with 
troops of the Rhine Province, which the reactionaries hate with such 
passion, we cannot doubt that reactionary forces are preparing a big 
general coup. 
The eruption here in Cologne seems to have been fixed for Whit 
Monday. The rumour is being assiduously spread that things will 
"start moving" on that day. They will try to provoke a small row so as 
to call the troops out immediately, threaten the city with bombard­
ment, disarm the civic militia, arrest the chief agitators, in short to 
maltreat us in the fashion of Mainz and Trier.3 
We warn the workers of Cologne earnestly not to fall into this trap 
set for them by the reactionaries. We urgently plead with them not to 
give the old-Prussian party the slightest pretext for placing Cologne 
under the despotism of martial law. We beg them to let Whit Sunday 
and Whit Monday pass in an  especially  tranquil atmosphere and thereby 
frustrate the entire scheme of the reactionaries. 
If we give the reaction a pretext for attacking us we will be lost and 
our fate will be the same as that of the inhabitants of Mainz. If they 
should feel compelled to attack us and if they really dare to stage an 
assault, the inhabitants of Cologne will have plenty of opportunity to 
prove that they too will not hesitate for one moment to defend the 
gains of March 18 with their blood and lives. 
Postscript. Just now the following orders have been issued: 
No watchword will be announced during the two Whitsuntide holidays 
(whereas usually it was issued with special solemnity). The troops will 
remain confined to barracks where the officers will receive the 
watchword. 
As of today, the fortress and auxiliary artillery companies as well as 
the infantry garrison of the forts will obtain, in addition to their 
normal rations, daily bread rations for four days in advance so that 
they will always have in hand food for eight days. 
The artillery will begin rifle practice already at seven o'clock this 
evening. 
Written by Engels on June 10, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 11, June 11, 1848 time 
a See this volume, pp. 20 and  23.—Ed. 

=====第102页=====
72 
AN ADMISSION OF INCOMPETENCE 
BY THE ASSEMBLIES OF FRANKFURT AND BERLIN 
Cologne, June 11. Both  assemblies,  the one in Frankfurt and the one in 
Berlin, have solemnly put on record their admission of  incompetence.  One 
assembly, by its vote on the question of Schleswig-Holstein, recognises the 
Federal Diet as its superior authority. 55 The other, by its decision to reject 
Deputy Berends' motion and  by passing to the substantiated order of  the day, 
not only repudiates the revolution,* but expressly admits that it is solely 
empowered to agree upon the Constitution and thereby recognises the 
basic principle underlying the draft of the Constitution that has been 
proposed by the Camphausen Government. Both assemblies have 
given a correct appraisal of their worth. They are both incompetent. 
Written on June 11, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 12-13,  June 13, 1848 
a See this volume, pp. 75-86t—Ed. Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第103页=====
73 
THE BERLIN DEBATE ON THE REVOLUTION 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 14, June 14, 1848] 
Cologne, June 13. At last the Agreement Assembly has made its 
position clear. It has rejected the idea of revolution and accepted the 
theory of agreement. 
The matter the Assembly had to decide was this. 
On March 18 the King promised a Constitution, introduced 
freedom of the press together with caution money,57 and made a 
series of proposals in which he declared that Germany's unity must 
be achieved by the merging of Germany in Prussia. 
These sum up the real content of the concessions made on March 
18. The fact that the people of Berlin were satisfied with this and that 
they marched to the palace to thank the King is the clearest proof of 
the necessity of the March 18 revolution. Not only the state, its 
citizens too had to be revolutionised. Their submissiveness could only 
be shed in a sanguinary liberation struggle. 
A well-known "misunderstanding"58 led to the revolution. There 
was indeed a misunderstanding. The attack by the soldiers, the fight 
which continued for 16 hours and the fact that the people had to 
force the troops to withdraw are sufficient proof that the people 
completely misunderstood the concessions of March 18. 
The results of the revolution were, on the one hand, the arming of 
the people, the right of association and the sovereignty of the people, 
won de facto; on the other hand, the retention of the monarchy and 
the Camphausen-Hansemann Ministry, that is a Government 
representing the big bourgeoisie. 
Thus the revolution produced two sets of results, which were 
bound to diverge. The people was victorious; it had won liberties of a 
pronounced democratic nature, but direct control passed into the 
hands of the big bourgeoisie and not into those of the people. 

=====第104页=====
74 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
In short, the revolution was not carried through to the end. The 
people let the big bourgeoisie form a Government and the big 
bourgeoisie promptly revealed its intentions by inviting the old 
Prussian nobility and the bureaucracy to enter into an alliance with 
it. Arnim, Kanitz and Schwerin became members of the Govern­
ment. 
The big bourgeoisie, which was all along anti-revolutionary, 
concluded a defensive and offensive alliance with the reactionary 
forces, because it was afraid of the people, i.e. of the workers and the 
democratic bourgeoisie. 
The united reactionary parties began their fight against democra­
cy by calling the revolution in question. The victory of the people was 
denied, the famous list of the "seventeen dead soldiers"59 was 
fabricated, and those who had fought on the barricades were 
slandered in every possible way. But this was not all. The United Diet 
convoked before the revolution was now actually convened by the 
Government, in order post festum to fabricate a legal transition from 
absolutism to the Constitution. Thus the Government openly 
repudiated the revolution. It moreover invented the theory of 
agreement, once more repudiating the revolution and with it the 
sovereignty of the people. 
The revolution was accordingly really called in question, and this 
could be done because it was only a partial revolution, only the 
beginning of a long revolutionary movement. 
We cannot here go into the question as to why and to what extent 
the present rule of the big bourgeoisie in Prussia is a necessary 
transitional stage towards democracy, and why, directly after its 
ascent to power, the big bourgeoisie joined the reactionary camp. 
For the present we merely report the fact. 
The Agreement Assembly had now to declare whether it recog­
nised the revolution or not. 
But to recognise the revolution under these circumstances meant 
recognising the democratic aspects of the revolution, which the big 
bourgeoisie wanted to appropriate to  itself. 
Recognising the revolution at this moment meant recognising the 
incompleteness of the revolution, and consequently recognising the 
democratic movement, which was directed against some of the 
results of the revolution. It meant recognising that Germany was in 
the grip of a revolutionary movement, and that the Camphausen 
Ministry, the theory of agreement, indirect elections, the rule of the 
big capitalists and the decisions of the Assembly itself could indeed 
be regarded as unavoidable transitional steps, but by no means as 
final results. 

=====第105页=====
The Berlin Debate on the Revolution 75 
The debate on the recognition of the revolution was carried on by 
both sides with great prolixity and great interest, but with 
remarkably little intelligence. One seldom reads anything so 
unedifying as these long-winded deliberations, constantly inter­
rupted by noisy scenes or fine-spun arguments about standing 
orders. Instead of the great passion of party strife, we have a cool, 
placid temper which threatens at any moment to sink to the level of 
amiable colloquy; instead of the biting edge of argument we have 
interminable and confused talk rambling from one subject to 
another; instead of trenchant retorts we have tedious sermons on the 
essence and nature of morality. 
Nor has the Left particularly distinguished itself in these debates.60 
Most of its speakers repeat one another; none of them dare tackle 
the question resolutely and speak their mind in frank revolutionary 
terms.  They are always afraid to give offence, to hurt or to frighten 
people away. Germany would have been in a sorry plight if the 
people who fought on March 18 had not shown more energy and 
passion in battle than the gentlemen of the Left have shown in the 
debate. 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 15, June 15, 1848] 
Cologne, June 14. Deputy Berends from Berlin opened the debate 
by moving: 
"In recognition of the revolution, the Assembly declares that those who fought on 
March 18 and 19 have rendered a genuine service to their country." 
The form of the motion, the classical-Roman laconic style, which 
was revived by the great French Revolution, was quite appropriate. 
On the other hand, the way in which Herr Berends argued in 
support of his motion was all the more inappropriate. He spoke not 
in a revolutionary but in a placating manner. He had to vindicate the 
anger of the insulted barricade fighters in the face of an Assembly of 
reactionaries and yet he calmly delivered a completely dry lecture as 
if he still spoke as a teacher to the Berlin Craftsmen's Association. 
The cause he had to defend was quite simple and quite clear but the 
arguments he advanced were the most confused imaginable. 
Herr Berends begins: 
"Gentlemen, recognition of the revolution is entirely in the nature of things  (!). Our 
Assembly is itself an eloquent recognition of the great movement which has swept 
through all the civilised countries of Europe. The Assembly is a product of this 
revolution, and consequently its existence is the actual recognition of the revolution." 

=====第106页=====
76 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Firstly. It is by no means a question of recognising in general that 
the "great movement which has swept through all the civilised 
countries of Europe" is a fact; it would be quite superfluous and 
meaningless to recognise this. It is rather a question of recognising 
the Berlin street battle, which is passed off as a revolt, as a genuine, 
real revolution. 
Secondly. The Assembly in Berlin is in one respect indeed a 
"recognition of the revolution", since without the Berlin street battle 
we would have no "agreed" Constitution, but at most an imposed 
Constitution. But the Assembly is likewise a rejection of the 
revolution, because of the way it was convoked and because of the 
mandate it was given by the United Diet and by the Ministry. An 
Assembly standing "on a revolutionary basis" does not agree, it-
decrees. 
Thirdly. By its vote on the address the Assembly has already 
recognised the agreement theory and by voting against the march to 
the grave of those killed in the fighting it has already rejected the 
revolution.61 It has rejected the revolution by "meeting" at all 
alongside the Frankfurt Assembly. 
Herr Berends' motion has therefore been in fact already twice 
rejected. Its failure this time was even more inevitable because the 
Assembly had to express its views openly. 
Since the Assembly was reactionary and since it was certain that the 
people could expect nothing from it, it was in the interest of the Left 
that the minority who voted for the motion should be as small as 
possible and should comprise only the most resolute members. 
Hence there was no need for Herr Berends to stand on ceremony. 
He had to act in the most determined, the most revolutionary way. 
Instead of clinging to the illusion that it was and wanted to be a 
constituent assembly, an assembly standing on a revolutionary basis, 
he had to tell the Assembly that it had already rejected the revolution 
indirectly, and to invite it now to reject it openly. 
But not only Berends, the speakers of the Left in general have 
failed to adhere to this policy, the only policy appropriate to a 
democratic party. They have been under the illusion that they could 
persuade the Assembly to make a revolutionary move. They have 
therefore made concessions, they have tried to soothe, they have 
spoken of reconciliation and they have consequently themselves 
repudiated the revolution. 
It is in a very reserved manner and very wooden language that 
Herr Berends then proceeds to expatiate upon revolutions in general 
and the Berlin revolution in particular. In the course of his 
reasoning he encounters the argument that the revolution was 

=====第107页=====
The Berlin Debate on the Revolution 77 
unnecessary because already before the revolution the King3 had 
conceded everything, and he replies: 
"It is true that His Majesty the King conceded many things ... but did these 
concessions satisfy the people? Did we have the guarantee that this promise would 
become a reality? I believe this assurance was ... only obtained after the battle!... It is 
well established that such a political transformation can only come to birth and be 
firmly grounded in the great catastrophes of battle. On March 18 one great concession 
was not yet made; that is the arming of the people.... Only when the people was 
armed, did it feel secure against possible misunderstandings.... Struggle is  therefore  (!) 
certainly a sort of natural  occurrence  (!), but an inevitable occurrence ... a catastrophe in 
which the transformation of political life becomes a reality, a fact." 
This long and confused argument, which abounds in repetitions, 
shows quite clearly that Herr Berends is completely in the dark about 
the results of the revolution and its necessity. The only results of the 
revolution known to him are the "guarantee" of the promises of the 
18th, and the "arming of the people". He deduces the necessity of 
the revolution in a philosophical manner by once more giving a 
rendering of the "guarantee" in a superior style and finally by 
asseverating that there can be no revolution without a revolution. 
The revolution was necessary, surely this means simply that it was 
necessary in order to obtain what we have obtained now. The 
necessity of the revolution is directly proportional to its results. But 
since Herr Berends is in the dark about its results, he has of course to 
resort to exaggerated asseverations in order to deduce the necessity 
of the revolution. 
What were the results of the revolution? Certainly not the 
"guarantee" of the promises of the 18th, but rather the subversion 
of these promises. 
The promises made on the 18th included a monarchy in which the 
aristocracy, the bureaucracy, the military and the clergy remained at 
the helm, but allowed the big bourgeoisie to exercise control by a 
granted Constitution and freedom of the press together with caution 
money. For the people: German flags, a German navy and 
compulsory military service in the army of the German Confedera­
tion instead of Prussian flags, a Prussian navy and compulsory 
military service in the Prussian army. 
The revolution overthrew all the powers of the absolute mon­
archy, the aristocrats, the bureaucrats, the military and the clerics. It 
brought about the exclusive rule of the big bourgeoisie. It gave the 
people the weapon of freedom of the press without caution money, 
the right of association and, to some extent, the physical weapon, the 
musket. 
a Frederick William IV.— Ed. 

=====第108页=====
78 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
But even that is not the main result. The people that has fought on 
the barricades and has been victorious is entirely different from the 
people that on March 18 marched to the palace to be enlightened, by 
means of cavalry attacks, about the significance of the concessions it 
had received. It is able to achieve things of a quite different nature 
and it confronts the Government in an entirely different way. The 
most important achievement of the revolution is the revolution  itself. 
"As an inhabitant of Berlin I can indeed say that it has caused us painful feelings" 
(nothing more!) "... to see this struggle maligned.... I take as my starting point the 
words of the Prime Minister,3 who ... declared that it was up to a great nation and all its 
representatives to work with clemency towards reconciliation. I appeal to this clemency 
when, as a representative of Berlin, I ask you to recognise the events of March 18 and 
19. The people of Berlin has certainly on the whole acted very honourably and 
righteously during the whole period that has passed since the revolution. It is possible 
that a few excesses have occurred ... and thus I believe that it is appropriate for the 
Assembly to declare etc., etc." 
The only thing we should like to add to this craven conclusion, 
which rejects the revolution, is that following such reasoning the 
motion deserved to be lost. 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 16, June 16, 1848] 
Cologne, June 14. The first amendment put forward in opposition 
to Berends' motion owed its short existence to Deputy Brehmer. It 
was a diffuse, well-meaning declaration which firstly recognised the 
revolution, secondly recognised the agreement theory, thirdly 
recognised all those who had contributed to the sudden change that 
had taken place, and fourthly recognised the great truth that 
No steed, no mounted knight 
Protects the lofty summits 
Where princes stand,— 
thus finally reducing the revolution again to a truly Prussian 
expression. Herr Brehmer, the worthy schoolmaster, wanted to please 
all parties, and none of them wanted to have anything to do with 
him. His amendment was dropped without any discussion, and Herr 
Brehmer retired with all the resignation of a disappointed philan­
thropist. 
Herr Schulze (from Delitzsch) has mounted the rostrum. Herr 
Schulze, too, is an admirer of the revolution, he admires however not 
Ludolf Camphausen. — Ed. 
Words from the Prussian hymn "Heil Dir im Siegerkranz". — Ed. 

=====第109页=====
The Berlin Debate on the Revolution 79 
so much the barricade fighters as the men of the morning after, 
those who are called the "people" as distinct from the "fighters". He 
desires that the "attitude of the people after the battle" should be 
especially recognised. His enthusiasm exceeded all bounds when he 
heard 
"about the restraint and circumspection of the people when it was no longer 
confronted by an enemy (!) ... about the earnestness and the conciliatory spirit of the 
people ... about its attitude towards the dynasty... we observed that the people was well 
aware that at such moments it directly faced history itself 11 
It is not so much the revolutionary activity of the people during the 
battle that enraptures Herr Schulze, as its quite non-revolutionary 
inactivity after the battle. 
To recognise the magnanimity of the people after the revolution 
can only signify one of two things: 
Either an insult to the people, for to recognise it as a merit that the 
people did not commit any base acts after its victory, is an insult to the 
people. 
Or it means recognising that the people relaxed after the military 
victory, and that this gave the reaction an opportunity to rise once 
again. 
"Combining both meanings" Herr Schulze has expressed his 
"admiration which turned into enthusiasm" because the people 
firstly behaved decently and secondly provided an opportunity for 
the reaction to recover its strength. 
The "attitude of the people" consisted in being so busy 
enthusiastically "facing history  itself"  when it should have been 
making history; in the fact that for all this "attitude", "restraint", 
"circumspection", "profound earnestness" and "inextinguishable 
dedication", the people never got round to preventing the Ministers 
from conjuring away one part after the other of the freedom it had 
won; and that the people declared the revolution to be complete 
instead of continuing it. How differently did the Viennese act, who 
rapidly overwhelmed the reaction and have now won a Constituent 
Imperial Diet instead of an Agreement Assembly.62 
Thus Herr Schulze (from Delitzsch) recognises the revolution on 
condition o c not recognising it. This earned him resounding cheers. 
After a short intermezzo concerning procedure, Herr Camphausen 
himself appears on the scene. He observes that according to Berends' 
motion "the Assembly should express its opinion and give its verdict 
on an idea". For Herr Camphausen the revolution is merely an 
"idea". He "leaves" it therefore to the Assembly to decide whether it 
wishes to do this. In Camphausen's view there "exist perhaps no 
considerable differences of opinion" about the matter under 
S-3447 

=====第110页=====
80 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
discussion, in accordance with the well-known fact that whenever two 
German burghers quarrel, they are always au fond in agreement. 
"If one wants to repeat that ... we have entered a phase which must bring about" 
(that is, it has not yet brought about) "very substantial transformations ... then no one 
can be more in agreement with this than I." 
"If, on the other hand, one intends to say that the state and the political authority 
have lost their legal foundation and that the existing authority was overthrown  by force ... 
then I must protest against such an interpretation." 
Up to now Herr Camphausen saw his principal merit in having 
re-tied the broken thread of legality; now he asserts that this thread 
has never been broken. This may be completely at variance with the 
facts,  but the dogma of the continuity of the legal succession of 
power from Bodelschwingh to Camphausen cannot bother about 
facts. 
"If one wants to say that we are on the threshold of events similar to those we know 
from the history of the English revolution in the seventeenth century and of the 
French revolution in the eighteenth, events whose upshot is the transfer of power into 
the hands of a dictator", 
then Herr Camphausen must likewise protest. 
Our thinking friend of history could of course not miss the 
opportunity the Berlin revolution provided for palming off those 
observations which the German burgher is the more eager to hear 
the more often he has read them in Rotteck's work.3  The Berlin 
revolution must be no revolution even for the reason that otherwise 
it would have to produce a Cromwell or a Napoleon, and Herr 
Camphausen objects to this. 
In the end Herr Camphausen permits his agreers "to express their 
feelings for the victims of a fateful clash", but he adds that in this case 
"many and essential aspects depend on the wording", he would 
therefore like to have the whole matter referred to a committee. 
After another point-of-order episode, a speaker finally comes 
forward who knows how to pluck at people's heart-strings, because 
he goes to the root of the matter. This is the Reverend Pastor Müller 
of Wohlau, who supports Schulze's amendment. The pastor does 
"not want to take up much of the Assembly's time but wishes merely to 
broach one rather important point". 
The pastor therefore submits the following question to the 
Assembly. 
"The motion has led us to the moral sphere, and if we take the motion not in its 
surface" (how does one set about to take a thing inks surface?) "but in its depth" (there 
Karl von Rotteck, Allgemeine Geschichte vom Anfang der historischen Kenntniss bis 
auf unsere Zeiten. — Ed. 

=====第111页=====
The Berlin Debate on the Revolution 81 
is such a thing as empty depth, just as there is empty length) "we cannot help 
recognising, however difficult these considerations may be, that the point in question 
is nothing more nor less than the moral recognition of the uprising. I  therefore  ask:  is an 
uprising something moral or is it not?" 
The point at issue is not a party political question but something 
infinitely more important — a theological-philosophical-moral prob­
lem. The Assembly has to come to an agreement with the Crown not 
about a Constitution but about a system of moral philosophy. "Is an 
uprising something moral or not?" That is what matters. And what 
answer does the pastor give to the Assembly which is breathless with 
suspense? 
"I do not believe, however, that we are in the position here of having to solve this high 
moral principle."!.' 
The pastor has only tried to get to the bottom of the matter in 
order to declare that he cannot reach the bottom. 
"Many thoughtful men have pondered on this subject and have nevertheless not 
arrived at any definite solution. Nor shall we achieve clarity in the course of a brief 
debate." 
The Assembly seems thunderstruck. The pastor presents a moral 
problem to the Assembly with great trenchancy and all the 
seriousness that the subject demands; he presents it and then 
announces that the problem cannot be solved. In this distressing 
situation, the agreers must have felt as if they were actually standing 
already "on a revolutionary basis". 
But this was nothing but a simple pastoral stratagem to which the 
pastor resorted in order to induce the Assembly to do penance. He 
has moreover prepared some balm for the penitent: 
"I believe that there is also a third point of view which has to be considered here. 
The victims of March 18 acted in a frame of mind which makes moral judgment 
impossible."  V. 
The barricade fighters were non compos mentis. 
"But if you ask me whether they were morally competent, my answer is a 
firm —'yes!' " 
We ask: if the word of God from the countryside allows himself to 
be elected to the Berlin Assembly merely in order to bore the entire 
public by his moralising casuistry, is such an action moral or is it not 
moral? 
Deputy Hofer, in his capacity of a Pomeranian peasant, protests 
against the whole thing. 
5* 

=====第112页=====
82 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
"For who were the military? Were they not our brothers and sons? Consider well 
the effect it will have, when the father on the seashore" (in Wendish : po more, i.e. 
Pomerania) "hears how his son has been treated here!" 
However the military may have behaved and whether or not they 
allowed themselves to be made the tools of the most infamous 
treachery—it makes no difference, they were our Pomeranian boys 
and therefore three cheers for them! 
Deputy Schultz of Wanzleben: Gentlemen, the people of Berlin 
must be recognised. Their courage was boundless. They conquered 
not only the fear of cannon. 
"What is the fear of being pulverised by grape-shot compared with the danger of 
being charged with causing a disturbance in  the street  and incurring severe, perhaps even 
degrading punishment! The courage required to take up this struggle is so lofty that 
the courage needed to face the open mouth of a cannon cannot  possibly  be compared 
with it!" 
Accordingly the Germans did not make a revolution before 1848, 
because they were afraid of the Police Inspector. 
Minister Schwerin rises to declare that he will resign if Berends' 
motion is passed. 
Eisner and Reichenbach speak against Schulze's amendment. 
Dierschke observes that the revolution must be recognised, because 
"the struggle for moral freedom has not yet ended" and because it 
was likewise "the moral freedom which called this Assembly into 
being". 
Jacoby demands "full recognition for the revolution with all its 
consequences". His was the best speech made during the entire 
session. 
Finally, after so much morality, tedium, irresolution and reconcili­
ation, we are pleased to see our Hansemann mount the rostrum. Now 
at last we shall hear something resolute and to the point. But no, 
Herr Hansemann too speaks today in a mild and mediating manner. 
He has his reasons, he does nothing without good reason. He sees 
that the Assembly wavers, that the vote is uncertain and that the 
proper amendment has not yet been found. He would like to have 
the debate adjourned. 
To achieve this he summons up all his ability to speak as gently as 
possible. The fact is there, it is incontestable. Some, however, call it a 
revolution, others call it "great events". We must 
"not forget that a revolution like that in Paris, or like the earlier one in England, has 
not taken place here, but what has taken place here is a transactionbetween the Crown 
and the people" (a strange transaction with grape-shot and rifle-bullets!). "Now 

=====第113页=====
The Berlin Debate on the Revolution 83 
precisely because in a certain sense we" (the Ministers) "do not object to the substance 
of the matter, but on the other hand the formulation has to be such that the basis of the 
Government on which we stand remains feasible"... 
therefore the debate ought to be adjourned, so that the Ministers can 
take counsel. 
What it must have cost our Hansemann to use such phrases and to 
admit that the "basis" on which the Government stands is so weak 
that it can be overturned by a "formulation"! His only compensation 
is the pleasure of being able to turn the matter again into a question  of 
confidence. 
Consequently, the debate was adjourned. 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 17, June 17, 1848] 
Cologne, June  14.—  Second day.— The debate begins again with a 
long argument on procedure. When this has been settled 
Herr Zachariä rises. He wants to propose an amendment designed 
to help the Assembly out of the predicament. The great ministerial 
formula has been found. It reads: 
"Taking into consideration that the immense importance of the great March 
events — to which together with the royal consent" (which is itself a "March event", 
though not a "great" one) "we owe the present constitutional position — and also that 
the services the fighters have rendered to it" (that is to the royal consent) "are 
undisputed (!!) and that moreover the Assembly does not regard it as its duty to pass 
judgments" (the Assembly is to declare that it has no judgment!), "but  to agree  with the 
Crown upon the Constitution,—the Assembly passes to the agenda." 
This muddled and unprincipled amendment, which pays obei­
sance to all sides, and in which, as Herr Zachariä flatters  himself, 
"everybody, even Herr Berends, will find everything that he could have 
possibly intended in the well-meaning attitude in which the motion was 
tabled", thus this bitter-sweet pap is the "formulation" on the 
"basis"  of which the Camphausen Government "stands" and is able 
to stand. 
Encouraged by the success of his colleague Müller, Pastor Sydow of 
Berlin ascends into the pulpit. The moral question is on his mind. He 
will solve the question that Müller was unable to solve. 
"Gentlemen, allow me at this point immediately" (after having already preached for 
half an hour) "to express what my sense of duty impels me to say: If the debate 
continues, then, in my opinion, no one should refrain from speaking until he has 
discharged his bounden duty. (Cheers.) 
"Permit me to make a personal observation. My view of revolution is (keep to the 
point!) that where a revolution occurs it is merely a symptom indicating that both 
sides,  the rulers and those they rule, are to blame. This" (this platitude, the cheapest 
way of disposing of the matter) "is the higher morality of the matter and (!) let us not 

=====第114页=====
84 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
anticipate the Christian-moral judgment of the nation." (For what purpose do the 
gentlemen think they are there?) (Agitation. Point of order!) 
"But gentlemen," continues the imperturbable champion of the higher morality 
and of the not-to-be-anticipated Christian-moral judgment of the nation, "I am not of 
the opinion that there may not be times when, with the inevitability of a natural event, 
political self-defence (!) is imposed upon a nation, and ... I am of the opinion that then 
the individual can participate in it in an entirely moral way." (We are saved, with the help 
of casuistry!) "Although it is also  possible  to participate in an immoral way, that rests with 
his conscience."!! 
The barricade fighters are not a subject to be examined by the 
soi-disant National Assembly, they ought to be heard in the 
confessional. Thus the matter is disposed of. 
Pastor Sydow announces moreover that he has "courage", speaks at 
length about the sovereignty of the people from the standpoint of 
the higher morality, is three more times interrupted by impatient 
clamour and returns to his seat with the pleasing conviction that he 
has discharged his bounden duty. Now the world knows what 
opinion Pastor Sydow holds and what opinion he does not hold. 
Herr Plönnis declares that the matter should be dropped. A 
statement qualified by so many amendments and amendments to 
amendments, and worn thin by so much discussion and quibbling, 
has after all no value. Herr Plönnis is right. But he could have 
rendered the Assembly no worse service than calling attention to this 
fact, this demonstration of cowardice on the part of so many 
members of both sides. 
Herr Reichensperger from Trier: 
"We are not here to construct theories and to  decree  history,  we ought to make  history 
as far as possible." 
By no means! By accepting the substantiated agenda, the Assembly 
decides that on the contrary its purpose is to unmake history. This is 
indeed also a way of "making history". 
"I should like to call your attention to Vergniaud's statement, that the revolution is 
about to devour its own children." a 
Alas,  this is not the case. On the contrary, its own children are 
about to devour the revolution! 
Herr Riedel has discovered that Berends' motion "is supposed to 
mean not only what is simply  expressed  by its words, but that it conceals a 
dispute about principles". And this victim of the "higher morality" is 
a geheimer Archivrat and professor! 
Another very reverend cleric approaches the platform. It is Herr 
Cf. Vergniaud's speech before the revolutionary tribunal in October  1793.—  Ed. 

=====第115页=====
The Berlin Debate on the Revolution 85 
Jonas, the ladies' preacher from Berlin. He really seems to have 
mistaken the Assembly for an audience made up of daughters of the 
educated élite. With all the pretentious prolixity of a true adept of 
Schleiermacher, he utters an endless series of the most banal 
commonplaces about the exceedingly important difference between 
revolution and reform. He was three times interrupted before 
completing the introduction to his sermon; at last he burst out with 
the grand proposition: 
"Revolution is something diametrically opposed to our present religious and moral 
consciousness. A revolution is an act which was considered great and glorious in 
ancient Greece and Rome, but Christianity...." (Vehement interruptions. General 
confusion. Esser, Jung, Eisner, the Chairman3 and numerous other speakers are 
trying to join in the discussion. At long last the popular pulpit orator can be heard 
again.) 
"At any rate, I dispute the right of the Assembly to vote on religious and moral 
principles, no assembly can vote on such matters" (? what about the consistory and the 
synod?). "The attempt to decree or declare that the revolution is a high moral 
principle or anything else" (that is anything at all), "seems to me to be on a par with 
the Assembly attempting to assert that there is a God or that there is no God, or that 
there are several Gods." 
There we are. The ladies' preacher has succeeded in transferring 
the question again to the sphere of the "higher morality", and now 
of course it falls only within the scope of the Protestant church 
councils and of the catechism manufacturers in the synod. 
Thank God! At last, after all this moral fog, our Hansemann 
speaks. With this practical mind, we are quite safe from the "higher 
morality". Herr Hansemann eliminates the entire moral point of view 
with one disdainful remark: 
"I ask, do we have leisure to indulge in such disputes about principles?" 
Herr Hansemann recalls that yesterday a deputy spoke about 
unemployed workers. Herr Hansemann uses this observation to 
perform an adroit turn. He speaks of the distress of the working 
class,  regrets their poverty and asks: 
"What is the reason of the general distress? I believe ... everybody has the feeling 
that there is as yet no certainty that the existing state of affairs is stable, so long as our 
constitutional position has not yet been put in order." 
Herr Hansemann now speaks from the heart. He exclaims, 
confidence must be restored! And the best way to restore confidence 
is to reject the revolution. Then the speaker for the Government, 
which "sees no reaction", launches into an alarming account of the 
importance he attaches to the friendly attitude of the reaction. 
a Karl Milde.— Ed. 

=====第116页=====
86 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
"I beseech you to promote harmony among oil  classes"  (by insulting the classes that 
carried through the revolution!); "I beseech you to promote harmony between the 
people and the army; do not forget that our hope of maintaining our independence 
depends on the army" (! in Prussia where everyone is a soldier!); "do not forget the 
difficult situation in which we find ourselves, I do not have to explain this to you in 
greater detail, anyone who reads  the newspapers  attentively' (and surely all the gentlemen 
do this) "will recognise that the situation is difficult, extremely difficult. I consider it 
inappropriate to sow the  seeds  of discordât this moment.... Therefore, gentlemen, try to 
reconcile  the parties, do not raise any question liable to provoke our  opponents,  for this is 
what would certainly occur. The adoption of the motion could have the most  deplorable 
consequences." 
How the reactionaries must have smiled when they saw Han­
semann, who is usually so intrepid, talking not only the Assembly but 
also himself into a state of alarm. 
This appeal to the fear of the big bourgeois, the lawyers and the 
schoolmasters in the Chamber was more effective than all the 
sentimental phrases about the "higher morality". The question was 
decided. D'Ester threw himself once more into the fray to neutralise 
the effect, but in vain. The debate was closed and with 196 votes to 
177 the Assembly passed to the agenda as substantiated by Zachariä. 
Thereby the Assembly passed judgment upon  itself,  i.e. it 
admitted that it was without judgment. 
Written by Engels on June 13-14, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung Nos. 14-17, June 14-17, 1848 

=====第117页=====
87 
THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES IN COLOGNE 
Cologne, June 16. A few days ago we had a by-election here which 
clearly showed how much the position of the parties has changed 
since the general election.64 
Police Superintendent Müller, substitute for Frankfurt, was 
elected in Gummersbach as deputy to Berlin. 
Three candidates competed in the elections. The Catholic party 
nominated Herr Pellmann, the constitutional party (the Citizens' 
Association) 65 ran Herr Fay, a lawyer, and the democratic party 
backed Herr Schneider II, a barrister, and President of the (Stollwerk) 
Democratic Society. 66 
In the first round (there were 140 voting delegates), Herr Fay 
received 29 votes, Herr Pellmann 34 and Herr Schneider 52. The 
rest of the votes were divided. 
The second round (139 votes) resulted in 14 votes for Herr Fay, 59 
for Herr Pellmann and 64 for Herr Schneider. Thus, the lead of the 
democratic party was still steadily increasing. 
Finally, in the third round (138 votes), Herr Fay did not receive 
a single vote. Herr Schneider obtained 55 and Herr Pellmann 
75 votes. The gentlemen of the Citizens' Association had given their 
votes to the Catholic candidate because they feared the Stollwerk 
democrats. 
These votes show how much public opinion here has changed. In 
the general elections, the democrats were everywhere in the 
minority. In this by-election, the democrats emerged as the by far 
most powerful of the three competing parties and only an unnatu­
ral coalition of the two other parties was able to defeat them. 

=====第118页=====
88 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
We do not blame the Catholic party for entering into this coali­
tion. We only stress the fact that the constitutional party has disap­
peared. 
Written on June 16, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 18, June 18, 1848 time 

=====第119页=====
89 
THE AGREEMENT ASSEMBLY OF JUNE 15 67 
Cologne, June 17. We told you a few days ago: you deny the 
existence of the revolution. It will prove its existence by a second 
revolution.3 
The events of June 14 are merely the first harbinger of this 
second revolution and already the Camphausen Government is in 
full dissolution. By placing itself under the protection of the people 
of Berlin, the Agreement Assembly has decreed a vote of confidence 
in them. 68 This act is a belated recognition of the March fighters. The 
Assembly has taken out of the hands of the Ministers the task of 
drawing up a Constitution and is seeking "agreement" with the 
people by appointing a committee which will examine all petitions 
and resolutions relating to the Constitution. This is a belated 
annulment of its declaration of incompetence.0 The Assembly 
promises to begin its constitutional work by a deed: the abolition of 
the very basis of the old system, namely of the feudal obligations 
with which the land is burdened. This promises to become another 
night of August 4.69 
In a word: on June 15 the Agreement Assembly repudiated its 
own past just as on June 9 it had repudiated the people's past. It has 
experienced its March 21.70 
The Bastille, however, has not yet been stormed. 
But from the East an apostle of revolution is approaching 
impetuously and irresistibly. He is already standing at the gates of 
a See this volume, pp. 73-75.—Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 72.—Ed. 

=====第120页=====
90 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Thorn .a It is the Tsar. The Tsar will save the German revolution by 
centralising it. 
Written on June 17, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 18, June 18, 1848 
a The Polish name is Torun.—Ed. 

=====第121页=====
91 
THE PRAGUE UPRISING71 
Cologne, June 17. Another massacre similar to that of Posen 72 is 
being prepared in Bohemia. The possibility of a continued peaceful 
association of Bohemia and Germany has been drowned in the blood 
of the Czech people shed by the Austrian army. 
Prince Windischgrätz had cannon mounted on the Vyshehrad 
and Hradshin a and trained on Prague. Troops were massed and a 
sudden attack on the Slav Congress73 and the Czechs was being 
prepared. 
The people discovered these preparations; they went in a body to 
the Prince's residence and demanded arms. The demand was 
rejected. Feeling began to run high and the crowds of people with 
and without arms were growing. Then a shot was fired from an inn 
opposite the commandant's palace and Princess Windischgrätz 
dropped, mortally wounded. The order to attack followed im­
mediately; the grenadiers advanced, the people were driven back. 
But barricades were thrown up everywhere, checking the advance of 
the military. Cannon were brought into position and the barricades 
raked with grape-shot. Torrents of blood were shed. The fighting 
went on throughout the night of the 12th and continued on the 13th. 
Eventually the troops succeeded in occupying the wide streets and 
pressing the people back into the narrower quarters of the city where 
artillery could not be used. 
Vyshehrad—southern part of Prague with the old citadel of the same name 
standing on the right bank of the Vltava; Hradshin (the Czech name is Hrad-
cany)—north-western part of Prague with the old castle.—Ed. 

=====第122页=====
92 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
That is as far as our latest news goes. But in addition it is stated 
that many members of the Slav Congress were deported from the 
city under a strong escort. It would appear that the military won at 
least a partial victory. 
However the uprising may end, a war of annihilation by the 
Germans against the Czechs is now the only possible outcome. 
In their revolution the Germans have to atone for the sins of their 
whole past. They atoned for them in Italy. In Posen they have 
brought down upon themselves once more the curse of the whole of 
Poland, and to that is now added Bohemia. 
The French were able to win the recognition and sympathy even of 
the countries to which they came as enemies. The Germans win 
recognition nowhere and find sympathy nowhere. Even where they 
adopt the role of magnanimous apostles of liberty, they are spurned 
with bitter scorn. 
And so they deserve to be. A nation which throughout its history 
has allowed itself to be used as a tool of oppression against all other 
nations must first of all prove that it has been really revolutionised. It 
must prove this not merely by a few indecisive revolutions, whose 
only consequence is to allow the old irresolution, impotence and 
discord to continue in a modified form; revolutions which let a 
Radetzky remain in Milan, a Colomb and Steinäcker in Posen, a 
Windischgrätz in Prague, a Hüser in Mainz, as if nothing had 
changed. 
A revolutionised Germany ought to have renounced her entire 
past, especially as far as the neighbouring nations are concerned. 
Together with her own freedom, she should have proclaimed the 
freedom of the nations hitherto suppressed by her. 
And what has revolutionised Germany done? She has fully 
endorsed the old oppression of Italy, Poland, and now of Bohemia, 
too, by German troops. Kaunitz and Metternich have been 
completely vindicated. 
And the Germans, after this, demand that the Czechs should trust 
them? 
Are the Czechs to be blamed for not wanting to join a nation that 
oppresses and maltreats other nations, while liberating itself? 
Are they to be blamed for not wanting to send their representa­
tives to our wretched, faint-hearted "National Assembly" at 
Frankfurt, which is afraid of its own sovereignty? 
Are they to be blamed for dissociating themselves from the 
impotent Austrian Government, which is in such a perplexed and 
helpless state that it seems to exist only in order to register the 
disintegration of Austria, which it is unable to prevent, or at least to 

=====第123页=====
The Prague Uprising 93 
give it an orderly course? A Government which is even too weak to 
save Prague from the guns and soldiers of a Windischgrätz? 
But it is the gallant Czechs themselves who are most of all to be 
pitied. Whether they win or are defeated, their doom is sealed. They 
have been driven into the arms of the Russians by 400 years of 
German oppression, which is being continued now in the street-
fighting waged in Prague. In the great struggle between Western 
and Eastern Europe, which may begin very soon, perhaps in a few 
weeks, the Czechs are placed by an unhappy fate on the side of the 
Russians, the side of despotism opposed to the revolution. The 
revolution will triumph and the Czechs will be the first to be crushed 
by it.74 
The Germans once again bear the responsibility for the ruin of the 
Czech people, for it is the Germans who have betrayed them to 
Russia. 
Written by Engels on June 17, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 18, June 18, 1848 

=====第124页=====
94 
VALDENAIRE'S ARREST —SEBALDT 
Cologne. As is well known, the Berlin Agreement Assembly has 
deferred the debate on Wencelius' motion concerning the imprison­
ment of Victor Valdenaire, the deputy of the district of Trier. And on 
what grounds! Because no law about the immunity of people's 
representatives can be found in the archives of the old Prussian 
legislation, just as there are, of course, no people's representatives in 
the old lumber-room of Prussian history. Nothing is easier than on 
this basis subsequently to destroy all the achievements of the 
revolution in the interest of the state treasury. The self-evident 
demands, requirements and rights of the revolution are not, of 
course, sanctioned by a legislation whose basis has been exploded by 
just this revolution. From the moment there were Prussian people's 
representatives, the immunity of the Prussian people's representa­
tives existed. Or should the continued existence of the entire 
Agreement Assembly be dependent on the mood of a chief of police 
or a law-court? By all means! Zweiffel, Reichensperger and the rest of 
the Rhenish jurists who transform every political question into 
procedural wrangling and who could not allow the case of 
Valdenaire to pass without displaying minute casuistry and gigantic 
servility, will be entirely safe from such a possibility. 
On this occasion we would like to pose a question to Herr 
Reichensperger II: Has Herr Reichensperger not perhaps been 
appointed to become President of the court in Cologne after Herr 
Schauberg's retirement, which is supposed to take place on July 1, 
1848? 
Valdenaire was arrested just as he was climbing into the stage-coach 
to Merxig where the election of a deputy for Frankfurt was to take 
place. Valdenaire had secured the great majority of the votes. There 

=====第125页=====
Valdenaire's Arrest—Sebaldt 95 
is no easier method to fail an election to which one objects than to 
arrest the candidate! And the Government, in order to be consistent, 
does not summon his substitute Graff in spite of his protests. Thus a 
population of 60,000 fallen out of favour is left unrepresented. We 
advise Herr Gräff to go to Berlin on his own authority. 
Finally, we cannot describe the situation in Trier better than by 
reproducing the following warning issued by the high and mighty 
Herr Sebaldt, the royal Landrat and Chief Burgomaster of Trier: 
WARNING 
For several evenings in a row, unusually numerous crowds of people have shown 
up on the public squares and streets of the city, which have aroused the fear in 
nervous people that illegal demonstrations are imminent. I am not one of these 
nervous people, and I like it well if the street traffic moves freely. If, however, 
contrary to expectations, some immature persons should get the idea of misusing this 
traffic for knavish tricks and insulting raillery, I must urge the better part of the public 
to dissociate itself immediately from these elements, for serious disturbances of public 
order will be met by serious counter-measures and I should be very sorry if during a 
possible conflict the careless should come to harm rather than the guilty. 
Trier, June 16, 1848 The royal Landrat and Chief Burgo­
master Regierungs-Rat Sebaldt 
How kindly and patriarchally this eminent man writes! 
"He likes it well if the street traffic moves freely." What a pleasant 
liking Herr Sebaldt has! 
Nervous people fear a demonstration. The dictator of Trier has the 
quality of not being nervous. Yet he must show his absolute 
authority, he must transform the chimeras of the nervous people 
into official  conjecture  so that he can oppose  serious  disturbances with 
appropriately serious counter-measures. 
How surprisingly well the great man is able to combine seriousness 
and kindliness! The better citizens of Trier may slumber in peace 
under the protection of this serious, yet kindly providence. 
Written on June 18, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 19, June 19, 1848 time 

=====第126页=====
96 
THE AGREEMENT ASSEMBLY SESSION 
OF JUNE 17 
Cologne, June 19. "Nothing learned and nothing forgot­
ten" a —this saying is as valid for the Camphausen Government as it 
is for the Bourbons. 
On June 14, the people, enraged by the agreers' repudiation of the 
revolution, march upon the arsenal.b They want a guarantee against 
the Assembly and they know that weapons are the best guarantee. 
The arsenal is taken by storm and the people arm themselves. 
The storming of the arsenal, an event without immediate results, a 
revolution that stopped halfway, nevertheless had the effect: 
1. That the trembling Assembly retracted its decision of the 
previous day and declared that it would place itself under the 
protection of the people of Berlin. 
2. That it repudiated the Ministry on a vital question and rejected 
the Camphausen draft Constitution by a majority of 46 votes. 
3. That the Ministry immediately disintegrated, that the Ministers 
Kanitz, Schwerin and Auerswald resigned (of these up to now only 
Kanitz has definitely been replaced, by Schreckenstein) and that on 
June 17 Herr Camphausen asked the Assembly to give him three 
days to replenish his decimated Ministry. 
All this was accomplished by the storming of the arsenal. 
And at the same time when the effects of this self-arming of the 
people become so strikingly apparent, the Government dares attack 
that action  itself.  At the same time when Assembly and Ministry 
acknowledge the insurrection, the participants of the insurrection 
are subjected to a judicial investigation, and are dealt with according 
A remark Talleyrand is supposed to have made about the Bourbons.—Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 89-90.—Ed. 

=====第127页=====
The Agreement Assembly Session of June 17 97 
to old-Prussian laws, slandered in the Assembly and portrayed as 
common thieves! 
On the very same day when the trembling Assembly places itself 
under the protection of those who stormed the arsenal, they are 
described as "robbers" and "violent thieves" in decrees issued by 
Herr Griesheim (Commissioner in the Ministry of War) and Herr 
Temme (Public Prosecutor). The "liberal" Herr Temme whom the 
revolution brought back from exile, begins a stringent investigation 
of those who continue the revolution. Korn, Löwinsohn and Urban 
are arrested. All over Berlin, police raid after police raid is being 
carried out. Captain Natzmer, who had the sense to recognise the 
necessity for an immediate withdrawal from the arsenal, the man 
who by his peaceful retreat saved Prussia from a new revolution and 
the Ministers from immense danger, this man is tried by a military 
court which makes use of the articles of war to condemn him to 
death. 
The members of the Agreement Assembly are likewise recovering 
from their fright. In their session on the 17th, they repudiate the 
men who stormed the arsenal just as they repudiated the barricade 
fighters on the 9th. The following events transpired during this 
session of the 17th. 
Herr Camphausen explains to the Assembly that he will now 
reveal all facts in order that it may decide whether or not to impeach 
the Ministry because of the storming of the arsenal. 
There was a reason, indeed, for impeaching the Ministers, not 
because they tolerated the storming of the arsenal, but rather 
because they caused it by circumventing one of the most significant 
results of the revolution: the arming of the people. 
Then Herr Griesheim, Commissioner in the Ministry of War, rises 
after him. He gives a lengthy description of the weapons in the 
arsenal, especially of rifles "of an entirely new type of which only 
Prussia knows the secret", of weapons "of historical significance" 
and of all the other marvellous items. He describes the guarding of 
the arsenal: upstairs there are 250 army troops and downstairs is the 
civic militia. He refers to the fact that the flow of weapons to and 
from the arsenal, which is the main armoury of the whole Prussian 
state,  was hardly interrupted by the March revolution. 
After all these preliminary remarks with which he tried to arouse 
the sympathy of the agreers for the arsenal, this most interesting 
institution, he finally comes to the events of June 14. 
The people's attention had always been drawn to the arsenal and 
the arms deliveries and they had been told that these weapons 
belonged to them. 

=====第128页=====
98 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
The weapons belonged indeed to the people, first of all as national 
property and secondly as part of the acquired and guaranteed right 
of the people to bear arms. 
Herr Griesheim "could state with certainty that the first shots were 
fired by the people against the civic militia". 
This assertion is a counterpart to the "seventeen dead soldiers" of 
March.75 
Herr Griesheim now relates that the people invaded the arsenal, 
that the civic militia retreated and that "1,100 rifles of the new type 
of rifle were then stolen, an irreplaceable loss" (!). Captain Natzmer 
had been talked into a "dereliction of duty", i.e. into retreating, and 
the military had withdrawn. 
But now the Commissioner from the Ministry of War comes to a 
passage of his report which causes his old-Prussian heart to bleed: 
the people desecrated the sacred schrine of old Prussia. Listen: 
"Thereafter downright  atrocities  began to occur in the rooms upstairs. Theft,  robbery 
and destruction took place. New weapons were flung down and broken. Antiques of 
irreplaceable value, rifles inlaid with silver and ivory and artistic, hard-to-replace 
artillery models were destroyed. Trophies and flags won  by the blood  of the people,  symbols of 
the nation's  honour,  were torn and besmirchedl" (General indignation. Calls from all sides: 
Shame! Shame!) 
This indignation of the old blade at the frivolity of the people is 
indeed laughable. The people have committed "downright at­
rocities" against old spiked helmets, the shakos of the army reserve 
and other junk "of irreplaceable value"! They have flung down the 
"new weapons"! What an "atrocity" such an act must represent in 
the eyes of a veteran lieutenant-colonel who was only allowed to 
admire the "new weapons" respectfully in the arsenal while his 
regiment had to practise with the most antiquated rifles! The people 
have destroyed the artillery models! Perhaps Herr Griesheim is 
demanding that the people are supposed to put on kid gloves before 
starting a revolution? But the most horrible event has yet to 
come—the trophies of old Prussia have been besmirched and torn! 
Herr Griesheim relates an event which demonstrates that the 
people of Berlin showed a most correct revolutionary attitude on 
June 14. The people of Berlin disavowed the wars of liberation by 
trampling upon the flags captured at Leipzig and Waterloo. 76 The 
first thing the Germans have to do in their revolution is to break with 
their entire disgraceful past. 
The old-Prussian Agreement Assembly, however, had of course to 
cry shame! shame! over an action in which the people for the first 
time confront in a revolutionary way not only their oppressors but 
also the glittering illusions of their own past. 

=====第129页=====
The Agreement Assembly Session of June 17 99 
In spite of all his whisker-raising indignation over such an 
outrage, Herr Griesheim does not, however, fail to remark that the 
whole matter "cost the state 50,000 talers as well as enough weapons 
to equip several battalions of troops". 
He continues: 
"It was not the desire to arm the people which caused the assault since the weapons 
were sold for a few groschen." 
The storming of the arsenal, according to Herr Griesheim, was 
merely the deed of a number of thieves who stole rifles in order to 
sell them again for a dram of liquor. The Commissioner from the 
Ministry of War so far owes us an -explanation why the "robbers" 
plundered the arsenal rather than the wealthy shops of the 
goldsmiths and money-changers. 
"Much sympathy has been shown for the unfortunate (!) captain because he 
violated his duty allegedly to prevent the shedding of citizens' blood; his action has 
even been portrayed as commendable and deserving of thanks. Today I was even 
visited by a delegation which is demanding that this deed should be acknowledged by 
the entire fatherland as deserving of thanks. (Indignation.) It consisted of 
representatives of the various clubs which are under the chairmanship of Assessor 
Schramm. (Indignation on the Right and calls of "shame!") One thing is certain, the 
captain has broken the first and foremost law of the soldier: he has abandoned his post 
in spite of explicit instructions given him not to leave it without explicit orders. It was 
put to him that his withdrawal would save the throne, that all troops had left the city 
and the King had fled from Potsdam. (Indignation.) He  acted  in exactly the  same manner 
as the fortress commandant in 1806 who also surrendered that which had been entrusted 
to him without further ado instead of defending it. Incidentally, the rejoinder that 
his withdrawal prevented the shedding of citizens' blood does not hold water. Not a 
hair on anybody's head would have been touched since he surrendered his post at the 
moment when the rest of the battalion was coming to his aid." (Shouts of "bravo" 
from the Right, hissing from the Left.) 
Herr Griesheim has, of course, forgotten again that Captain 
Natzmer's restraint saved Berlin from renewed armed fighting, the 
Ministers from the greatest danger and the monarchy from being 
overthrown. Herr Griesheim, who again plays the role of lieutenant-
colonel to the hilt, sees in Natzmer's act nothing but insubordination, 
cowardly desertion of his post and treason in the well-known 
old-Prussian manner of 1806. The man to whom the monarchy owes 
its continued existence is to be condemned to death. What a 
wonderful example for the entire army! 
And how did the Assembly act at this tale by Herr Griesheim? It 
became the echo of his indignation. The Left finally protested — by 
hissing. The Berlin Left is generally behaving in a more and more 
cowardly and ambiguous manner. Where were these gentlemen, 
who exploited the people during the elections, on the night of June 

=====第130页=====
100 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
14, when the people soon let the advantages gained slip from their 
grasp again, solely because of their perplexity, and when only a 
leader was lacking to make the victory complete? Where were Herr 
Berends, Herr Jung, Herr Eisner, Herr Stein, and Herr Reichen­
bach? They remained at home or made innocuous complaints to the 
Ministers. But that is not all. They do not even dare to defend the 
people against the calumnies and vilifications of the Government 
Commissioner. Not a single one of them speaks up. Not a single one 
wants to be responsible for the action of the people which gave them 
their first victory. They dare not do anything but—hiss. What 
heroism! 
Written by Engels on June 19, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 20, June 20, 1848 time 

=====第131页=====
101 
THE STUPP AMENDMENT 
Cologne, June 20. Herr Stupp from Cologne has proposed an 
amendment to the law concerning the immunity of deputies which was 
not discussed in the Agreement Assembly but which might not be 
uninteresting to his fellow citizens from Cologne. We do not want to 
deprive them of the undivided enjoyment of this legislative work of 
art. 
The Amendment of Deputy Stupp 
Paragraph 1. "No member of the Assembly may be called to account in any 
manner whatsoever either for his votes or for the words and opinions that he 
expresses in his capacity as deputy." 
Amendment: "Delete the word 'words' in the third line." 
Reason: "It suffices that a deputy may freely express his opinion. The expression 
'words' may also comprise slander which entitles the insulted person to sue for libel in a 
civil action. To protect the deputies from such suits seems to be contrary to the respect 
and honour of the Assembly." 
It suffices that the deputy expresses no opinion at all but simply 
drums and votes. Why then not also delete "opinions" since opinions 
must be expressed in "words", may even be expressed in "slander­
ous"  words, and since also slanderous opinions may be "subsumed" 
under the expression "opinions"? 
Paragraph 2. "For the duration of the Assembly none of its members may be called 
to account or arrested for an act liable to punishment without the permission of the 
Assembly except when that member is caught in the act or within 24 hours thereafter. 
A similar permission is necessary for an arrest on account of debts." 
Amendment: "Delete the final sentence: 'A similar permission is necessary'for an 
arrest on account of debts.'" 
Reason: "We are dealing here with an infringement of  the civil rights of citizens and the 
ratification of such an infringement seems to me to be questionable. Though it might 
be greatly in the interest of the Assembly to keep some deputy in its midst, I still find 
respect for civil rights more important. 

=====第132页=====
102 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
"We must, however, bear in mind especially that we are promulgating this law not 
for the future, i.e. not for the members of a future Chamber, but for  us. Let us assume 
that there are members among us who have to fear arrest on account of debts; it would 
certainly make a bad impression on our voters if we were to protect ourselves against 
the legitimate prosecution of our creditors by a law which we have passed ourselves." 
Rather the other way around! It makes a bad impression upon 
Herr Stupp that the voters have sent members "among us" who 
could be arrested on account of debts. How lucky were Mirabeau and 
Fox not to have had to live under the legislation of Stupp. One single 
difficulty disconcerts Herr Stupp for a moment, it is "the interest of 
the Assembly to keep some deputy in its midst". The interest of the 
people—but who wants to speak of that? It is only a question of the 
interests of a "closed society" which wants to keep someone in its 
midst while the creditors would like to see him outside in gaol. 
Collision of two important interests! Herr Stupp could have given a 
more convincing version of his amendment: individuals who are 
embarrassed by debts may only be elected representatives of the 
people with the permission of their respective creditors. They may 
be recalled at any time by their creditors. In the final analysis, both 
Assembly and Government are subject to the supreme decision of 
the creditors of the state. 
Second amendment to Paragraph 2: 
"While the Assembly is in session none of its members may be prosecuted 
or arrested by the authorities without the permission of the Assembly for a 
punishable act unless he is caught in the act." 
Reason: "The word 'Assembly' in the first line is taken to mean a corporation, and 
with regard to this the expression 'duration of the Assembly' seems unsuitable. I am 
proposing the substitution of 'while the Assembly is in session'. 
"It also seems more fitting to replace 'an act liable to punishment' with 'a 
punishable act'. 
"I am of the opinion that we must not exclude civil proceedings on account of 
punishable acts because we would thereby allow an infringement of civil law. Hence 
the addition 'by the authorities'. 
"If the addition 'or within the next 24 hours etc' remains, the judge may arrest any 
deputy within 24 hours after any transgression." 
The Bill assures the immunity of the deputies for the duration of 
the Assembly, the amendment of Herr Stupp only for "the duration 
of the sessions", i.e. for 6, or at most 12 hours per day. And what an 
ingenious justification! One can speak of the duration of  a session  but 
can one speak of the duration of a corporation? 
Herr Stupp does not want the authorities to prosecute or arrest the 
deputies without the Assembly's permission. He thus takes the liberty 
to infringe criminal law. But as regards civil  proceedings]  On no 
account should there be an encroachment upon civil law! Long live 

=====第133页=====
The Stupp Amendment 103 
civil law! What the state has no right to do, the private person may 
carry out! Civil proceedings above everything! Civil proceedings are 
Herr Stupp's fixed idea. Civil law is Moses and the prophets! Swear 
by civil law, particularly civil proceedings! People, show respect for 
the Holy of Holies! 
There are no infringements of civil law upon public law but there 
are "questionable" encroachments of public law upon civil law. Why 
bother with a Constitution since we possess the Code civil78 as well as 
civil courts and lawyers? 
Paragraph 3. "Any criminal procedure against a member of the Assembly and any 
arrest is suspended for the duration of the session if the Assembly demands it." 
Motion to change Paragraph 3 in the following manner: 
"Any criminal procedure against a member of the Assembly and any arrest 
arising out of it—unless the arrest has been made by virtue of a judicial 
verdict—shall be cancelled at once if the Assembly so decides." 
Reason: "It is surely not the intention to release deputies from gaol who have 
already been sentenced to imprisonment by a judicial verdict. 
"If the amendment is passed, it will apply also to those who are in gaol on account 
of debts." 
Could the Assembly have the treasonable intention to weaken the 
"force of a judicial verdict" or even to take into its midst a man who 
is "in gaol" on account of debts? Herr Stupp is trembling at this 
assault upon civil proceedings and the force of judicial verdicts. Any 
question of the sovereignty of the people has now been disposed of. 
Herr Stupp has proclaimed the sovereignty of civil proceedings and civil 
law. How cruel to snatch such a man away from civil law practice and 
to throw him into the inferior sphere of the legislative power! The 
sovereign people has committed this "questionable" infringement of 
"civil law". Herr Stupp, on the other hand, starts civil proceedings 
against the sovereignty of the people and public law. 
Emperor Nicholas, however, may calmly turn back. Upon the first 
crossing of the Prussian frontier he will be met by Deputy Stupp who 
will hold in one hand "civil proceedings" and in the other hand a 
"judicial verdict". For, he will declare with appropriate solemnity: 
War, what is war? A questionable infringement of civil law! A 
questionable infringement of civil law! 
Written on June 20, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 21, June 21, 1848 time 

=====第134页=====
104 
A NEW POLICY IN POSEN 
Cologne, June 20. Once again there is a new twist to the Posen 
affair! After the Willisen phase with its lofty promises and 
enthusiastic proclamations came the Pfuel phase with shrapnel, 
brandings and shaved heads, 79 the phase of the blood bath and 
Russian barbarity. Now after the Pfuel phase comes a new phase of 
reconciliation! 
Major Olberg, Chief of the General Staff at Posen and chief 
participant in the massacres and brandings, is suddenly transferred 
against his will. General Colomb is also transferred against his will 
from Posen to Königsberg. General Pfuel (von Höllenstein 3) has been 
ordered to go to Berlin and Oberpräsident Beurmann has already 
arrived there. 
Thus Posen has been completely deserted by the knights who bore 
lunar caustic in their coat of arms, were swinging shearing knives 
and bravely, from secure ambush, mowed down defenceless 
scythemen with shrapnel at a distance of 1,000 to 1,200 paces. The 
German-Jewish Polonophobes are shaking. Just like the Poles at an 
earlier time they find themselves betrayed by the Government. 
A light has suddenly dawned upon the Camphausen Government. 
The danger of a Russian invasion has convinced it that it made an 
enormous mistake when it surrendered the Poles to the wrath of the 
bureaucracy and the Pomeranian army reserve. Now that it is too 
late, it wants to regain the sympathy of the Poles at any price! 
Moreover, the entire bloody war of extermination against the 
Poles with all its cruelties and barbarities which will for ever form a 
disgraceful chapter in German history, the justifiable deadly hatred 
Höllenstein means "lunar caustic".—Ed. 

=====第135页=====
A New Policy in Posen 105 
of the Poles against us, the now inevitable Russian-Polish alliance 
against Germany, an alliance by which the enemies of the revolution 
will be reinforced by a brave people of 20 million, has all this 
happened and taken place merely in order to give Herr Camp­
hausen the opportunity to stammer his pater peccavi? 
Does Herr Camphausen really believe that now when he is in need 
of the Poles, it is possible through gentle oratory and concessions to 
regain former sympathies which have been drowned in blood? Does 
he really believe that the stigmatised hands will ever be raised in his 
defence or that the shaven foreheads will ever expose themselves to 
Russian sabres? Does he really believe that he can ever lead those 
who escaped Prussian shrapnel against Russian grape-shot? 
And does Herr Camphausen believe that his Government can 
survive now that he himself has so unambiguously admitted his 
inability? 
Written by Engels on June 20, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 21, June 21, 1848 time 

=====第136页=====
106 
THE DOWNFALL OF THE CAMPHAUSEN 
GOVERNMENT 
Cologne, June 21. 10 p.m. We received the following information 
from Berlin, June 20: The Camphausen Government has fallen; at 8 
o'clock  this morning Herr Camphausen returned his portfolio to the King? 
When the Agreement Assembly met this morning after an adjournment due 
to the proposed changes, the President read out a  letter  from Camphausen 
announcing his resignation to the Chamber  because  he had not  succeeded  in 
filling the ministerial vacancies. Herr Hansemann, Herr von Auerswald, 
Herr Bornemann, Herr von  Patow,  Herr Roth von  Schreckenstein  and Herr 
Schleinitz sat on the ministerial bench, Schreckenstein as newly appointed 
Minister of War and Schleinitz,  the well-known favourite of  the Princess  of 
Prussia c and Russophile,  as Minister of Foreign Affairs. Hansemann 
and von Auerswald further declared that now that the Prime 
Minister had resigned they were all provisional, with the exception of von 
Schreckenstein and Schleinitz, and would merely handle day-to-day affairs 
until the formation of a new Cabinet. 
The Agreement Assembly was moreover asked for an indefinite 
adjournment of the Chamber. 
It has been decided to adjourn until next Monday. 
Our readers  will not  be surprised  by this news. For  days  now  we have  been 
predicting the downfall of the Camphausen Government. And we  added: 
Either a new revolution or a definitely  reactionary  Government. The attempt 
at a new revolution has  failed.  A Russophile Government will pave the 
way for the Tsar. 
Written on June 21, 1848 
First published in the special supplement 
to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 22, June 
22, 1848 
a Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
b Karl Milde.— Ed. 
c Augusta, Marie Luise Katharina. —Ed. Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第137页=====
107 
THE DOWNFALL OF THE CAMPHAUSEN 
GOVERNMENT 80 
Cologne, June 22. 
May the sun shine very clear 
Once it, too, will disappear,3 
and the sun of March 30, tinged by the hot blood of the Poles, has 
also set.81 
The Camphausen Government has covered the counter­
revolution with its liberal-bourgeois cloak. The counter-revolution 
now feels strong enough to shake off this irksome mask. 
It is possible that the Government of March 30 will be followed for 
a few days by some untenable Government of the Left Centre. Its 
real successor will be the Government of the Prince of Prussia. 
Camphausen has the honour of having given the absolutist feudal 
party its natural boss and himself a successor. 
Why pamper the bourgeois guardians any longer? 
Are the Russians not standing on the eastern frontier and the 
Prussian troops on the western border? Have not shrapnel and lunar 
caustic prepared the Poles for the Russian propaganda campaign? 
Have not all steps been taken to repeat in almost all Rhenish towns 
the bombardment of Prague?b 
Have not the Danish and Polish wars, and the many small clashes 
between the military and the people, provided the army with all the 
time and opportunity in the world to form itself into a brutal 
soldiery? 
a Quotation from Ferdinand Raimund's play Das Mädchen aus der Feenwelt  oder  der 
Bauer als Millionär, Act II, Scene  6.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 91-93.— Ed. 

=====第138页=====
108 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Is not the bourgeoisie tired of revolution? And is there not 
standing in the middle of the ocean the rock upon which the 
counter-revolution will build its church*: England} 
The Camphausen Government seeks to snatch a pennyworth of 
popularity ,b to stir up public compassion by the assurance that it is 
making its exit from the stage of the state as a dupe. It certainly is a 
case of the deceived deceiver.0  Since it served the big bourgeoisie, it 
was compelled to try to cheat the revolution out of its democratic 
gains;  in combating democracy it was forced to ally itself with the 
aristocratic party and become the tool of its counter-revolutionary 
aims.  The aristocratic party is now strong enough to throw its 
protector overboard. Herr Camphausen has sown reaction as envisaged 
by the big bourgeoisie and he has reaped reaction as envisaged by  the feudal 
party. One was the well-meant intention of the man, the other his evil 
fate.  A penny's worth of popularity for the disappointed man. 
A penny's worth of popularity! 
May the sun shine very clear 
Once it, too, will disappear! 
But it will rise again in the East. 
Written on June 22, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 23, June 23, 1848 
a Matthew 16:18 (paraphrased).—Ed. 
Cf. Heinrich Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput XXIV.— Ed. 
G. E. Lessing, Nathan der Weise, Act III, Scene  7.— Ed. 

=====第139页=====
109 
THE FIRST DEED OF THE GERMAN NATIONAL 
ASSEMBLY IN FRANKFURT 
Cologne. The German National Assembly has at last risen to its 
task! It has at last made a decision of immediate practical value, it has 
intervened in the Austro-Italian war.82 
And how has it intervened? Has it proclaimed Italy's indepen­
dence? Has it sent a courier to Vienna with the order that Radetzky 
and Weiden must at once withdraw behind the River Isonzo? Has it 
issued a congratulatory message to the Provisional Government of 
Milan? 83 
Not at all! It has declared that it would  regard  any attack  upon Trieste 
as a casus belli. 
This means: The German National Assembly, in cordial agree­
ment with the Federal Diet, allows the Austrians to commit the 
greatest brutalities in Italy, to plunder, to murder, to pour 
incendiary rockets into every village and town (see under Italy) and 
then to retreat safely to neutral territory of the German Confedera­
tion! It allows the Austrians at any time to inundate Lombardy from 
German soil with Croats and Pandours84 but it wants to prohibit the 
Italians from pursuing the beaten Austrians into their hiding-places! 
It permits the Austrians to use Trieste to blockade Venice and the 
mouths of the Piave, the Brenta, the Tagliamento; but it prohibits 
any hostile action of the Italians against Trieste! 
The German National Assembly could not have acted with greater 
cowardice than it did by adopting this decision. It does not have the 
courage openly to sanction the Italian war. It has even less courage to 
prohibit the Austrian Government from conducting the war. Caught 
in this embarrassing situation, it passes the decision on Trieste (to top 
it all by acclamation, so as to still its secret fear by loud cries) which 

=====第140页=====
110 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
formally neither approves nor disapproves of the war against the 
Italian revolution but which, nevertheless, approves of it in fact. 
This decision is an indirect  declaration  of war on Italy, and because it 
is an indirect declaration, doubly disgraceful for a nation of 40 
million people like the German. 
The decision of the Frankfurt Assembly will evoke a storm of 
protest in all Italy. If the Italians still have some pride and energy, 
they will answer by a bombardment of Trieste and a march on the 
Brenner. 
But while the Frankfurt Assembly proposes, the French people 
disposes. Venice has appealed for French aid. After this, the French 
will probably soon cross the Alps and then it will not be long before 
we have them on the Rhine. 
One deputy3 has accused the Frankfurt Assembly of being idle. On 
the contrary! It has already worked so hard that we have one war in 
the northb and another one in the south and that wars in the west 
and east have become inevitable. We shall be in the fortunate 
position of having to fight simultaneously the Tsar and the French 
Republic, reaction and revolution. The Assembly has made sure that 
Russian and French, Danish and Italian soldiers will meet at St. 
Paul's Church in Frankfurt.0 And it is said the Assembly has been 
idle! 
Written by Engels on June 22, 1848 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 23, June 23, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
Kohlparzer.— Ed. 
The war with Denmark over Schleswig-Holstein. —Ed. 
c The meeting place of the German National Assembly.— Ed. 

=====第141页=====
Ill 
THE HANSEMANN GOVERNMENT' 
Cologne, June 23. A new turn in the government crisis in Berlin! 
Our Hansemann has been entrusted with the formation of a Cabinet 
and he will drop pathetically into the arms of the Left Centre 
together with Patow, Bornemann, Schleinitz and Schreckenstein, the 
debris of the old Cabinet. Herr Rodbertus is supposed to participate 
in the new combination. He is the mediator who obtains favour 
and forgiveness from the Left Centre for the contrite wreckage of 
the Camphausen Government. 
By the grace of Herr Rodbertus, our Prussian Duchâtel sees his 
wildest dreams coming true—he becomes Prime Minister. Camp-
hausen's laurels did not let him rest. Now he will at last have the 
opportunity to prove what he is capable of when he is in a position to 
spread his wings unhindered. Now we will be able to admire in all 
their glory his gigantic financial plans and his limitless projects for 
the elimination of all want and misery—those plans which he used to 
present in such a magnificent light to his deputies. Only now is he in 
a position to devote to the state the entire range of his talents which 
he earlier displayed so brilliantly and successfully as railwayman and 
in other posts. And now it will begin to rain votes of confidence. 
Herr Hansemann has surpassed his model. Thanks to Rodbertus' 
devotion he will be Prime Minister, a position never held by 
Duchâtel. But we warn him. Duchâtel had his reasons for always 
remaining ostensibly in the background. Duchâtel knew that the 
more or less cultured circles of the country both within and without 
the Chamber need a well-spoken knight of the "great debate", a 
Guizot or Camphausen, who on every occasion could soothe the 
consciences and capture the hearts of all audiences with the required 
arguments, philosophical deductions, statesman-like theories and 
6-3447 

=====第142页=====
112 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
other empty phrases. Duchâtel never envied his loquacious ideolo­
gists the nimbus of the Prime Minister's office. Caring for real, actual 
power, he considered vain glitter worthless. He knew that where he 
was, there was real power. Herr Hansemann wants to try it another 
way, he must know what he is doing. But we repeat, being Prime 
Minister is not the natural role for a Duchâtel. 
We are struck with a painful feeling when we contemplate how 
soon Herr Hansemann must plunge from his dizzy height. For 
before the Hansemann Government has been formed, before it has 
had a single moment to enjoy its existence, it is already doomed. 
"The hangman stands at the door," 
reaction and the Russians are knocking and before the cock will have 
crowed thrice,b  the Hansemann Government will have fallen despite 
Rodbertus and despite the Left Centre. Then good-bye to the Prime 
Minister's office, good-bye financial plans and gigantic projects for 
the elimination of want; the abyss will swallow them all and best 
wishes to Herr Hansemann when he quietly returns to his humble 
civil hearth and can contemplate the fact that life is but a dream. c 
Written on June 23, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 24, June 24, 1848 time 
a Heinrich Heine, "Ritter  Olaf",  Caput  II.—Ed. 
b Cf. Mark 14:30.—Ed. 
c An allusion to the title of Calderön de la Barca's play La vida es sueno (Life Is a 
Dream).—Ed. 

=====第143页=====
113 
THE NEUE BERLINER ZEITUNG 
ON THE CHARTISTS 
Cologne, June 23. The first issue of the Neue Berliner Zeitung 
reports all sorts of curious things about England. It is nice to be 
original; the Neue Berliner Zeitung has at least the merit that it 
describes conditions in England in quite brand-new fashion. First of 
all, it says: 
"O'Connor, who, indeed, seems to be a man without intelligence or principles, 
enjoys no esteem here at all." 
It is not up to us to decide whether O'Connor possesses as much 
intelligence and principle as the Neue Berliner Zeitung. This scion of 
ancient Irish kings, this leader of Great Britain's proletariat may in 
these advantages lag behind the educated Berlin newspaper. You are 
entirely correct, however, oh educated Berlin newspaper, in what 
you have to say about his reputation: O'Connor, like all rev­
olutionaries, is held in very bad odour. He has never been able to 
gain the respect of all the pious people the way you have already 
done by your first issue. The Berlin newspaper says further: 
"O'Connell said that he" (that is O'Connor) "possesses energy but no logic." 
That is just splendid. The blessed Danb was an honourable man; 
the logic of his energy consisted in pulling an annuity of 30,000 
pound sterling from the pockets of his poor countrymen. The logic 
of O'Connor's agitation resulted only in the sale of the entire worldly 
possessions of this notorious Chartist. 
a From an article dated "London, 15. Juni", published in the Neue Berliner Zeitung 
No. 1, June 20, 1848, supplement, p.  9.—Ed.  , 
b Daniel O'Connell.—Ed. 
(i* 

=====第144页=====
114 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
"Mr. Jones, the second leader of the extreme faction of the Chartists, who is now 
being sought by the courts and who is nowhere to be found, cannot even find anyone 
to put up bail of 1,000 pound sterling." 
That is the third piece of news from our extremely well-educated 
Berlin newspaper. In these three lines, it states three extreme 
absurdities. In the first place, bail is out of the question so long as the 
courts are still searching for someone. Secondly, Mr. Ernest Jones 
has already been in Newgate3 for a fortnight. The educated Berlin 
newspaper was perhaps only invited to tea at another extremely 
well-educated and well-informed fellow newspaper when quite 
recently the entire bourgeois press of England gave expression to its 
brutal joy over Jones' arrest. Thirdly, Mr. Jones has indeed at last 
found someone who gladly offered to pay 1,000 pound sterling for 
him, namely none other than the unintelligent and unprincipled 
O'Connor himself who was, however, turned down by the courts 
since as a Member of Parliament he cannot put up bail. 
The Berlin newspaper ends by alleging that the Chartists in the 
country's smaller towns frequently have fisticuffs with each other. If 
you had only once read an English newspaper, esteemed Berlin 
paper! You would have made the discovery that the Chartists have 
always had more fun in beating up the police than each other. 
We commend the intelligent and principled Neue Berliner Zeitung 
to the special attention of our readers. 
Written on June 23, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 24, June 24, 1848 time 
a The London prison.—Ed. 

=====第145页=====
115 
THREAT OF THE GERVINUS ZEITUNG" 
Cologne, June 24. 
"There will not be any trouble if the prestige of the Frankfurt Assembly and its 
constitutional provisions keep France in check; Prussia will restore its prestige from its 
eastern provinces and in doing this it may  perhaps  hardly shrink from the  temporary loss  of its 
Rhine Province." (Gervinus Zeitung of June 22.) 
How diplomatically the Berlin correspondent of the professorial 
newspaper writes! Prussia will restore "its prestige from its eastern 
provinces". Where will it restore its prestige? In the eastern 
provinces? Oh no, from the eastern provinces. In the Rhine Province? 
Even less so, since in connection with this  restoration  of its prestige it 
counts "on a temporary  loss of the Rhine Province", i.e. a temporary loss 
of its "prestige" in the Rhine Province. 
Thus in Berlin and Breslau} 
And why will it not restore with its eastern province rather than 
from its eastern province the prestige it has apparently lost in Berlin 
and Breslau? 
Russia is not the eastern province of Prussia, Prussia is rather the 
western  province of Russia. But from the Prussian eastern province, the 
Russians will move arm in arm with the worthy Pomeranians to 
Sodom and Gomorrah and restore the "prestige" of Prussia, i.e. the 
Prussian dynasty and absolute monarchy. This "prestige" was lost on 
the day when absolutism was forced to push a "written  scrap  of paper", 
soiled by plebeian blood, between itself and its people, and when the 
Court was compelled to place itself under the protection and 
supervision of bourgeois grain and wool merchants.86 
Thus the friend and saviour is to come from the East. What then is 
the purpose of concentrating soldiers that side of the frontier? It is 
from the West that the enemy is approaching and it is therefore in 
the West that the troops should be concentrated. A naive Berlin 
Deutsche Zeitung edited by Professor Gervinus.— Ed. 
b Wroclaw.— Ed. 

=====第146页=====
116 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
correspondent of the Kölnische Zeitung does not comprehend the 
heroism of Pfuel, that upright Polonophile who accepts a mission to 
Petersburg without an escort of 100,000 men behind him. Pfuel 
travels to Petersburg unafraidl Pfuel in Petersburg] Pfuel does not 
hesitate to cross the Russian frontier and the German public spins 
yarns about Russian forces along the German frontier! The 
correspondent of the Kölnische Zeitung feels sorry for the German 
public. But let us return to our professorial newspaper! 
If from the East the Russians rush to the aid of the Prussian 
dynasty, from the West the French will rush to help the German 
people. The "Frankfurt Assembly" may continue to debate calmly 
the best agenda and the best "constitutional provisions". The 
correspondent of the Gervinus Zeitung hides this opinion by the 
rhetorical embellishment "that the Frankfurt Assembly and its 
constitutional provisions" will keep France "in check". Prussia will 
lose the Rhine Province. But why should it shrink from such a loss? It 
will only be "temporary". German patriotism will march once again 
under Russian command against the French Babylon and also 
restore for good "the prestige of Prussia" in the Rhine Province and in 
all South Germany. Oh, you foreboding angel, you! a 
If Prussia does not "shrink from the temporary loss of the Rhine 
Province" the Rhine Province shrinks even less from the "permanent" 
loss of Prussian rule. If the Prussians ally themselves with the 
Russians, the Germans will ally themselves with the French and 
united they will wage the war of the West against the East, of 
civilisation against barbarism, of the republic against autocracy. 
We want the unification of Germany. Only as the result of the 
disintegration of the large German monarchies, however, can the 
elements of this unity crystallise. They will be welded together only 
by the stress of war and revolution. Constitutionalism, however, will 
disappear of itself as soon as the watchword of  the time is: Autocracy or 
Republic. But, the bourgeois constitutionalists exclaim indignantly, 
who has brought the Russians into German affairs? Who else but the 
democrats? Down with the democrats!—And they are right! 
If we ourselves had introduced the Russian system in our country, 
we would have saved the Russians the trouble of doing it and we 
would have saved the  costs  of war. 
Written on June 24, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 25, June 25, 1848 time 
Goethe, Faust, Erster Teil, "Marthens Garten".— Ed. 

=====第147页=====
117 
PATOW'S REDEMPTION MEMORANDUM1 
Cologne, June 24. During the agreement session of the 20th of this 
[month],  that fateful session during which Camphausen's sun went 
down and the ministerial chaos began, Herr Patow submitted a 
memorandum 3 which contains the chief principles according to 
which he intends to regulate the abolition of feudalism in the 
countryside. 
Reading this memorandum, one cannot understand why there 
had not been a peasant war long ago in the old-Prussian provinces. 
What a mess of services, fees and dues, what a jumble of medieval 
names, one more fantastic than the other! Seigniory, death dues, 
heriot,b tithes on livestock, protection money, Walpurgis rent, bee 
dues,  wax rent, commonage, tithe, liege money,88 additional rent — 
all that has been in existence until today in the "best-administered 
state of the world" and would have continued into all eternity if the 
French had not made their February revolution. 
Yes, most of these obligations, particularly the most burdensome 
among them, would continue into all eternity if Herr Patow were to 
get his way. It was exactly for this reason that Herr Patow was put in 
charge of this department so that he should spare the squires from 
the backwoods of Brandenburg, Pomerania and Silesia as much as 
possible and cheat the peasants as much as possible of the fruits of 
the revolution! 
Patow, Promemoria, betreffend die Massregeln der Gesetzgebung, durch welche die 
zeitgemässe Reform der guts- und grundherrlichen Verhältnisse und die Beseitigung der noch 
vorhandenen Hemmungen der Landeskultur bezweckt  wird. — Ed. 
In the original Besthaupt and Kurmede are used, which are regional variants of the 
German expression for heriot.— Ed. 

=====第148页=====
118 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
The Berlin revolution has rendered these feudal conditions 
impossible for all time. The peasants, as was quite natural, abolished 
them at once in practice. All the Government had to do was to 
legalise the abolition of all feudal obligations which had in fact already 
been abrogated by the  people's  will. 
But its castles must go up in flames before the aristocracy decides 
upon a fourth of August.8 The Government, itself represented in 
this case by an aristocrat, declares for the aristocracy; it submits to 
the Assembly a memorandum in which the agreers are requested 
now also to betray to the aristocracy the peasant revolution which 
broke out in all Germany in March. The Government is responsible 
for the consequences which the application of Patow's principles will 
have in the countryside. 
For Herr Patow wants the peasants to pay indemnities for the 
abrogation of all feudal obligations, even the liege money. The only 
obligations which are to be abolished without compensation are those 
which are derived from serfdom, from the old tax system and from 
patrimonial jurisdiction 90 or those which are worthless to the feudal 
lords (how gracious!), i.e. on the whole those obligations which 
constitute the smallest part of the entire feudal burden. 
On the other hand, all feudal redemption payments which have 
previously been fixed by contract or judgment are to be definitive. 
This means: the peasants, who have paid off their obligations under 
the reactionary, pro-aristocratic laws issued since 1816 and particu­
larly those issued since 1840, and who have been cheated out of their 
property in favour of the feudal lords, first by the law and then by 
bribed officials, will receive no compensation. 
Instead mortgage banks91 are to be created so as to throw dust into 
the peasants' eyes. 
If all were to go according to the wishes of Herr Patow, the feudal 
obligations would be just as little removed under his laws as under 
the old laws of 1807* 
The correct title of Herr Patow's essay should be: "Memorandum 
concerning the Preservation of Feudal Obligations for All Time by 
Way of Redemption." 
The Government is provoking a peasant war. Perhaps Prussia will also 
"not shrink from the temporary loss" of Silesia. 
Written on June 24, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 25, June 25, 1848 

=====第149页=====
119 
THE DEMOCRATIC CHARACTER 
OF THE UPRISING93 
Prague. Every day brings further confirmation of our view of the 
Prague uprising (No. 18 of this paper3), and shows that the 
insinuations of German newspapers which alleged that the Czech 
party served reaction, the aristocracy, the Russians etc. were 
downright lies. 
They only saw Count Leo Thun and his aristocrats, and failed to 
notice the mass of the people of Bohemia—the numerous industrial 
workers and the peasants. The fact that at one moment the 
aristocracy tried to use the Czech movement in its own interests and 
those of the camarilla at Innsbruck,94 was regarded by them as 
evidence that the revolutionary proletariat of Prague, who, already 
in 1844, held full control of Prague for three days, represented the 
interests of the nobility and reaction in general. 
All these calumnies, however, were exploded by the first decisive 
act of the Czech party. The uprising was so decidedly democratic 
that the Counts Thun, instead of heading it, immediately withdrew 
from it, and were detained by the people as Austrian hostages. It was 
so definitely democratic that all Czechs belonging to the aristocratic 
party shunned it. It was aimed as much against the Czech feudal 
lords as against the Austrian troops. 
The Austrians attacked the people not because they were Czechs, 
but because they were revolutionaries. The military regarded the 
storming of Prague simply as a prelude to the storming and burning 
down of Vienna. 
a See this volume, pp. 91-93.—Ed. 

=====第150页=====
120 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Thus the Berliner Zeitungs-Halle writes: 
"Vienna, June 20. The deputation which the local Citizens' Committee95 had 
sent to Prague has returned today. Its sole errand was to arrange for some sort of 
supervision of telegraphic communications, so that we should not have to wait for 
information 24 hours, as was often the case during the last few days. The deputation 
reported back to the Committee. They related dreadful things about the military rule 
in Prague. Words failed them to describe the horrors of a conquered, shelled and 
besieged city. At the peril of their lives they drove into the city from the last station 
before Prague by cart, and at the peril of their lives they passed through the lines of 
soldiers to the castle of Prague. 
"Everywhere the soldiers called out to them: 'So you're here, too, you Viennese 
dogs!  Now we've got you!' Many wanted to set upon them, even the officers were 
extremely rude. Finally the deputies reached the castle. Count Wallmoden took the 
credentials the Committee had given them, looked at the signature and said: 
'Pillersdorf? He is of no account here.' Windischgrätz treated the plebeian rabble more 
arrogandy than ever, saying: ' The revolution has  been  victorious  everywhere;  here we  are the 
victors and we recognise no civilian authority. While I was in Vienna things were quiet 
there. But the moment I left everything was suddenly upset.' The members of the 
deputation were disarmed and confined in one of the rooms of the castle. They were 
not allowed to leave until two days later, and their arms were not returned to them. 
"This is what our deputies reported, this is how they were treated by the Tilly of 
Prague and this is how the soldiers behaved, yet people here still act as though they 
believe that this is merely a fight against the Czechs. Did our deputies perhaps speak 
Czech? Did they not wear the uniform of the Viennese national guard? Did they not 
have a warrant from the Ministry and the Citizens' Committee which the Ministry had 
recognised as a legal authority? 
"But the revolution has gone too far. Windischgrätz thinks he is the man who can 
stem it. The Bohemians are shot down like dogs, and when the time for the venture 
comes the advance against Vienna will begin. Why did Windischgrätz set Leo Thun 
free,  the same Leo Thun who had put himself at the head of the Provisional 
Government in Prague and advocated the separation of Bohemia? Why, we ask, was 
he freed from Czech hands if his entire activity were not a game prearranged with the 
aristocracy in order to bring about the explosion? 
"A train left Prague the day before yesterday. On it travelled German students, 
Viennese national guards, and families who were fleeing from Prague, for, despite the 
fact that tranquillity had been restored, they no longer felt at home there. At the first 
station the military guard posted there demanded that all the passengers without 
exception hand over their weapons, and when they refused the soldiers fired into the 
carriages at the defenceless men, women and children. Six bodies were removed from 
the carriages and the passengers wiped the blood of the murdered people from their 
faces.  This was how Germans were treated by the very military whom people here 
would like to regard as the guardian angels of German liberty." 
Written by Engels on June 24, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 25, June 25, 1848 

=====第151页=====
121 
[NEWS FROM PARIS] 
Cologne, June 24, 10 p.m. Letters of the 23rd from Paris have 
failed to arrive. A courier who has passed through Cologne has told 
us that when he left fighting had broken out in Paris between the 
people and the national guard,97 and that he had heard heavy 
cannon-fire at some distance from Paris.98 
Written on June 24, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first 
to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 25, June time 
25, 1848 

=====第152页=====
122 
REICHENSPERGER 
Cologne, June 25. We have the misfortune to be good prophets. 
What we foretold in No. 19 has come to pass. 3 Herr Reichensperger 
from Trier really has become President of the provincial court of 
justice. That is a consolation in these hard times. Guizot-
Camphausen may have been overthrown, Duchâtel-Hansemann may 
be tottering — but the Guizot-Duchâtel system of corruption seems 
to be intent on striking new roots here. And what do the individuals 
matter, as long as the thing itself is at hand?—Incidentally, we 
would recommend Herr Reichensperger to read the address from 
Berncastel" in our special supplement published this morning. 
Written on June 25, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 26, June 26, 1848 time 
See this volume, p.  94.—Ed. 
"Berncastel, 18. Juni", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 25, June 25, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第153页=====
123 
[NEWS FROM PARIS] 
Cologne, June 25, 10 p.m. Letters from Paris have again failed to 
arrive; the Paris newspapers which came today are those of the 23rd 
and in the regular course of the postal service they should have 
arrived already yesterday evening. In these circumstances, the only 
sources at our disposal are the confused and contradictory reports of 
Belgian newspapers and our own knowledge of Paris. Accordingly 
we have tried to give our readers as accurate a picture as possible of 
the uprising of June 23.a 
There is no time for further comments. Tomorrow we shall 
publish a detailed account of our viewsb as well as a detailed report of 
the meeting of the Paris Chamber on June 23. 
Written on June 25, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first 
to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 26, June time 
26, 1848 
a See next article.—Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 128 and 130-33.—Ed. 

=====第154页=====
124 
DETAILS ABOUT THE 23rd OF JUNE 
The insurrection is purely a workers' uprising. The workers' anger 
has burst forth against the Government and the Assembly which had 
disappointed their hopes, taken daily recourse to new measures 
which served the interests of the bourgeoisie against the workers, 
dissolved the Labour Commission at the Luxembourg, limited the 
national workshops and issued the law against gatherings.100 The 
decidedly proletarian nature of the insurrection emerges from all 
the details. 
The boulevards, the great arteries of Parisian life, became the 
scenes of the first gatherings. All the way from the Porte St. Denis 
down to the old rue du Temple was thronged with people. Workers 
from the national workshops declared that they would not go to 
Sologne to the national workshops there. Others related that they 
had left for that place yesterday but had waited in vain at the 
Barrière Fontainebleau for the travel papers and orders to start the 
journey which had been promised them the evening before. 
Around ten o'clock the call went out for the erection of barricades. 
The eastern and south-eastern parts of Paris, starting with the 
Quartier and Faubourg Poissonnière, were quickly barricaded but, it 
seems, in somewhat unsystematic and desultory fashion. The rues St. 
Denis,  St. Martin, Rambuteau, Faubourg Poissonnière and on the 
left bank of the Seine the approaches to the faubourgs St. Jacques 
and St. Marceau —the rues St. Jacques, La Harpe and La Huchette 
and the adjacent bridges—were more or less strongly fortified. Flags 
were raised on the barricades which bore the inscription: "Bread or 
Death!" or "Work or Death!" 
Thus the insurrection was definitely based on the eastern part of 
the city which is predominantly inhabited by workers, first of all on 

=====第155页=====
Details about the 23rd of June 125 
the "aimables faubourgs",* those of Saint Jacques, Saint Marceau, 
Saint Antoine, du Temple, Saint Martin and Saint Denis, then on the 
districts between them (quartiers Saint Antoine, du Marais, Saint 
Martin and Saint Denis). 
The erection of the barricades was followed by attacks. The guard 
post of the boulevard Bonne Nouvelle, which in almost every 
revolution is first to be seized, had been occupied by the mobile 
guard. 101 The post was disarmed by the people. 
Soon afterwards, however, the bourgeois guard from the western 
parts of the city came to the rescue. It reoccupied the post. A second 
unit occupied the high pavement in front of the Théâtre du 
Gymnase which commands a large section of the boulevards. The 
people attempted to disarm the advanced posts, but, for the time 
being, neither side made use of arms. 
At last the order came to capture the barricade across the 
boulevard at the Porte Saint Denis. The national guard, led by the 
Police Inspector, advanced; there were negotiations; a few shots 
were fired — it is not clear from which side — and the firing quickly 
became general. 
Immediately, the guard post of Bonne Nouvelle also opened fire. 
A battalion of the second legion, which had occupied the boulevard 
Poissonnière, also advanced with loaded rifles. The people were 
surrounded on all sides. The national guard, firing from their 
advantageous and partially secure positions, caught the workers in 
an intense cross-fire. The workers defended themselves for half an 
hour. Finally, the boulevard Bonne Nouvelle and the barricades up 
to the Porte Saint Martin were seized. Here, too, the national guard, 
attacking around eleven o'clock from the direction of the Temple, 
had taken the barricades and occupied the approaches to the 
boulevard. 
The heroes who stormed these barricades belonged to the 
bourgeoisie of the second arrondissement, which extends from the 
Palais Ex-Royal 102 over the entire Faubourg Montmartre. The 
wealthy boutiquiers* of the rues Vivienne and Richelieu and the 
boulevard des Italiens live here. Here, too, dwell the great bankers of 
the rues Laffitte and Bergère and also the merry gentlemen of 
private means of the chaussée d'Antin. Rothschild and Fould, 
Rougemont de Lowemberg and Ganneron live here. In a word, here 
lies the Stock Exchange, Tortoni 103 and all that is connected with or 
dependent on them. 
As Louis Philippe called these suburbs.— Ed. 
Shopkeepers.—Ed. 

=====第156页=====
126 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
These heroes, who were threatened first and foremost by the red 
republic, were also the first on the scene. It is significant that  the first 
barricade  of June 23 was captured by  those  who  were conquered  on February 
24. They advanced three thousand men strong. Four companies, 
marching at the double, captured an overturned omnibus. The 
insurgents, meanwhile, seemed to have entrenched themselves once 
again at the Porte Saint Denis, for towards noon General 
Lamoricière had to move up with strong detachments of the mobile 
guard, regular troops, cavalry and two cannon in order to seize a 
strong barricade in conjunction with the second legion (the national 
guard of the 2nd arrondissement). The insurgents forced a platoon 
of the mobile guard to retreat. 
The battle on the boulevard Saint Denis was the signal for 
engagements in all eastern districts of Paris. The fighting was bloody. 
Over 30 insurgents were killed or wounded. The enraged workers 
vowed to attack from all sides during the following night and to fight 
the "municipal guard of the republic"104 to the death. 
At eleven o'clock fighting also took place in the rue Planche-
Mibray (the continuation of the rue Saint Martin towards the Seine) 
and one man was killed. 
There were also bloody clashes in the region of the Halles, the rue 
Rambuteau etc. Four or five dead were left lying. 
At one o'clock a fight took place in the rue du Paradis-
Poissonnière. The national guard fired but the result is unknown. 
After a bloody clash in the Faubourg Poissonnière, two non­
commissioned officers of the national -guard were disarmed. 
The rue Saint Denis was cleared by cavalry charges. 
During the afternoon heavy fighting took place in the Faubourg 
Saint Jacques. Barricades in the rues Saint Jacques and La Harpe 
and in the Place Maubert were assaulted with varying degrees of 
success and much use of grape-shot. In the Faubourg Montmartre 
troops were also using cannon. 
The insurgents were on the whole pushed back. The Hôtel de 
Ville 3 remained free. By three o'clock, the insurrection was confined 
to the faubourgs and the [Quartier du] Marais. 
By the way, few non-uniformed national guardsmen (i.e. workers 
who do not have the money for the purchase of uniforms) were seen 
under arms. On the other hand, there were people among them who 
carried luxury weapons, hunting rifles etc. Men of the mounted 
national guards (traditionally the scions of the wealthiest families), 
too, had entered the ranks of the infantry on foot. On the boulevard 
Town Hall.— Ed. 

=====第157页=====
Details about the 23rd of June 127 
Poissonnière, national guardsmen calmly let themselves be disarmed 
by the people and then took to their heels. 
At five o'clock the battle was still going on when it was all of a 
sudden suspended by a downpour. 
In some places, however, the fighting lasted until late in the 
evening. At nine o'clock, there was still rifle-fire in the Faubourg St. 
Antoine, the centre of the working-class population. 
Up to then the battle had not yet been fought with the full intensity 
of a decisive revolution. The national guard, with the exception of 
the second legion, seems for the most part to have hesitated to attack 
the barricades. The workers, angry though they were, understand­
ably limited themselves to the defence of their barricades. 
Thus,  the two parties separated in the evening after making a date 
for the following morning. The first day of battle resulted in no 
advantages for the Government. The insurgents, who had been 
pushed back, could reoccupy the lost positions during the night, as 
indeed they did. The Government, on the other hand, had two 
important points against it: it had fired with grape-shot and it had 
been unable to crush the rebellion during its first day. With 
grape-shot, however, and one night, not of victory but of mere truce, 
rebellion  ceases  and revolution begins. 
Written by Engels on June 25, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first 
to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 26, June time 
26, 1848 

=====第158页=====
128 
NEWS FROM PARIS 
Cologne, June 26. The news just received from Paris takes up so 
much space that we are obliged to omit all articles of critical 
comment. 
Therefore only a few words to our readers. The latest news 
received from Paris is: The resignation of Ledru-Rollin and Lamartine 
and their Ministers; the transfer of Cavaignac's military dictatorship 
from Algiers to Paris; Marrast the dictator in civilian clothes; Paris 
bathed in  blood;  the insurrection growing into the  greatest  revolution that 
has ever taken place, into a revolution of the proletariat against the 
bourgeoisie.  Three days which sufficed for the July revolution and the 
February revolution are insufficient for the colossal contours of this 
June revolution, but the victory of  the people  is more certain than  ever.  The 
French bourgeoisie has dared to do what the French kings never dared—it 
has itself  cast  the die. This second act of the French revolution is only the 
beginning of the European tragedy. 
Written by Marx on June 26, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 27, June 27, 1848 

=====第159页=====
129 
THE NORTHERN STAR 
ABOUT THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 106 
The Northern Star, the organ of the English Chartists, which is 
edited by Feargus O'Connor, G. Julian Harney and Ernest Jones, 
contains in its latest issue an appreciation of the manner in which the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung interprets the English people's movement 
and advocates democracy in general. 
We thank the editors of the Northern Star for the friendly and 
genuinely democratic way in which they have mentioned our 
newspaper. At the same time we want to assure them that the 
revolutionary Northern Star is the only English newspaper for whose 
appreciation we care. 
Written on June 26, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 27, June 27, 1848 time 

=====第160页=====
130 
THE 23rd OF JUNE 
We are still finding numerous new facts about the battle of the 
23rd. The available material is inexhaustible; time, however, allows 
us only to publish what is most important and characteristic. 
The June revolution offers the spectacle of an embittered battle 
such as Paris and the world in general have never seen before. The 
fiercest fighting of all previous revolutions took place during the 
March days at Milan. An almost entirely unarmed population of 
170,000 souls beat an army of 20,000 to 30,000 men! Yet the March 
days of Milan are child's play compared with the June days of Paris. 
What distinguishes the June revolution from all previous revolu­
tions is the absence of all illusions and all enthusiasm. 
The people are not standing on the barricades as in February 
singing "Mourir pour la patrie". 107 The workers of June 23 are 
fighting for their existence and the fatherland has lost all meaning 
for them. The Marseillaise and all memories of the great Revolution 
have disappeared. The people as well as the bourgeoisie sense that 
the revolution which they are experiencing will be more significant 
than that of 1789 or 1793. 
The June revolution is the revolution of despair and is fought with 
silent anger and the gloomy cold-bloodedness of despair. The 
workers know that they are involved in a fight to the death and in the 
face of the battle's terrible seriousness, even the cheerful French 
esprit remains silent. 
History offers only two other examples which show similarities 
with the battle that is probably still being fought in Paris at this very 
moment: the Roman slave war and the 1834 insurrection at Lyons. 
The old Lyons motto "to work while one lives or to die fighting" 
has also suddenly reappeared after fourteen years and has been 
written on the banners. 
The June revolution is the first which has actually divided all 
society into two large hostile armed camps which are represented by 
Eastern Paris and Western Paris. The unanimity of the February 

=====第161页=====
The 23rd of June 131 
revolution, that poetic unanimity full of dazzling delusions and 
beautiful lies so appropriately symbolised by that windbag and 
traitor Lamartine, has disappeared. Today the inexorable serious­
ness of reality tears up all the hypocritical promises of February 25. 
Today the February fighters are battling against each other, 
and — what has never happened before — all indifference is gone 
and every man who can bear arms really takes part in the fight either 
inside or outside the barricade. 
The armies which are fighting each other in the streets of Paris are 
as strong as the armies which fought in the battle of the nations at 
Leipzig. 8 This fact alone proves the tremendous significance of the 
June revolution. 
But let us go on to describe the battle  itself. 
The information which reached us yesterday led us to believe that 
the barricades had been constructed in somewhat haphazard 
fashion. The extensive reports of today prove the opposite. Never 
before have the defence works of the workers been constructed with 
so much composure and so methodically. 
The city was divided into two armed camps. The dividing line ran 
along the north-eastern edge of the city from Montmartre down to 
the Porte St. Denis and from there down to the rue St. Denis across 
the Ile de la Cité and along the rue St. Jacques up to the barrière. 
Everything east of that line was occupied and fortified by the 
workers. The bourgeoisie attacked from the western part and 
obtained its reinforcements from there. 
Starting early in the morning, the people silently began to erect 
their barricades. They were higher and firmer than ever before. A 
colossal red flag was flying on the barricade at the entrance to the 
Faubourg St. Antoine. 
The boulevard St. Denis was fortified very heavily. The barricades 
of the boulevard, the rue de Cléry, and the adjacent houses which 
had been transformed into regular fortresses formed a complete 
system of defence. Here, as we already reported yesterday, the first 
significant battle broke out. The people fought with indescribable 
defiance of death. A strong detachment of the national guard made 
a flanking attack upon the barricade of the rue de Cléry. Most of the 
barricade's defenders withdrew. Only seven men and two women, 
two beautiful young  grisettes,  remained at their post. One of the seven 
mounts the barricade carrying a flag. The others open fire. The 
national guard replies and the standard-bearer falls. Then a grisette, 
a tall, beautiful, neatly-dressed girl with bare arms, grasps the flag, 
climbs over the barricade and advances upon the national guard. 
The firing continues and the bourgeois members of the national 

=====第162页=====
132 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
guard shoot down the girl just as she has come close to their 
bayonets. The other grisette immediately jumps forward, grasps the 
flag, raises the head of her companion and, when she finds her dead, 
furiously throws stones at the national guard. She, too, falls under 
the bullets of the bourgeoisie. The firing gets more and more intense 
and comes both from the windows and the barricade. The ranks of 
the national guard grow thinner. Aid finally arrives and the 
barricade is stormed. Of the barricade's seven defenders, only one is 
left alive and he is disarmed and taken prisoner. The lions and stock 
exchange wolves of the second legion have carried out this heroic 
deed against the seven workers and two grisettes. 
After the joining of the two corps and the capture of the barricade, 
there is a short and ominous silence. But it is soon interrupted. The 
courageous national guard opens up a heavy platoon-fire against the 
unarmed and quiet masses of people who occupy part of the 
boulevard. They scatter in horror. The barricades, however, were 
not taken. It was only when Cavaignac himself moved up with 
infantry and cavalry units that the boulevard up to the Porte Saint 
Martin was taken after long fighting and only towards three 
o'clock. 
A number of barricades had been erected in the Faubourg 
Poissonnière, particularly at the corner of the Allée Lafayette, where 
several houses also served the insurgents as fortresses. An officer of 
the national guard led them. The 7th Light Infantry Regiment, the 
mobile guard and the national guard moved against them. The battle 
lasted half an hour. The troops finally won but only after they had 
lost about 100 dead and wounded. This engagement took place after 
3 o'clock in the afternoon. 
Barricades had also been erected in front of the Palace of Justice, 
in the rue Constantine and the adjacent streets as well as on the Saint 
Michel Bridge where the red flag was waving. After prolonged 
fighting these barricades, too, were captured. 
The dictator Cavaignac ordered his artillery to take up positions 
along the Notre-Dame Bridge. From here he took the rue 
Planche- Mibray and the Cité under fire and could easily bring it [the 
artillery] into play against the barricades of the rue Saint Jacques. 
This latter street was intersected by numerous barricades and the 
houses were transformed into genuine fortresses. Only artillery 
could be effective here and Cavaignac did not hesitate for one 
moment to use it. The roar of the cannon could be heard during the 
entire afternoon. Grape-shot swept the street. At 7 o'clock in the 
evening only one barricade had still to be taken. The number of dead 
was very large. 

=====第163页=====
The 23rd of June 133 
Cannon were also fired along the Saint Michel Bridge and the rue 
Saint-André des Arts. Right at the north-eastern end of the city, at 
the rue Château Landon where a troop detachment had dared to 
advance, a barricade was also battered down with cannon-balls. 
During the afternoon the fighting in the north-eastern faubourgs 
grew in intensity. The inhabitants of the suburbs of La Villette, 
Pantin etc. came to the aid of the insurgents. Barricades were erected 
again and again in very great numbers. 
In the Cité a company of the republican guard, under the pretext 
of wanting to fraternise with the insurgents, had crept between two 
barricades and then opened fire. The people fell furiously upon the 
traitors and beat them to the ground one by one. Barely 20 of them 
found a chance to escape. 
The intensity of the fighting grew all along the line. Cannon were 
fired everywhere as long as daylight prevailed. Later on the fighting 
was limited to rifle-fire which continued till late into the night. At 11 
o'clock the sounds of the military rally could still be heard all over 
Paris and at midnight there was still shooting in the direction of the 
Bastille. The Place de la Bastille together with all its approaches was 
entirely controlled by the insurgents. The centre of their power, the 
Faubourg Saint Antoine, was heavily fortified. Cavalry, infantry, 
national guard and mobile guard units stood massed along the 
boulevard from the rue Montmartre to the rue du Temple. 
At 11 p.m. there were already over 1,000 dead and wounded. 
This was the first day of the June revolution, a day unequalled in 
the revolutionary annals of Paris. The workers of Paris fought all 
alone against the armed bourgeoisie, the mobile guard, the newly 
organised republican guard and against regular troops of all arms. 
They held their own with unprecedented bravery equalled only by 
the likewise unprecedented brutality of their foe. One becomes 
forbearing towards a Hiiser, a Radetzky and a Windischgrätz if one 
observes how the Parisian bourgeoisie participates with genuine 
enthusiasm in the massacres arranged by Cavaignac. 
The Society of the Rights of Man109 which had again been set up 
on June 11, decided in the night of the 23rd-24th to make use of the 
insurrection in order to advance the  red flag and accordingly to play 
its part in the uprising. The Society then held a meeting, decided 
upon the necessary measures and appointed two permanent 
committees. 
Written by Engels on June 27, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 28, June 28, 1848 time 

=====第164页=====
134 
THE 24th OF JUNE 
Paris was occupied by the military throughout the entire night. 
Strong pickets were stationed in the squares and boulevards. 
At four o'clock in the morning the rally was sounded. An officer 
and several men of the national guard went from house to house and 
fetched out men of their company who had failed to report 
voluntarily. 
At the same time the roar of the cannon resumes most violently in 
the vicinity of the Saint Michel Bridge which forms the juncture 
between the insurgents on the left bank and those of the Cité. 
General Cavaignac who this morning has been invested with 
dictatorial powers, is burning with the desire to employ them against 
the uprising. Yesterday the artillery was used only in exceptional 
cases and for the most part only in the form of grape-shot. Today, 
however, the artillery is brought everywhere into action not only 
against the barricades but also against houses. Not only grape-shot is 
used but cannon-balls, shells and Congreve rockets. 
This morning a heavy clash began in the upper part of the 
Faubourg Saint Denis. Near the northern railway, the insurgents 
occupied several barricades and a house which was under construc­
tion. The first legion of the national guard attacked without, 
however, gaining any advantage. It used up its ammunition and lost 
about fifty dead and wounded. It barely held its own position until 
the artillery arrived (towards 10 o'clock) and blew the house and the 
barricades to smithereens. The troops reoccupied the northern 
railway. The battle in this whole neighbourhood (called Clos Saint 
Lazare which the Kölnische Zeitung has transformed into "courtyard 
of Saint Lazare") continued, however, for a long time and was 
conducted with great bitterness. "It is a veritable massacre," writes 

=====第165页=====
The 24th of June 135 
the correspondent of a Belgian newspaper.3  Strong barricades went 
up at the barrières of Rochechouart and Poissonnière. The 
fortification at the Allée Lafayette was also built up again and yielded 
only in the afternoon to cannon-balls. 
The barricades in the rues Saint Martin, Rambuteau and du 
Grand Chantier could likewise only be captured with the aid of 
cannon. 
The Café Cuisinier opposite the Saint Michel Bridge was 
destroyed by cannon-balls. 
The main battle, however, took place towards three o'clock in the 
afternoon on the Quai aux Fleurs where the famous clothing store 
La Belle Jardinière was occupied by 600 insurgents and transformed 
into a fortress. Artillery and regular troops attack. A corner of the 
wall is smashed in. Cavaignac, who here commands the firing 
himself,  calls on the insurgents to surrender, otherwise they will all 
be put to the sword. The insurgents reject this demand. The 
cannonade begins anew and finally incendiary rockets and shells are 
poured in. The house is totally destroyed, burying eighty insurgents 
under the rubble. 
The workers also fortified themselves on all sides in the Faubourg 
Saint Jacques, in the neighbourhood of the Panthéon. Every house 
had to be besieged as in Saragossa. 110 The efforts of dictator 
Cavaignac to storm these houses proved so fruitless that the brutal 
Algerian soldier declared that he would set them on fire if the 
occupants refused to surrender. 
In the Cité, girls were firing from windows at the troops and the 
civic militia. Here, too, howitzers had to be used in order to achieve 
any success at all. 
The Eleventh Battalion of the mobile guard which attempted to 
join the insurgents was wiped out by the troops and the national 
guard. So at least goes the story. 
Around noon the insurrection had definitely gained the advan­
tage.  All faubourgs, the suburbs of Les Batignolles, Montmartre, La 
Chapelle and La Villette, in  brief,  the entire outer rim of Paris from 
the Batignolles to the Seine as well as the greater part of the left bank 
of the Seine were in their hands. Here they had seized 13 cannon 
which they did not use. In the centre, in the Cité and in the lower 
part of the rue Saint Martin, they advanced towards the Hôtel de 
Ville which was guarded by masses of troops. Nevertheless, Bastide 
declared in the Chamber that within an hour the Hôtel de Ville 
might fall to the insurgents and the stupefaction which this piece of 
a L'Indépendance belge No. 179, June 27, 1848, p. 3, column 2.— Ed. 

=====第166页=====
136 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
news evoked caused the Chamber to proclaim a dictatorship and 
martial law. Cavaignac had hardly been endowed with his new 
powers when he took the most extreme and cruel measures, such as 
never before have been used in a civilised city, measures that even 
Radetzky hesitated to employ in Milan. Once again the people were 
too magnanimous. Had they used arson in reply to the incendiary 
rockets and howitzers, they would have been victorious by the 
evening. They had, however, no intention to use the same weapons 
as their opponents. 
The ammunition of the insurgents consisted mostly of gun-cotton, 
large amounts of which were produced in the Faubourg Saint 
Jacques and in the Marais. A cannon-ball foundry was set up in the 
Place Maubert. 
The Government continuously received support. Troops were 
rolling into Paris throughout the entire night. National guards 
arrived from Pontoise, Rouen, Meulan, Mantes, Amiens and Le 
Havre. Troops came from Orléans and artillery and sappers from 
Arras and Douai; a regiment came from Orléans. On the morning of 
the 24th, 500,000 rounds of ammunition and twelve artillery pieces 
arrived in the city from Vincennes. By the way, the railway workers 
on the northern railway have torn up the tracks between Paris and 
Saint Denis in order to prevent the arrival of further reinforce­
ments. 
These combined forces and that unprecedented brutality suc­
ceeded in pushing back the insurgents during the afternoon of the 
24th. 
The fact that not only Cavaignac but the national guard itself 
wanted to burn down the entire quarter of the Panthéon shows how 
savagely the national guard fought and how well it knew that it was 
fighting for its very survival! 
Three points were designated as headquarters of the attacking 
troops: the Porte Saint Denis where General Lamoricière was in 
command, the Hôtel de Ville where General Duvivier stood with 14 
battalions, and the Place de la Sorbonne whence General Damesme 
attacked the Faubourg Saint Jacques. 
Towards noon the approaches to the Place Maubert were taken 
and the square itself was encircled. At one o'clock the square fell; 
fifty members of the mobile guard were killed there! At the same 
time,  after an intense and persistent cannonade, the Panthéon was 
taken, or rather, it surrendered. The 1,500 insurgents who had 
entrenched themselves here capitulated, probably upon the threat of 
M. Cavaignac and the infuriated bourgeoisie to set fire to the entire 
quarter. 

=====第167页=====
The 24th of June 137 
At the same time, the "defenders of order" advanced further and 
further along the boulevards and captured the barricades of the 
adjacent streets. At the rue du Temple, the workers were forced to 
retreat to the corner of the rue de la Corderie. Fighting was still 
going on in the rue Boucherat and also on the other side of the 
boulevard in the Faubourg du Temple. Single rifle shots were still 
being fired in the rue Saint Martin and one barricade was still 
holding out at the Pointe Saint Eustache. 
Around 7 p.m. General Lamoricière received two national guard 
battalions from Amiens which he immediately used to encircle the 
barricades behind the Château d'Eau. a The Faubourg Saint Denis 
and also almost the entire left bank of the Seine were at that time 
peaceful and free. The insurgents were besieged in a part of the 
Marais and the Faubourg Saint Antoine. These two quarters were, 
however, separated by the boulevard Beaumarchais and the Saint 
Martin Canal behind it, and the latter could be used by the military. 
General Damesme, the commander of the mobile guard, received 
a bullet wound in his thigh at the barricade of the rue l'Estrapade. 
The wound is not dangerous. Nor are the representatives Bixio and 
Domes as severely injured as was at first believed. 
The wound of General Bedeau is also light. 
At nine o'clock the Faubourg Saint Jacques and the Faubourg 
Saint Marceau were as good as captured. The battle had been 
exceptionally fierce. General Bréa was in command there at the time. 
General Duvivier at the Hôtel de Ville had less success. But even 
here the insurgents were pushed back. 
General Lamoricière had cleared the faubourgs Poissonnière, 
Saint Denis and Saint Martin up to the barrières after overcoming 
heavy resistance. Only in the Clos Saint Lazare were the workers still 
holding out; they were entrenched in the Louis Philippe Hospital. 
This same information was given by the Presidentb to the National 
Assembly at 9:30 p.m. He was forced, however, to disavow his own 
statements several times. He admitted that heavy shooting was still 
going on in the Faubourg Saint Martin. 
Thus the situation in the evening of the 24th was as follows: 
The insurgents still held about half the terrain which they had 
occupied in the morning of the 23rd. This terrain consisted of the 
eastern part of Paris, i.e. the faubourgs St. Antoine, du Temple, St. 
Martin and the Marais. The Clos St. Lazare and a few barricades 
along the Botanical Gardens formed their outposts. 
a Water Tower.—Ed. 
Senard.—Ed. 

=====第168页=====
138 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
All the rest of Paris was in the hands of the Government. 
What is most striking in this desperate battle is the savagery with 
which the "defenders of order" fight. They who in former times 
displayed such tender feelings for every drop of "citizen's blood" 
and who had even sentimental fits over the death of the municipal 
guards111 on February 24, shoot down the workers like wild beasts. 
Not a word of compassion or of reconciliation and no sentimentality 
whatever, but violent hatred and cold fury against the insurgent 
workers reign in the ranks of the national guard and in the National 
Assembly. The bourgeoisie, fully conscious of what it is doing, 
conducts a war of extermination against them. The workers will 
wreak terrible vengeance on the bourgeoisie no matter whether it 
wins for the moment or is defeated at once. After a batde like that of 
the three June days, only terrorism is still possible whether it be 
carried out by one side or the other. 
We shall end by quoting some passages from a letter written by a 
captain of the republican guard who describes the events of the 23rd 
and 24th as follows: 
"I am writing to you while muskets are rattling and cannon are thundering. By 
about 2 o'clock we had captured three barricades at the head of the Notre-Dame 
Bridge. Later we moved to the rue St. Martin and marched down its entire length. 
When we arrived at the boulevard, we saw that it was abandoned and as empty as at 
2 o'clock in the morning. We ascended the Faubourg du Temple and stopped before 
reaching the barracks. Two hundred paces further on there was a formidable 
barricade supported by several others and defended by about 2,000 people. We 
negotiated with them for two hours, but in vain. The artillery finally arrived towards 6 
o'clock. The insurgents opened fire first. 
"The cannon replied and until 9 o'clock windows and bricks were shattered by the 
thunder of the artillery. The firing was terrible. Blood flowed in streams while at the 
same time a tremendous thunderstorm was raging. The cobblestones were red with 
blood as far as one could see. My men are falling under the bullets of the insurgents; 
they defend themselves like lions. Twenty times we mount an assault and twenty times 
we are driven back. The number of dead is immense and the number'of injured much 
greater still. At 9 o'clock we take the barricade with the bayonet. Today (June 24) at 3 
o'clock in the morning we are still up. The cannon are thundering incessandy. The 
Panthéon is the centre. I am in the barracks. We guard prisoners who are being 
brought in all the time. There are many injured among them. Some  are shot  out of  hand. 
I have lost 53 of my 112 men." 
Written by Engels on June 27, 1848 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 28, June 28, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第169页=====
139 
THE 25th OF JUNE 
Every day the intensity, violence and fury of the battle increased. 
The bourgeoisie became more and more ruthless towards the 
insurgents the more its brutality failed to lead to immediate success, 
the more it was itself becoming exhausted as a result of fighting, 
night-watches and bivouacking, and the closer it came to final 
victory. 
The bourgeoisie declared the workers to be not ordinary enemies 
who have to be defeated but enemies of  society  who must be destroyed. 
The bourgeois spread the absurd assertion that the workers, whom 
they themselves had forcibly driven to revolt, were interested only in 
plunder, arson and murder and that they were a gang of robbers 
who had to be shot down like beasts in the forest. Yet, for 3 days the 
insurgents held a large part of the city and behaved with great 
restraint. Paris would have been reduced to ruins but they would 
have triumphed had they used the same violent means as were 
employed by the bourgeoisie and its mercenaries led by Cavaignac. 
All the details show with what barbarism the bourgeois conducted 
themselves during the fighting. Disregarding for the moment the 
grape-shot, the shells, and the incendiary rockets which they used, it 
is an established fact that they gave no quarter at most of the captured 
barricades. The bourgeois massacred everyone they found there 
without exception. In the evening of the 24th over 50 captured 
insurgents were shot in the Allée de l'Observatoire without any trial. 
"It is a war of extermination," writes a correspondent of the 
Indépendance belge* which itself is a bourgeois paper. On all the 
a "Paris, dimanche, 23 juin, 2 heures de relevée", L'Indépendance  belge  No. 179, 
June 27, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第170页=====
140 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
barricades it was understood that the insurgents would be killed 
without exception. 
When Laroche jaquelein said in the National Assembly that 
something should be done to counteract this  belief,  the bourgeois 
would not even let him finish speaking but made such a clamour that 
the President had to put on his hat and suspend the session. The 
same kind of clamour broke out again when M. Senard himself later 
(see below, session of the Assembly 3) wanted to say a few hypocritical 
words of mildness and reconciliation. The bourgeois did not want to 
hear of forbearance. Even at the risk of losing part of their property 
by a bombardment, they were determined to put an end once and 
for all to the enemies of order, to plunderers, robbers, incendiaries 
and communists. 
Yet the bourgeois did not display any of that heroism which their 
journals attempted to attribute to them. From today's session of the 
National Assembly it is clear that the national guard was paralysed 
with fear at the outbreak of the insurrection. In spite of all the 
pompous phrases, reports from all the newspapers of the most 
diverse trends reveal that on the first day the national guard was very 
weak, that on the second and third day Cavaignac had to get them 
out of bed and that he had a corporal and four soldiers lead them 
into battle. The fanatical hatred of the bourgeois for the revolution­
ary workers was not capable of overcoming their natural cowardice. 
The workers on the other hand fought with unequalled bravery. 
Although they were less and less capable of replacing their casualties 
and more and more pushed back by superior strength, they did not 
tire for one moment. Already from the morning of the 25th they 
must have realised that the chance of victory had decisively turned 
against them. Masses upon masses of new troops arrived from all 
regions. Large contingents of the national guard came to Paris from 
the outskirts and more distant towns. The regular troops who fought 
on the 25th numbered 40,000 more men than the normal garrison. 
In addition, there was the mobile guard of 20,000 to 25,000 men as 
well as national guard units from Paris and other towns. Moreover, 
there were several thousand men from the republican guard. The 
entire armed force which took the field against the insurrection on 
the 25th certainly numbered some 150,000 to 200,000 men, whereas 
the workers had at most a quarter of that strength, had less 
ammunition, no military leadership and no serviceable cannon. Yet 
they fought silently and desperately against colossal superior 
"Schluss der Sitzung der Nationalversammlung vom 25. Juni", Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 29, June 29, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第171页=====
The 25th of June 141 
strength. Masses upon masses of troops moved on the breaches in 
the barricades which the heavy guns had created; the workers met 
them without uttering a sound and fought everywhere down to the 
last man before they let a barricade fall into the hands of the 
bourgeois. On Montmartre the insurgents called out to the 
inhabitants: Either we shall be cut to pieces or we shall cut the others 
to pieces, but we will not budge. Pray God that we may win because 
otherwise we shall burn down all Montmartre. This threat, which was 
not even carried out, counts, of course, as a "despicable plan", 
whereas Cavaignac's shells and incendiary rockets "are skilful 
military measures which are admired by everyone"! 
On the morning of the 25th, the insurgents occupied the following 
positions: the Clos Saint Lazare, the suburbs of St. Antoine and du 
Temple, the Marais and the Quartier Saint Antoine. 
The Clos Saint Lazare (the former monastery precinct) is a large 
expanse of land which is partly built on and partly covered as yet 
only with houses in construction, streets merely laid out etc. The 
Northern Railway Station is situated exactly in its middle. In this 
quarter, which has many irregularly placed buildings and a lot of 
building material, the insurgents had established a mighty strong­
hold. Its centre was the Louis Philippe Hospital which was under 
construction. They had raised imposing barricades which were 
described by eyewitnesses as quite impregnable. Behind them was 
the city wall which was hemmed in and occupied by the insurgents. 
From there their fortifications ran to the rue Rochechouart, that is to 
the area of the barrières. The barrières of Montmartre were heavily 
defended and Montmartre itself was completely occupied by them. 
Forty cannon, which had been firing at them for two days, had not 
yet reduced them. 
Once again the 40 cannon bombarded these fortifications during 
the entire day. At last, at 6 in the evening, the two barricades at the 
rue Rochechouart were taken and soon thereafter the Clos Saint 
Lazare also fell. 
At 10 a.m. the mobile guard captured several houses on the 
boulevard du Temple from which the insurgents had directed their 
bullets into the ranks of the attackers. The "defenders of order" had 
advanced approximately to the boulevard des Filles du Calvaire. The 
insurgents, in the meantime, were driven further and further into 
the Faubourg du Temple. The Saint Martin Canal was seized in 
places and from here as well as from the boulevard, the broad and 
straight streets were taken under heavy artillery fire. The battle was 
unusually violent. The workers knew full well that here the core of 
their position was being attacked and they defended themselves 

=====第172页=====
142 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
furiously. They even recaptured barricades which they had earlier 
been forced to abandon. After a long batde, however, they were 
crushed by the superiority of numbers and weapons. One barricade 
after another fell. At nightfall, not only the Faubourg du Temple, 
but, by way of the boulevard and the canal, the approaches to the 
Faubourg Saint Antoine and several barricades in the faubourg had 
also been captured. 
At the Hôtel de Ville, General Duvivier made slow but steady 
progress. Moving from the direction of the quays, he made a 
flanking attack upon the barricades of the rue Saint Antoine and, at 
the same time, used heavy guns against the lie St. Louis and the 
former lie Louvier. 112 Here, too, a very bitter bätde was fought, 
details of which are lacking, however. All that is known is that at four 
o'clock the Mairie of the ninth arrondissement and the adjacent 
streets were captured, that one after another the barricades of the 
rue Saint Antoine were stormed and that the Damiette Bridge, which 
gave access to the lie Saint Louis, was taken. At nightfall, the 
insurgents here had everywhere been driven off and all access routes 
to the Place de la Bastille had been freed. 
Thus the insurgents had been driven out of all parts of the city 
with the exception of the Faubourg Saint Antoine. This was their 
strongest position. The many approaches to this faubourg, which 
had been the real focus of all Paris insurrections, were guarded with 
special skill. Slanting barricades covering each other, reinforced by 
cross-fire from the houses, represented a terrifying objective for 
an attack. Storming them would have cost an infinite number of 
lives. 
The bourgeois, or rather their mercenaries, were encamped in 
front of these fortifications. The national guard had done little that 
day. The regular troops and the mobile guard had accomplished 
most of the work. The national guard occupied the quiet and 
conquered parts of the city. 
The worst conduct was displayed by the republican guard and the 
mobile guard. The newly organised and purged republican guard 
fought the workers with great animosity and thereby won its spurs as 
the republican municipal guard.113 
The mobile guard, which was mostly recruited from the Paris 
lumpenproletariat, has already during its brief period of existence, 
thanks to good pay, transformed itself into the praetorian guard of 
whoever was in power. The organised lumpenproletariat has given 
battle to the unorganised working proletariat. It has, as was to be 
expected, placed itself at the disposal of the bourgeoisie, just 
as the lazzaroni in Naples placed themselves at the disposal of 

=====第173页=====
The 25th of June 143 
Ferdinand.3 Only those detachments of the mobile guard that 
consisted of real workers changed sides. 
But in what a contemptible light the entire present state of affairs 
in Paris appears when one observes how these former beggars, 
vagabonds, rogues, gutter-snipes and small-time thieves of the 
mobile guard are being pampered, praised, rewarded and decorated 
when only in March and April every bourgeois described them as a 
ruffianly gang of robbers capable of all sorts of reprehensible acts, 
no longer to be tolerated. These "young heroes", these "children of 
Paris",  whose courage is unrivalled, who climb barricades with the 
most dashing bravery etc., are treated that way because these 
ignorant barricade fighters of February now fire just as ignorantly 
upon the working proletariat as they had formerly fired upon 
soldiers, because they let themselves be bribed to massacre their 
brothers for thirty sous a day! Honour to these corrupt vagabonds 
because they have shot down the best and most revolutionary part of 
the Parisian workers for thirty sous a day! 
The courage with which the workers have fought is truly 
marvellous. For three full days, 30,000 to 40,000 workers were able 
to hold their own against more than 80,000 soldiers and 100,000 
men of the national guard, against grape-shot, shells, incendiary 
rockets and the glorious war experiences of generals who did not 
shrink from using methods employed in Algeria! They have been 
crushed and in large part massacred. Their dead will not be 
accorded the honour that was bestowed upon the dead of July and 
February. History, however, will assign an entirely different place to 
them, the martyrs of the first decisive battle of the proletariat. 
Written by Engels on June 28, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 29, June 29, 1848 time 
See this volume, p.  25.—Ed. 
7-3447 

=====第174页=====
144 
THE JUNE REVOLUTION114 
The workers of Paris were overwhelmed by superior strength, but 
they were not  subdued.  They have been  defeated  but their enemies are 
vanquished. The momentary triumph of brute force has been 
purchased with the destruction of all the delusions and illusions of 
the February revolution, the dissolution of the entire moderate 
republican party and the division of the French nation into two 
nations, the nation of owners and the nation of workers. The 
tricolour republic now displays only one colour, the colour of the 
defeated, the colour of  blood.  It has become a red republic. 
None of the big republican figures, whether of the National or the 
Réforme, 1*5 sided with the people. In the absence of leaders and 
means other than rebellion  itself,  the people stood up to the united 
forces of the bourgeoisie and army longer than any French dynasty 
with the entire military apparatus at its disposal was ever able to 
stand up to any group of the bourgeoisie allied with the people. To 
have the people lose its last illusions and break completely with the 
past, it was necessary that the customary poetic trimmings of French 
uprisings—the enthusiastic bourgeois youth, the students of the  école 
polytechnique, the tricornes —should be on the side of the suppressors. 
The medical students had to deny the wounded plebeians the 
succour of their science. Science does not exist for the plebeian who 
has committed the heinous, unutterable crime of fighting this time 
for his own existence instead of for Louis Philippe or Monsieur 
Marrast. 
The Executive Committee,116 that last official vestige of the 
February revolution, vanished like a ghost in the face of these grave 
events. Lamartine's fireworks have turned into the incendiary 
rockets of Cavaignac. 
Fraternité, the brotherhood of antagonistic classes, one of which 
exploits the other, this fraternité which in February was proclaimed 

=====第175页=====
fcrgan  brr fttmttatk. 
JW 29. ftöla,  lorarrßag  29. 3uni t848. 
3nn( «M tâ$\ié>.  IBejktUunfitn  fâr fca* n«uWe  fiuartel,  3«H Stic „Nene  WjetafW*  Sefttrag"  erfefcrint  »on 
bi# aZeptcnbcr,  tooUt  man  falMgft  wd<^en. 
Wie ^offämrrr £<utfd>fanM tubmen -BtfttDiingen an. 
5iir Çr«irfrti* Obcrntfrmeit abonnement« iptrt 9. 0. tttcronbrt, gfr. 28, *3rM»$afft in 
mir Dié fônigliifec O6m$oft*ttmt in 9aa>en. Cur (fn^UnD tit ££. g, <$. gtotr £ Comp, 
raniglidren OneM-Memier une taé $oftbäreau ju £üiticb. 
SbontKMCittéyrci« m ftélit »imtljäbrlid) 1 Jtbfr. 15 Cgr., tn atUn übrigen Ort« ^mißen« 2 îblr. 3 *>&. Ô $f. «M«erba(b «Prni&rn« 
tim9*i»rt#4. 3*f(t«tt : ©ce MtrfjMttip 9ctä|etfc ton twrtn Sfoim t ©gr. (i $f. 
«njf^en «ffer »rt erlangen tard) öie großen SnbM&ungen t*r 3titima, bit mitejh Sntrettung. arbitra,, un© 23, ru« Notre Dame de Nazareth in D« 
SRcmgote @ftt« tu Sonoon. Sûr Belgien une JpoflartB tit 
t 3»t*laa •*•" fremiMn 3ei< 
3« 91t. 28 brr „SWeuen ftbfimftrn 3citunfl" iff am 
38- 3uni CDtoratnt* tine auptrorotntlidtt ©tilagt audge* 
tjtben un» wrfanM woroen. 
9f<M|éflf<6e  Äepablif. 
** I>ie ««rifrr Arbeitet  fhb t 
maty,  fît fait i!fi  aîd>t erleg<_. 
t>te l&egaer fiab befielt  Der  Mgrabïtit1i«>c >'tn«PÏ  » 
taira Orwalt  tft erfawft  r'' ' " *' * "" rjL-
Ctabtlbaaara  kn $tbrt«'3tr»0l«i»B,  Bit 
"7taa.f*ea Carter,  -'• ' - ^~-
l»et Statiaaea, Sermd)tMKg aler liUfdjaagra a: 
alt-repablitaaifà)ea f « Kaflbfuft ber aanirt 
3erfIiftHM  ber  fraijMf^« 
"l *- -*) bit SMUM 
i eu«,  eu iitjot 
»tbfi Xcpablir geworben. 
ftetae repub[ifaBifd)e SepatatioB,  fet ti  »ont Motional,  fri rt DOB 
T »rforme  oaf (Seite  be«  SolH ! Oba« autre g**«*- »bar  ai. 
i sHiJril  a« bu  (SwpbraBg felbft, wibrrftwb  e" " i ©elbate«ta larger,  al« „ . _ „...  t fraa}bfi|d)i 
aafrir,  mit  allem militiinfdjen apparat errfrbn, ràrr  mit bta 
»igln gtaffion bn^ »»»rgwifi« »ibrr^aBb. Iloitit  " 
UBttrbridrr fiebB.  D«  3ôfl''nl9*  6rr "*6'l' n'|j** 1 
Satxlttt rniittR  bfn  vrrwaibftni yi(*«|fra 
{«aft rrfagtn 
BBfaat ifftnfa)aft rnftnt nid>t  foi bfrt Çlfbfjn 
igbatf,  b«*  BBféglto)« ¥(Tbrt4«  ' ** 
t 6a>aBjf  ju fö)[agoi t fit Son 
f biûppf pbft  fur fterra SRarraft. 
X>tr Itftt pftijifBf ÄH* ïft g(br«aT'Sew>Itti(nt , bit trefutice 
kommiffîoB  ifi »ot  bttB  «TB^  brr  ŒreiOBtfft  mt tia  »tbflbilB  |rr-
flofffn. ïaniartiiiï'l ïfii(W«9«ùi babeBfi* «noanbefl in  ' ~ 
raFrtrn Œanaigtiac" 
î« grattïRité, r »ribrrliOrti't 
t aBbm txpÏpUivt, it ötant-
tgt«,«*,tfr|te8 Slajfrn, 
S(f<tritben,  auf i*bt*  l - ibt wabrtr, 
r eourgrnftf iOnatiniTtr, BNlbrrnb  bad ^oti*  be*  Proletariat« 
rbranstf, MvH«trtf, v«niQ>)tr. 
Dir »r«bnlio>(fit B»à|rte arabe  f» taug, 
r pn>trtarifâ)c ïb»t  m Sajlaf 
«lallt »rrbfB  mu(itf,  MeMblitaiiet, »((ö)i  bit flan 
«»rfiaV DrbnuB« «lit »JBfl  br<  flrfrontw Ihtpfr« 
tçnaflifdjf DBDofihoneB* . bcaen  ,ber  3BfaH I grFroattn Itopfr« ocrlaBgttn 
_ ,-_, .r Stellt tiBrt 
îfoifirr»f(fcff«  bfB  gtBrjtinn Cpaa^ir wtrtfjob, îtgitiatifttii, 
Hwld>r  bit ïiMét Biibt flb»erfeB , fonbtrn ibren ©ajBitt «raabmt »eif bit OeteBftte, 
ibr flcgea  Ut ttfiign)a« eftatirtfa, nitttwirftlt, ràtriétM 
Rebet etaoBber fd)liMBtrrtB, »ril  ber  feeiale  t«*pf,  bei fbt«  ^w. 
terarub bilbett,  MI  tiat Inftige fciftcmj «awavea batte.  Me 
lïnrt«!  *" fVafe,  be« ffim«  Dit  ^aiiTetolativa  iî kie 
MflioV SfpelBttw,  bie abftsfeabt Neoolahm,  awil«B  bit 6teSe 
brr «brafe  bit  ©aa> grrrrttn  tjl, »ni tit Stepablif  bai boivt 
bes Uaartmträ ftfbß nttblftflc, t«brn  fie ibm bie  fa)irnnbe 
«ab eerfiedenbe  tn»  tbfû)I«flt«. 
!•' Writ 
I biBiait «ibo  ber  frauoufibta -KatipBabei> fd)rtit Savaigna .««joui 
r rrpRblifdBifrbfft {N>Brgeeifie. 
DBBfTtta ftine ftaiatrffbta,  a 
fraR)bftfq)*R »»irjrtifw 
- ng, bfRB  fie lie) bie 
ng anaeta^et. ffitbt «brr  btB  3»at! 
ufortfdKn Ste^ieran^  »at rt  «nftaab  aBb 
ir Äetbwtjioiiitfitj  b"«  flroSiaBtbigea  Rrtei-
u ta tanftRb  »m  ofnjieflrn f lafattu abbrarft« 
Per ju prtbtgtn,  bit  gfbmartccolut 
3nitrrfft gema«>t  une ti  bantie  fi 
fffiiung btr'SationalPfTfaramlung nrrtt jBflltid), ibnri 
» tbrtm riaeRen 
• KtbniarreDolnrioa 
r. <Stit  brr «r-
Hprofaïf*. (ttfban-
[agtt, jnrû(f(ufubren. « Vffaftrt  »»a  Vari4  ta »Ut e 
. , . ... 1 iVt 30ibM  im fKtotrtov 
jrrnaa«,  Die  «abera,  ami fie  «d>t bfjreifoi,  wie bo4 8»lf  ! 
awftra ïoaa, fftae al(e»ei Äeaflea ^tmfn frlbftßüt.g  j 
•crtretea. SRff.fdjt«  0e(b,  tRflliT*»* 0elb,  brr boa! 
»aitifd>ellblri r bie  Silir, Saialette aller  Hrt  »âffra  bu 
fvaberbarc tinanif tytm SerfiaBbe MtaritttlR. Veibe  Ibn] 
ber SRfaamlaaa aber fà|lcB , baf eiae iRemrïlidV ftlifl  fie vu 
bm »#lre treaat. fteiae »agi , fid) fâr bat SoU » erbebe a. 
éabalb  brr  6tnp»r wrâber  if) , brùbt  bie atafrrri  aa< ai 
8rÂb(rfiaXett  m 3RaabJB  fibrea.  C«  |BB 
t «bfoMffaa« biefer ^brafe  
beahgrr ®â>«o« »rrbùrat.  SI«  îaroà) 30B(WI fio> j« rtm  B 
- -W ibr  »m-
brr îr$iti-
trfrKrin tfbf r ürbtitrr fyatten fitfe  i"i ^rbraar gtfdjïagrB, 
Ht ttm> jjtroorfrn  ju  
®ef4aft  brr  Xatioaalt 
brnar «B0tfd>cbtR  fa nacbra, 
in bit altrn Srrbaltatfft ^aràdjiiwirffn 
aid)!,  »tit  ti fo  to*«ig  m brr  (£)r»ali 
tiirt Ring« frbt, riaer inbuftrietl«*  Si 
rafter jejaraftn  : h, i e 
brutal« ïifrt  ta tRbra  n 
ergriff ftlbft bit  Stefreacta aid)t,  bie aaf Um »obea  t 
SrrMItBiffe mMIi^  * - ~ " "' ' 
3abr prefr  f« far 
att<»ârtigra permet,  . ,._...  .. 
bit »Bot îaofpa# fltbcrign ®e|btr 
tarifer» «erÏAeft  fie 1 " " 
»rgaRifirtra SBtrffidtt« 
SWMptrfoaiBilBBB îbril Bfpaini,  »- T _  J,.._ lf. ..._ 
fit aflfböm Steplbfthaer  )• fria. ttidjt  bit fratrnrntkir X>etonr 
aad) brin Sebraar rtitbte  aa6,  ma>t  bit btitatt 8tgnJlattr iaa) béai 
15. TOfli. Sattifa), prarrifâ) Rufte eRtfcbiebea »erb<hi. Çabt it>r  Sa' 
aaiUrn  ,bte  gebiBorretieiBticB  fâr QBO)  semad)t, Pbrr  far UK? ,RiabIea:  bra mraqfenfR 
proBiforifà)  " tin \J»Rabeab*»b  t« au'Iitârif* 
©tbiagung, bafj  fit 
r VtbtaaaM,  ba^ rirerrlid>r ©a>»dr«ri atgea  Pie  3«fa»ri* rifrrte , «it 
m RMB  Vie ricutï tBr*  bra *t(i( 9tti' aatraft, arrdn)  bit 
TOajtttrdt ber SerfaatnlHag  ia Stirttanjt,  ail min fw »m ber 
îaraattf «rjembra.  Sit  fo)rrit ffitb  ! aber  bte Srbettrr , an u 
Brrbrroea, baft 9tiraiaBb aabn«  ber  „Defitatr"  ïft, al« fit 
fr(bftlEnr»tbrrfirfliBfjr|tBBteT«beB sber  bie Xrpablit.  Uab ba-
rast béait fie fra>rpfbaft  : 4< lebr bie Stepabld  1 
tm tirfe HboriRb,  brr fid) ear aa« trifftti  bat,  barf  er bie 
DtwefratfB trrrn, batf  R BB« «àbaea laffrt,  bie Kämpfe  am bie 
Staatffvra frira iabaltta«, illaferifd), »njl¥ 
«ar fd>»ad)t frigr ®emàrber fbaarn  bit graar «afnerfra.  Uit 
ftoflifiPHrn, »tl*c  ml bea  »tbiagBigtn  brr  bBrarTlid>ea 0efrD-
fdjaft felbft ber»r«rbrB,  fie mâffrn bardXdmpft,  fir ftaara aia)t 
»rapboatafirl ambra,  tit brfte ®taat«form  ift bit,  wpruibif  oc 
fellfd>aftrid)tB ®eoeBfd|e aitbt vrr»ifo}t,  «.4t  grWatrfam, alf»  aar 
(ànftlitp, alfo  aar fdmnbar arfrffrlt »trbeB.  J)it  beftr Staat«' 
fiflea,  fur 
@arbr,  bit îtnitï t Optt, r Satb (eiaea ©rnher, 
l\> tri SoUrt 
rrpabli(anif(br 
pflrgra, Zttutt  on-
ïtn fie trrbenlid)», feierliche ^eid)»|ôar »rrbra ibre 9tefte  ter 
Ifrbe beftattra,  bit cffititOe greffe »irb  Tir unfirrMid) rrflarrR,  bie 
tarapdifibe btraftioB »irfc ibntn bulbiarR oom Often bid in  m »ßfften. 
«ber bir yiebtier,  t-om  ÔRRgrr jm.fftR,  r« btr  trrfTe  «t-
fd)aubt,  »OR bra  Strjtra »rrlaffrn,  von ten  famtttn Siebe  ge-
" '• ~ - *' ~ ta, ibre Seibtr HBb Iriabtr IR 
mafrat.ftbeR greffe. 
mein (k fefbft  im Jldinpi, 9Iaebtn<ad»fH  une 
tte, je Biber  fit iljmn mbliArn ßleae rBttir. 
trN.Irtt  Bit  Vrbeiitr Riebt  far «nfiKmlidje 
t&t&pbalfn-
Her 3.M  (»»II  i«< '<1  B«««ä(  1« 9tt- M M  CtoAMn 
ZMtistttt  i* bit  Çàiibe.  Sir  fil» bra fimlliQrn 3if«a  fir 
birfr artiflfrit  fe^r  vrrbnbt«. 
(Em ÎUM M «Of iBrfrobafra,  BOB ©eilfB  brt Dr. Phil.  38. 
BOB »rBS)»BiffB r {irBIruBI, BtniBil  bie rtTCBnrrtbr Sriladr aanl 
,. «kWg.  H« *••*  «r«""«  «•" •<*'',**  »"''i.*ï!' 
rBf »«wr  (B gebra ;  »ir V«eB  M «brr fit u«fre  Mw  MiOt, 
»niglln«  "Bn ZM  birirt Cbhatalrt  «B bit  (»•*< »li*l" 
briur .. „SB(»b»BHB  ! b. t.  t»B«B»frBBfr, Br«iB(*»»lj<r,  »». 
b>r, Olb«Bb«r|jrr  BBb fr<B|»B  ! »I*B*  ail -•» u» riBc;B(lt« 
».ri ru»l..."  (B brjiBBi  bn Dr.  Pkil.  B. »« 8r»Wa»l(B, 
y<rBtntaM.  — „3*  bflb* BBfrnfrrfam  aDr Vmétr  bfr  3ntrr«g. 
niïïr bBrrbltBbirt  ; iè) b'rU ba«  @IMX  : aBf Brrfa)ùbm» SBrgrB, 
tir IIb 1BBI  îbnl »rrfo>BJ"«BB  IBBJ,'BBB  brt  rafff*« KBiffr» 
»BBtBii  (B rrtall™.  - »cStf«!™ ! En J««.lli»rB (l«»i-
f4>B «Bllrr  (Ü. »1"M1 '• f<»8).  bu (<u  laBg.r  Inl  «BB 
b« 9CB(>B  .Bf|»»«*<ll  fcb,  »*rbe«  a«A la  bitfr« 3a>ri BM 
BBfr, SitiBbr  ia îxBtdtlaab rtf*.iB<B.  - Sribil  bit »3»<aia!ra 
Bflb nibaarfra,  bit SM««rb aarrftaatB,  aBb  attt aabtni  8B(M-
«àaiiBt  bt. iBtBKt(*tB làrfci «jrbta lall i- »BBb,  (tia - -
I» »irb  f.» .BtfaVibra,  ab bat  Srafraltaai,  b. ». W î.jt la 
«(Bût, «irait  BBb  8a*,I,(  BBO)  bti aa«  Viai(a) , abtr ab 
btT Ctatfa>t »Pitbtr  (ni tBtrbta »iib,  »it aattr  bta  laialia)i(a)ta 
yailtra.  -
StMarra ! 3»r »t»»«l («gl™» tia(t»fa,  baf is «Nttt Jti«. 
ai t bit  f..a»r(a>l.4ltB »trbta gtWagta  t  „rtH; «rbt" 
air! < »rat bar*  »al  a»tb gtrMt» »trbta.  Cit  »BbllartB (baraBtrr  bit rarfi(a)tB €täiaaiO »rrbta (taftiM  t 
ltafr<a,i>|>B  aab  S)il,iir »trbtl  3tr  »Offralli*  bit  5CB(. 
(ta âbrrniflbta.  Tu  @Bb»fllbtatfditB  a. (. ».  »trbta  nil btB 
ëvMtotB fertig. 
StjrBtaltB  ! (Sort Hafgabt  ift tiBt bitl (d)»trrrt , brin bit 
gtafftB »trbta gtfa^rb »BB (ürarrälra btal(4tr Xblasfl. 
„Xbtr »trbta baaa  bit Slaffra  bié la aa<  ffitltbbalta BBrbriagta 
fbaatB  V (brt ia)  CBO>  fragra. HatrbiBg«~  ! X^talt barda  . baf 
B»4IBI  15. 3a»r»BBbtrl  bit v«((ilta,  ». t. bit  rigrallutca 
»tbaita,  bit  «labl Sat« btlagtil.a, atrulta baro) 
tiata »trrllbtTi(a)IB XtiàXfitDta.  - XailaaM «MUe 
fiab làagf) brfaBBl  ; gafli DratfiblBab »arbt baio) (tiBt @»ioat 
btwao>l:  t» Sattt aattr  brB  3titUBJ«Brrrt»BBbtalta »»trail 
(tiBt 'Konon Stailaab »Bltt Magfl CtBt(a)laBb trobtra ; tiat» 
naigta Dtar(a)lBBbt  Bal  tiat» Kaiftr  aa btr  ®»iet  ijt ta  aio>l 
gtwaajfta.  — SBtMalfa! »miltl «fld>  ja tiBtm trBftta Äampfi 
L.#^ 3br erjag«B.r.fe 
(frotte*  in (ÉRalaHb'ieib  e«, »rldje ©e^rrgabea *abea; faft 
,a lebet« üarer Chfer  \M 3br  3rmaRbeR , brr „StuarfiMtrR" 
fiebt,  brr  foaafer, èrtaftea, Vtubea^itgr, Jefljàge  «•* b*rgleia>« 
laaac »orber araaa  fe fielt,  mit  birfe fpattr fommea »er< 
bea. ffieflpbaleBl  3D» («Bt ade ©ojlai»tfeIbrr,  <if  traeB  IB 
biefem ja*te  bie  „i»tl)e Crbr"  mit ©dt  »irb getriaftwer-
bra; 3br  »iff!  «aaa Ç»eaa  3br  «B*  beffre graoa eriiKrt,  »a« 
«arr „SpHrifirn'' gefebra  Bat »or  »arjem , »r 20 3«b*™  »»» 
meOrùbt  BBO)  fribrr erjâblt babwj  »a« ia  jebem Dorfr  paf-
firei mrb  ; m brr Sa« be« «irngBiffe« blieb aabtfaaat. «afin «a<b barabrr frib  3br  ciaigrrmaftea telebrt »orben :  S 
" ' ' "  b»berfl ïbtile  be« fat 
3* »cube mid> ba|er an tf aa)  *0e tov  weRpbalifdjea Ptatnme  ! 
i« ift aid)t aBein  ti* Aampf  am nnfere greifreif  anb  @eiîltnag; 
e* ift tip  Itampf, bnra>  btB far  riBt'gr 3e>tta  bie grogt ratfdftr-
befl »irb :  Ob (jnropa  ber  Barbarei oerfalltR  *nb bie  Hage  mil 
aQen ibrea ©tàaeln bie Dbetbanb bebaUtn fotl, ober ob ba«, »a« 
is an« Efttfa)« lebt,  aab »orjag«»eife  in Seftp|alra btwif« 
ifl: ffiabrbrit  tn ©taat, Kird>e  aab  Jantilir,  asd) ia  flfiei fio> 
Ditfrr «Bfeaf  tft . DtHBfftr •^•r, 
ltfd)t SRertflr brafrlbra aio>t babe abbrarfen moDra. weil 
bolt bt« SUfrafe«  |R aufregen b fn, al«  baft »a* bir  Srraarvert-
lid)ftit  be«  tlbbruttr« abrraebmra fbnae. 
« „<ep&f«fifrr«"  ja geboren, febea »ir nul 
i anfern SraillrtoR aafjabevabre e ^trlt »rftpbâlifa)rr 8iti 
- t>.e  »rflpbal.ftbe ftfl  bat  aabtr gaita  t*,Bff. S Rb f<£<-
Perairfrln  aao) bit  brrabiflfKbr 9ta<brid)t mitgrbraa>t,  baf bit *< 
«olariM  ia arm  fomifo>ea girftenfba» ffialberf  bit beftta Ära*" 
la tvaara btfliaat. SalbctT  ift »big,  St.  ZlariblaaaX ftebt m"> 
tâglio)  aaa) bna  tffra  mit brr  «errfiHampftife  im TOaabr  »or 
brm @a)loftpertalt  aaf BBb  abnaabrlR grà|rnb itbea gBlen 
»arger. 
First page  of the  Neue Rheinische Zeitung containing 
Marx's article  "The  June  Revolution" 

=====第176页=====

=====第177页=====
The June Revolution 147 
and inscribed in large letters on the façades of Paris, on every prison 
and every barracks—this fraternité found its true, unadulterated 
and prosaic expression in civil war, civil war in its most terrible 
aspect, the war of labour against capital. This brotherhood blazed in 
front of all the windows of Paris on the evening of June 25, when the 
Paris of the bourgeoisie held illuminations while the Paris of the 
proletariat was burning, bleeding, groaning in the throes of 
death. 
This brotherhood lasted only as long as there was a fraternity of 
interests between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. Pedants 
sticking to the old revolutionary tradition of 1793; socialist 
doctrinaires who begged alms for the people from the bourgeoisie 
and who were allowed to deliver lengthy sermons and compromise 
themselves so long as the proletarian lion had to be lulled to sleep; 
republicans who wanted to keep the old bourgeois order in  toto,  but 
without the crowned head; members of the dynastic opposition117 
on whom chance imposed the task of bringing about the downfall of 
a dynasty instead of a change of government; legitimists,118 who did 
not want to cast off their livery but merely to change its style—these 
were the allies with whom the people had fought their February 
revolution. What the people instinctively hated in Louis Philippe was 
not Louis Philippe  himself,  but the crowned rule of a class, capital on 
the throne. But magnanimous as always, the people thought they 
had destroyed their enemy when they had overthrown the enemy of 
their enemies, their common enemy. 
The February revolution was the nice revolution, the revolution of 
universal sympathies, because the contradictions which erupted in it 
against the monarchy were still undeveloped and peacefully dormant, 
because the social struggle which formed their background had only 
achieved a nebulous existence, an existence in phrases, in words. The 
June revolution is the ugly revolution, the nastv revolution, because the 
phrases have given place to the real thing, because the republic has 
bared the head of the monster by knocking off the crown which 
shielded and concealed it. 
Order! was Guizot's war-cry. Order! shouted Sébastiani, the 
Guizotist, when Warsaw became Russian. Order! shouts Cavaignac, 
the brutal echo of the French National Assembly and of the 
republican bourgeoisie. 
Order! thundered his grape-shot as it tore into the body of the 
proletariat. 
None of the numerous revolutions of the French bourgeoisie since 
1789 assailed the existing order, for they retained the class rule, the 
slavery of the workers, the  bourgeois  order, even though the political 

=====第178页=====
148 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
form of this rule and this slavery changed frequently. The June 
uprising did assail this order. Woe to the June uprising! 
Under the Provisional Government it was considered good form 
and, moreover, a necessity to preach to the magnanimous work­
ers—who, as a thousand official posters proclaimed, "placed three 
months of hardship at  the disposal  of the republic"—it was both politic and 
a sign of enthusiasm to preach to the workers that the February 
revolution had been carried out in their own interests and that the 
principal issue of the February revolution was the interests of the 
workers. With the opening of the National Assembly the speeches 
became more prosaic. Now it was only a matter of leading labour  back 
to its old conditions, as Minister Trélat said. Thus the workers fought 
in February in order to be engulfed in an industrial crisis. 
It is the business of the National Assembly to undo the work of 
February, at least as far as the workers are concerned, and to fling 
them back to their old conditions. But even this was not done, 
because it is not within the power of any assembly any more than of a 
king to tell a universal industrial crisis—advance up to  this point and no 
further. In its crude eagerness to end the embarrassment of the 
February phraseology, the National Assembly did not even take the 
measures that were possible on the basis of the old conditions. Parisian 
workers aged 17 to 25 were either pressed into the army or thrown 
onto the street; those from other parts were ordered out of Paris to 
Sologne without even receiving the money normally due to them 
under such an order; adult Parisians could for the time being secure 
a pittance in workshops organised on military lines on condition that 
they did not attend any public meetings, in other words on condition 
that they ceased to be republicans. Neither the sentimental rhetoric 
which followed the February events nor the brutal legislation after 
May 15 119 achieved their purpose. A real, practical decision had to be 
taken. For whom did you make the February revolution, you 
rascals—for  yourselves  or for  us?  The bourgeoisie put this question in 
such a way that it had to be answered in June with grape-shot and 
barricades. 
The entire National Assembly is nevertheless struck with paralysis, 
as one representative of the people2 put it on June 25. Its members 
are stunned when question and answer make the streets of Paris flow 
with blood; some are stunned because their illusions are lost in the 
smoke of gunpowder, others because they cannot understand how 
the people dare stand up on their own for their own vital interests. 
Russian money, British money, the Bonapartist eagle, the lily, amulets of 
Ducoux.— Ed. 

=====第179页=====
The June Revolution 149 
all kinds—this is where they sought an explanation of this strange 
event. Both parts of the Assembly feel however that a vast gulf sepa­
rates them from the people. None of them dares stand up for the 
people. 
As soon as the stupor has passed frenzy breaks out. The majority 
quite rightly greets with catcalls those pitiful Utopians and hypocrites 
guilty of the anachronism of still using the term fraternité, 
brotherhood. The question at issue was precisely that of doing away 
with this term and with the illusions arising from its ambiguity. When 
the legitimist Larochejaquelein, the chivalrous dreamer, protested 
against the infamy of those who cried "Vae victis! Woe to the 
vanquished!" the majority of the deputies broke into a St. Vitus's 
dance as if stung by a tarantula. They shouted  woe!  to the workers in 
order to hide the fact that it is precisely they themselves who are the 
"vanquished". Either the Assembly must perish now, or the republic. 
And that is why it frantically yells—long live the republic! 
Is the deep chasm which has opened at our feet to be allowed to 
mislead the democrats, to make us believe that the struggle over the 
form of the state is meaningless, illusory and futile? 
Only weak, cowardly minds can pose such a question. Collisions 
proceeding from the very conditions of bourgeois society must be 
fought out to the end, they cannot be conjured out of existence. The 
best form of state is that in which the social contradictions are not 
blurred, not arbitrarily—that is merely artificially, and therefore 
only seemingly—kept down. The best form of state is that in which 
these contradictions reach a stage of open struggle in the course of 
which they are resolved. 
We may be asked, do we not find a tear, a sigh, a word for the 
victims of the people's wrath, for the national guard, the mobile 
guard, the republican guard and the troops of the line? 
The state will care for their widows and orphans, decrees extolling 
them will be issued, their remains will be carried to the grave in 
solemn procession, the official press will declare them immortal, 
European reaction in the East and the West will pay homage to them. 
But the plebeians are tormented by hunger, abused by the press, 
forsaken by the doctors, called thieves, incendiaries and galley-slaves 
by the respectabilities; their wives and children are plunged into still 
greater misery and the best of those who have survived are sent 
overseas. It is the right and the privilege of  the democratic press  to place 
laurels on their clouded threatening brow. 
Written by Marx on June 28, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 29, June 29, 1848 

=====第180页=====
150 
THE KÖLNISCHE ZEITUNG 
ON THE JUNE REVOLUTION 
Cologne, June 30. If one reads the following passages from the 
London Telegraph and compares them to the babble about the Paris 
June revolution that emanates from the German liberals, especially 
Herr Brüggemann, Herr Dumont and Herr Wolfers, one will have 
to admit that the English bourgeois, apart from many other 
distinctions, surpass the German philistines in at least this regard: 
although they judge great events from a bourgeois point of view, 
they judge them as men and not in the manner of gutter-snipes. 
The Telegraph comments in its issue No. 122: 
"... And here we may be expected to say something of the origin and consequence 
of this terrible bloodshed. 
"At once it proclaims itself a complete battle between  classes." 
(A kingdom for such a thought—is the mental exclamation of the 
august Kölnische Zeitung and its "Wolfers".) 
"It is an insurrection of the workmen against the government they believed 
themselves to have created, and the classes who now support it. How the quarrel 
immediately originated is less easy to explain, than to detect its lasting and ever 
present causes. The revolution of  February  was chiefly effected by the working  classes  [...] 
and it was proclaimed to have  been  made for their advantage. It was a social, more than a 
political revolution. The masses of discontented workmen have not all of a sudden 
sprung, endowed with all the capabilities of soldiers, into existence; nor are their 
distress and their discontent the offspring merely of the events of the last four 
months. On Monday only we quoted the statement, perhaps exaggerated, of 
M. Leroux, which was made, however, in the National Assembly, and not denied [...] 
that there are in France 8,000,000 beggars and 4,000,000 workmen who have no 
secure wages. He spoke generally, and meant expressly to describe the time  before  the 
revolution; for his complaint was, that since the revolution nothing had been done to 
remedy that great disease. The theories of Socialism and Communism which had 
become rife in France, and now exercise such influence over the public mind, grew 

=====第181页=====
The Kölnische Zeitung  on the  June Revolution  151 
from  the  terribly depressed condition  of the  bulk  of the  population under  the 
government  of Louis Philippe [...].  The  main fact  to be  kept  in view  is the distressed 
condition  of the multitude  as the great living cause  of the revolution.  [...] 
... "The  National Assembly  [•••]  speedily voted  to deprive  the  workmen  of the 
advantages which the politicians  of the revolution  [...] had  so hastily and unthinkingly 
conferred  on  them.  In a  social,  if not  political, point  of view,  a great reaction  was 
apparent, and authority was invoked, backed  by a  large part  of France,  to put down the 
men who had  given that authority existence  [....]  That they should from such 
proceedings—first flattered  and fed,  then divided  and  threatened with starvation, 
drafted  off to the  country, where  all the  labour connections were destroyed,  and a 
deliberate plan adopted  to annihilate their power—that they should have been 
irritated can surprise  no man; that after accomplishing one successful revolution they 
should have spontaneously thought they could bring about another, is not astonishing, 
and their chances  of success against  the  armed force  of the  government, from  the 
great length  of time they have already resisted, seem greater than most people were 
prepared  to expect. According  to this view, which  is confirmed  by no  political leaders 
having been detected amongst the people, and by the fact that the ouvriers ordered  to 
quit Paris  [...]  proceeded  no further than just outside the banners and then returned, 
the insurrection  is the consequence  of a  general feeling  of indignation amongst the working 
classes  and not  of any political  agency.  They fancy their interest is again betrayed by their 
own government,  and  they have taken  up arms  now as  they took them  up in  February  to 
fight against  the  terrible distress  of which they have  so long been  the  victims. 
"The present battle, then, [...]a  is but a  continuation  of the battle which took place  in 
February  [....] The  contest  is only a continuation  of that struggle which pervades all Europe, 
more or  less, for a fairer distribution  of the annual produce  of labour.  Put down  in Paris now 
it probably will be;  for the  force which  the  new authority  has  inherited from the old 
authority that  it displaced,  is apparently overwhelming.  But,  however successfully  put 
down,  it will  be again  and  again renewed, till government either makes  a fairer 
distribution  of the  produce  of labour,  or,  finding that impossible, retreats from  the 
awful responsibility  of attempting  it and  leaves  it to be  decided  by the [...]  open 
competition  of the  market.... The  real  fight  is for the means of  comfortable  subsistence;  the 
middle classes have been deprived  of them  by the  politicians who undertook  to guide 
the revolution; they have been savaged as well as the workmen;  the strongest passions  of 
both are now roused into mischievous activity; and, forgetting their  brotherhood,  they  make 
brutal war on each other.  The  ignorant  if not  ill-meaning government, which seems  to 
have no conception  of its  duty  in this extraordinary crisis,  [...] has  first hurled  the 
workmen  on the  middle classes,  and is now  helping the middle  classes  to exterminate the 
deceived, deluded,  and  indignant workmen.  The  principle  of the Revolution, the  resolve  to 
fight against  distress  and oppression,  must not  be suffered  to bear the blame  of this great 
calamity,  it must  be thrown rather  on those ignorant meddling politicians who have so 
aggravated  all the  disasters bequeathed  to them  by Louis Philippe." 
Thus writes  a London newspaper  of the bourgeoisie about the June 
revolution,  a newspaper which represents  the  principles  of Cobden, 
Bright etc.  and  which after  the  Times  and the  Northern Star, the two 
despots  of the English press, according to the Manchester Guardian,  is 
the most widely read paper  in England. 
a Modified quotation.  The  Telegraph has: "The battle, then, that  was  raging  on 
Friday, Saturday  and  SimHav  " 

=====第182页=====
152 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Let us compare No. 181 of the Kölnische Zeitungl This remarkable 
newspaper transforms the battle  between  two classes  into a  battle between 
respectable  people and rogues! What a worthy paper! As if the two 
classes did not hurl these epithets at each other. It is the same 
newspaper which at first, when rumours about the June uprising 
began to circulate, admitted its total ignorance as to the nature of the 
insurrection, and then had to get the information from Paris that an 
important social revolution was taking place whose scope would not be 
circumscribed by one defeat. Finally, strengthened by  one defeat of the 
workers, it sees in the insurrection nothing but a battle between "the 
enormous majority" and a "wild horde" of "cannibals, robbers and 
murderers". 
What was the Roman slave war? A war  between respectable people  and 
cannibals! Herr Wolfers will write Roman history and Herr Dumont 
and Herr Brüggemann will enlighten the workers, the "unfortunate 
ones",  as to their real rights and duties and 
"initiate them into  the science  which leads to order and which /orms the true citizen"! 
Long live the science of Dumont-Brüggemann-Wolfers, the secret 
science! To cite one example of this  secret  science:  This praiseworthy 
triumvirate has told its gullible readers throughout two issues that 
General Cavaignac wants to mine the district of St. Antoine. The district 
of St. Antoine happens to be somewhat larger than the golden city of 
Cologne. The scientific triumvirate, however, that we recommend to 
the German National Assembly for ruling Germany, the triumvirate 
Dumont-Brüggemann-Wolfers, have overcome this difficulty; they 
know how to blow up the city of Cologne with one mine! Their 
notions of the mine which blows up the Faubourg St. Antoine 
correspond to the notion of the subterranean forces which 
undermine modern society, caused the Paris earthquake in June and 
spat up bloody lava from its revolutionary crater. 
But dearest triumvirate! Great Dumont-Brüggemann-Wolfers, great 
personalities proclaimed by the world of advertisement! Cavaignacs 
of the world of advertisement! We modestly bowed our heads, bowed 
them before the greatest historical crisis that has ever broken out: 
the class war between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. We have not 
created the fact, we have stated it. We have stated that one of the 
classes is the  conquered one as  Cavaignac himself say s.ï2° On the grave of 
the conquered, we have cried "woeT to the victors and even Cavaignac 
shrinks from his historical responsibility! And the National Assembly 
charges with cowardice every member who does not openly accept 
the terrible historical responsibility. Did we open up the Sibylline 
Book for the Germans so that they should burn it? Do we ask the 

=====第183页=====
The Kölnische Zeitung on the June Revolution 153 
Germans to become Englishmen when we describe the batde 
between the Chartists and the English bourgeoisie? 
Germany, however, ungrateful Germany, you may know the 
Kölnische Zeitung and its advertisements but you do not know your 
greatest men, your  Wolfers,  your Brüggemann and your Dumontl How 
much sweat of the brain, sweat of the face and sweat of the blood has 
been shed in the battle between  classes,  in the battle between free men 
and slaves, patricians and plebeians, feudal lords and serfs, capitalists 
and workers! But only  because  there  was.  no Kölnische Zeitung. But, most 
courageous triumvirate, if modern society produces "criminals", 
"cannibals", "murderers" and "plunderers" in such masses and with 
such energy that their insurrection shakes the basis of official society, 
what kind of society is this? What anarchy in alphabetical order! And 
you believe that you can heal the schism, that you have uplifted the 
actors and spectators of this terrible drama by dragging them down 
into a servant tragedy à la Kotzebue. 
Among the national guardsmen of the faubourgs St. Antoine, St. 
Jacques and St. Marceau only 50 could be found who followed the call 
of the bourgeois bugle. Thus reports the Paris Moniteur, the official 
newspaper, the paper of Louis XVI, Robespierre, Louis Philippe and 
Marrast-Cavaignacl There is nothing simpler for the science which 
"turns"  a man into a true citizenl The three largest faubourgs of 
Paris,  the three most industrialised faubourgs of Paris, whose 
patterns made the muslins of Dacca and the velvet of Spitalfields pale 
and fade, are supposed to be inhabited by "cannibals", "plunder­
ers",  "robbers" and "criminals". So says Wolfersl 
And Wolfers is an honourable man!3 He has bestowed honours 
upon the rogues by having them fight greater battles, produce 
greater works of art and accomplish more heroic deeds than those of 
Charles X, Louis Philippe, Napoleon and the spinners of Dacca and 
Spitalfields. 
We were just now mentioning the London Telegraph. Yesterday our 
readers heard Emit Girardin. The working class, he says, after 
allowing its debtor, the February revolution, to delay paying off its 
debts for a month, the working class, the creditor, knocked at the 
debtor's house with the musket, the barricade and its own body! But 
Emil Girardinl Who is he? No anarchist! Heaven forbid! He is, 
however, a republican of the coming day, a republican of the morrow 
(républicain du lendemain) whereas the Kölnische Zeitung, the Wolf erses, 
Dumonts and Brüggemanns are all republicans of the day before 
yesterday, republicans before the republic and republicans of  the eve (répub-
a Shakespeare, Julius Caesar, Act III, Scene  2.—Ed. 

=====第184页=====
154 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
licains de la veille)\ Can Emil Girardin give evidence by the side 
of Dumont? 
Admire the patriotism of the Cologne newspaper as it gloats with 
malicious pleasure over the deportations and hangings. It only wants to 
prove to the world, to the incredulous, stone-blind German world, 
that the republic is more powerful than the monarchy and that the 
republican National Assembly with Cavaignac and Marrast was able 
to carry out what the constitutional Chamber of Deputies with 
Thiers and Bugeaud was unable to do! Vive la république! Long live 
the republic! exclaims the Spartan Cologne paper at the sight of 
Paris,  bleeding, moaning and burning. The crypto-republican! That 
is why this paper is suspected of being  cowardly  and unprincipled by a 
Gewinns, by an Augsburgpaper al The immaculate one! The Charlotte 
Corday of Cologne! 
Please notice that not one Paris  newspaper,  not the Moniteur, not the 
Débats and not the National, speaks of "cannibals'", "plunderers'", 
"robbers" and "murderers". There is only one newspaper, the paper of 
Thiers, the man whose immorality was condemned by  Jacobus  Venedey 
in the Kölnische Zeitung, the man against whom the Cologne paper 
screamed at the top of its voice: 
They are not going to get it, 
Our own free German Rhine, 
it is Thiers' paper, the Constitutionnel, from which the Belgian 
Indépendance and Rhenish science embodied in Dumont, Brüggemann 
and Wolfers derive their knowledge! 
Examine now in a critical vein these scandalous anecdotes with 
which the Kölnische Zeitung brands the oppressed, the same 
newspaper which at the outbreak of fighting declared its complete 
ignorance of the nature of the struggle, which during the battle 
declared it to be an "important social revolution", and which after the 
battle calls it a boxing match between the police and the robbers. 
They lootedl But what did they loot? Weapons, ammunition, surgical 
dressings  and the most  necessary  items of  food.  The robbers wrote on the 
window shutters: "Mort aux voleurs!" Death to the  robbers! 
They "murdered like cannibals". The cannibals did not willingly 
permit the national guardsmen, who advanced upon the barricades 
behind the regular troops, to smash  the skulls of their wounded, to shoot 
their overwhelmed comrades and to stab their women. The cannibals 
who exterminated during a war of extermination as a French bourgeois 
Allgemeine Zeitung. — Ed. 
Nikolaus Becker, "Der deutsche Rhein". —Ed. 

=====第185页=====
The Kölnische Zeitung on the June Revolution 155 
newspaper writes! They set on fire? Yet the sole incendiary torch 
which they hurled against the legitimate incendiary rockets of 
Cavaignac in the 8th arrondissement was a poetic, imaginary torch, as 
the Moniteur confirms. 
"Some," says Wolfers, "held up high the programme of Barbes, Blanqui and 
Sobrier, the others hailed Napoleon and Henry V." 
The chaste Cologne newspaper, which has not been pregnant 
either with the descendants of Napoleon or with Blanqui, declared 
already on the second day of the insurrection that the "fight was 
waged in the name of the red republic". What then is she babbling 
about  pretenders?  She is, however, as has already been intimated, an 
obdurate crypto-republican, a female Robespierre that scents pre­
tenders everywhere, and these pretenders cause her morality to 
shudder. 
"Almost all of them had money and several of them had .considerable sums." 
There were from 30,000 to 40,000 workers and "almost all of 
them had money" during this time of want and business slump! The 
money was probably so scarce because the workers had hidden it\ 
The Paris Moniteur has published with the greatest conscientious­
ness all cases where money was found on the insurgents. There were 
at most twenty such cases. Different newspapers and correspondents 
have repeated these cases and cited different sums. The Kölnische 
Zeitung, with its tried critical tact, which takes all these different 
reports of the twenty cases for so many different cases and then still 
adds all the cases circulated by rumours, might at best perhaps arrive 
at 200 cases. And that entitles the paper to state that almost all the 
30,000 to 40,000 workers had money! All that has been established is 
that legitimist, Bonapartist and perhaps Philippist emissaries pro­
vided with money mingled or intended to mingle with the barricade 
fighters. M. Payer, that most conservative member of the National 
Assembly, who spent 12 hours as a prisoner among the insurgents, 
declares: 
"Most of them were workers who had been driven to desperation  by four months of misery. 
They said: Better to die of a bullet than of starvation!" 
"Many, very many of the dead," affirms Wolfers, "bore the ominous mark with 
which society stigmatises crime." 
That is one of the base lies, shameful calumnies and infamies 
which Lamennais, the foe of the insurgents and the man of the 
National, has stigmatised in his Peuple constituant —and which the 
always chivalrous legitimist Larochejaquelain has stigmatised in the 
National Assembly. The entire lie is based upon the quite 

=====第186页=====
156 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
unconfirmed assertion of one press-agency, which has not been 
corroborated  by the Moniteur, that eleven  corpses  had been discovered 
which were marked with the letters T. F. a And in which revolution 
have the eleven corpses not been found? And which revolution will 
not brand with these letters eleven times 100? 
Let us note that the newspapers, proclamations and illuminations 
of the victors testify that they starved out, drove to desperation, 
bayonetted, fusilladed, buried alive and deported the vanquished 
and desecrated their corpses. And against the conquered there are 
only anecdotes,  and only anecdotes that are related by the Constitution­
nel, reprinted by the Indépendance and translated into German by the 
Kölnische. There is no greater insult to truth than to try to prove it by 
an anecdote, says—Hegel}" 
The women are sitting in front of the houses of Paris and scraping 
lint for dressings for the wounded, even the wounded insurgents. 
The editors of the Kölnische Zeitung pour sulphuric acid into their 
wounds. 
They have denounced us to the bourgeois police. We recommend 
in return that the workers, the "unfortunate ones", let themselves "be 
enlightened as to their real rights and duties and initiated into the 
science  which leads to order and which forms the true citizen", by the 
immortal triumvirate Dumont-Brüggemann-Wolfers. 
Written by Engels on June 30," 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 31, July 1, 1848 time 
Convict brand (travaux forcés:  forced labour).— Ed. 
G. W. F. Hegel, Phänomenologie des  Geistes.  VI. "Der Geist", § Die Bildung und 
ihr Reich der Wirklichkeit. — Ed. 

=====第187页=====
157 
THE JUNE REVOLUTION121 
[THE COURSE OF THE PARIS UPRISING] 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 31, July 1, 1848] 
Gradually we gain a more comprehensive view of the June 
revolution; fuller reports arrive, it becomes possible to distinguish 
facts from either hearsay or lies, and the nature of the uprising 
stands out with increasing clarity. The more one succeeds in 
grasping the interconnection of the events of the four days in June, 
the more is one astonished by the vast magnitude of the uprising, the 
heroic courage, the rapidly improvised organisation and the 
unanimity of the insurgents. 
The workers' plan of action, which Kersausie, a friend of Raspail 
and a former officer, is said to have drawn up, was as follows: 
The insurgents, moving in four columns, advanced concentrically 
towards the Hôtel de Ville. 
The first column, whose base of operations was the suburbs of 
Montmartre, La Chapelle and La Villette, advanced southwards 
from the barrières of Poissonnière, Rochechouart, St. Denis and La 
Villette, occupied the boulevards and approached the Hôtel de Ville 
through the rues Montorgueil, St. Denis and St. Martin. 
The second column, whose base was the faubourgs du Temple and 
St. Antoine, which are inhabited almost entirely by workers and 
protected by the St. Martin Canal, advanced towards the same centre 
through the rues du Temple and St. Antoine and along the quays of 
the northern bank of the Seine as well as through all other streets 
running in the same direction in this part of the city. 
The third column based on the Faubourg St. Marceau advanced 
towards the Ile de la Cité through the rue St. Victor and the quays of 
the southern bank of the Seine. 
The fourth column, based on the Faubourg St. Jacques and the 
vicinity of the Medical School, advanced along the rue Saint Jacques 

=====第188页=====
158 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
also to the Cité. There the two columns joined, crossed to the right 
bank of the Seine and enveloped the Hôtel de Ville from the rear 
and flank. 
Thus the plan, quite correctly, was based on the districts in which 
only workers lived. These districts form a semicircular belt, which 
surrounds the entire eastern half of Paris, widening out towards the 
east. First of all the eastern part of Paris was to be cleared of enemies, 
and then it was intended to move along both banks of the Seine 
towards the west and its centres, the Tuileries and the National 
Assembly. 
These columns were to be supported by numerous flying squads 
which, operating independently alongside and between the columns, 
were to build barricades, occupy the smaller streets and be 
responsible for maintaining communications. 
The operational bases were strongly fortified and skilfully 
transformed into formidable fortresses, e.g. the Clos St. Lazare, the 
Faubourg and Quartier St. Antoine and the Faubourg St. Jacques, in 
case it should become necessary to retreat. 
If there was any flaw in this plan it was that in the beginning of the 
operations the western part of Paris was completely overlooked. 
Here there are several districts eminently suitable for armed action 
on both sides of the rue St. Honoré near the Halles and the Palais 
National, which have very narrow, winding streets inhabited mainly 
by workers. It was important to set up a fifth centre of the 
insurrection there, thus cutting off the Hôtel de Ville and at the same 
time holding up a considerable number of troops at this projecting 
strongpoint. The success of the uprising depended on the insurgents 
reaching the centre of Paris as quickly as possible and seizing the 
Hôtel de Ville. We cannot know what prevented Kersausie from 
organising insurgent action in this district. But it is a fact that no 
uprising was ever successful which did not at the outset succeed in 
seizing the centre of Paris adjoining the Tuileries. It suffices to 
mention the uprising which took place during General Lamarque's 
funeral 122 when the insurgents likewise got as far as the rue 
Montorgueil and were then driven back. 
The insurgents advanced in accordance with their plan. They 
immediately began to separate their territory, the Paris of the 
workers, from the Paris of the bourgeoisie, by two main fortifica­
tions—the barricades at the Porte Saint Denis and those of the Cité. 
They were dislodged from the former, but were able to hold the 
latter. June 23, the first day, was merely a prelude. The plan of the 
insurgents already began to emerge clearly (and the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung grasped it correctly at the outset, see No. 26, special 

=====第189页=====
The June Revolution 159 
supplement3), especially after the first skirmishes between the 
advanced guards which took place in the morning. The boulevard 
St. Martin, which crosses the line of operation of the first column, 
became the scene of fierce fighting, which, partly due to the nature 
of the terrain, ended with a victory for the forces of "order". 
The approaches to the Cité were blocked on the right by a flying 
squad, which entrenched itself in the rue Planche-Mibray; on the left 
by the third and fourth columns, which occupied and fortified the 
three southern bridges of the Cité. Here too a very fierce battle 
raged. The forces of "order" succeeded in taking the St. Michel 
Bridge and advancing to the rue St. Jacques. They felt sure that by 
the evening the revolt would be suppressed. 
The plan of the forces of "order" stood out even more clearly than 
that of the insurgents. To begin with, their plan was merely to crush 
the insurrection with all available means. They announced their 
design to the insurgents with cannon-ball and grape-shot. 
But the Government believed it was dealing with an uncouth gang 
of common rioters acting without any plan. After clearing the main 
streets by the evening, the Government declared that the revolt was 
quelled, and the stationing of troops in the conquered districts was 
undertaken in an exceedingly negligent manner. 
The insurgents made excellent use of this negligence by launching 
the great battle which followed the skirmishes of June 23. It is quite 
remarkable how quickly the workers mastered the plan of campaign, 
how well-concerted their actions were and how skilfully they used the 
difficult terrain. This would be quite inexplicable if in the national 
workshops the workers had not already been to a certain extent 
organised on military lines and divided into companies, so that they 
only needed to apply their industrial organisation to their military 
enterprise in order to constitute immediately a fully organised 
army. 
On the morning of the 24th they had not only completely regained 
the ground they had lost, but even added new terrain to it. True, the 
line of boulevards up to the boulevard du Temple remained in the 
hands of the troops, thus cutting off the first column from the 
centre, but on the other hand the second column pushed forward 
from the Quartier St. Antoine until it almost surrounded the Hôtel 
de Ville. It established its headquarters in the church of St. Gervais, 
within 300 paces of the Hôtel de Ville. It captured the St. Merri 
monastery and the adjoining streets and advanced far beyond the 
Hôtel de Ville, so that together with the columns in the Cité it almost 
a See this volume, pp. 124-27.—Ed. 

=====第190页=====
160 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
completely encircled the Hôtel de Ville. Only one way of approach, 
the quays of the right bank, remained open. In the south the 
Faubourg St. Jacques was completely reoccupied, communication 
with the Cité was restored, reinforcements were sent there, and 
preparations were made for crossing to the right bank. 
There was no time to be lost. The Hôtel de Ville, the revolutionary 
centre of Paris, was threatened and was bound to fall unless the most 
resolute measures were taken. 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 32, July 2, 1848] 
Cavaignac was appointed dictator by the terrified National 
Assembly. Accustomed as he was in Algeria to "energetic" action, he 
did not have to be told what to do. 
Ten battalions promptly moved towards the Hôtel de Ville along 
the wide Quai de l'École. They cut off the insurgents in the Cité from 
the right bank, secured the safety of the Hôtel de Ville and even 
made it possible to attack the barricades surrounding it. 
The rue Planche-Mibray, and its continuation, the rue Saint 
Martin, were cleared and kept permanently clear by cavalry. The 
Notre-Dame Bridge, which lies opposite and leads to the Cité, was 
swept by heavy guns, and then Cavaignac advanced directly on the 
Cité in order to take "energetic" measures there. The "Belle 
Jardinière", the main strongpoint of the insurgents, was first 
shattered by cannon and then set on fire by rockets. The rue de la 
Cité was also seized with the aid of gun-fire; three bridges leading to 
the left bank were stormed and the insurgents on the left bank were 
pressed back. Meanwhile, the 14 battalions deployed on the Place de 
Grève and the quays freed the besieged Hôtel de Ville and reduced 
the church of Saint Gervais from a headquarters to a lost outpost of 
the insurgents. 
The rue St. Jacques was not only bombarded from the Cité but also 
attacked in the flank from the left bank. General Damesme broke 
through along the Luxembourg to the Sorbonne, seized the Quartier 
Latin and sent his columns against the Panthéon. The square in front 
of the Panthéon had been transformed into a formidable stronghold. 
The forces of "order" still faced this unassailable bulwark long after 
they had taken the rue St. Jacques. Gun-fire and bayonet attacks 
were of no avail until finally exhaustion, lack of ammunition and the 
threat of the bourgeois to set the place on fire compelled the 1,500 
workers, who were completely hemmed in, to surrender. At about 
the same time, the Place Maubert fell into the hands of the forces of 
"order" after a long and courageous resistance, and the insurgents, 

=====第191页=====
The June Revolution 161 
deprived of their strongest positions, were forced to abandon the 
entire left bank of the Seine. 
Meanwhile the troops and national guards stationed on the 
boulevards of the right bank of the Seine were likewise put into 
action in two directions. Lamoricière, who commanded them, had 
the streets of the faubourgs St. Denis and St. Martin, the boulevard 
du Temple and part of the rue du Temple cleared by heavy artillery 
and swift infantry attacks. By the evening he could boast of brilliant 
successes. He had cut off and partly surrounded the first column in 
the Clos St. Lazare; he had pushed back the second column and by 
advancing along the boulevards had thrust a wedge into it. 
How did Cavaignac win these advantages? 
First, by the vastly superior force he was able to use against the 
insurgents. On the 24th he had at his disposal not only the 
20,000-strong Paris garrison, the 20,000 to 25,000 men of the mobile 
guard and the 60,000 to 80,000 available men of the national guard, 
but also the national guard from the whole environs of Paris and 
from many of the more distant towns (20,000 to 30,000 men) and in 
addition 20,000 to 30,000 soldiers who were called in with the utmost 
dispatch from the neighbouring garrisons. Even on the morning of 
the 24th he had well over 100,000 men at his disposal, and by the 
evening their numbers had increased by  half.  The insurgents, on the 
other hand, numbered 40,000 to 50,000 men at most! 
Secondly, by the brutal means he used. Until then cannon had 
been fired in the streets of Paris only once, i.e. in Vendémiaire 1795, 
when Napoleon dispersed the insurgents in the rue Saint Honoré 
with grape-shot. 123 But no artillery, let alone shells and incendiary 
rockets, was ever used against barricades and against houses. The 
people were unprepared for this, they were unable to defend 
themselves, for the only counteraction they could take was to set fire 
to houses, but this was repugnant to their sense of what was right. Up 
till then the people had no idea that this brand of Algerian warfare 
could be used right in the centre of Paris. They therefore retreated, 
and their first retreat spelt their defeat. 
On the 25th Cavaignac attacked with even larger forces. The 
insurgents were confined to a single district, the faubourgs Saint 
Antoine and du Temple; in addition they still held two outposts, the 
Clos St. Lazare and a part of the St. Antoine district up to the 
Damiette Bridge. 
Cavatgnac, who had received further reinforcements of 20,000 to 
30,000 men as well as a substantial park of artillery, first attacked the 
isolated outposts of the insurgents, especially the Clos St. Lazare. 
The insurgents were entrenched here as in a fortress. After a 

=====第192页=====
162 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
12-hour bombardment with cannon and mortar shells, Lamoricière 
finally succeeded in dislodging the insurgents and occupying the 
Clos St. Lazare, but not until he had mounted a flank attack from the 
rues Rochechouart and La Poissonnière, and had demolished the 
barricades by bombarding them with 40 guns on the first day and 
with an even greater number on the next. 
Another part of his column penetrated through the Faubourg 
Saint Martin into the Faubourg du Temple, but was not very 
successful. A third section moved along the boulevards towards the 
Bastille, but it did not get very far either, because a number of the 
most formidable barricades there resisted for a long time and only 
succumbed after a fierce cannonade. The houses here suffered 
appalling destruction. 
Duvivier's column advancing from the Hôtel de Ville pressed the 
insurgents back still further with the aid of incessant artillery fire. 
The church of St. Gervais was captured, a long stretch of the rue 
Saint Antoine well beyond the Hôtel de Ville was cleared, and several 
columns moving along the quay and streets running parallel to it 
seized the Damiette Bridge, which connected the insurgents of the 
St. Antoine district with those of the St. Louis and Cité islands. The 
Saint Antoine district was outflanked and the insurgents had no 
choice but to fall back into the faubourg, which they did in fierce 
combat with a column advancing along the quays to the mouth of the 
St. Martin Canal and thence along the boulevard Bourdon skirting 
the canal. Several insurgents who were cut off were massacred, 
hardly any were taken prisoner. 
The St. Antoine district and the Place de la Bastille were seized in 
this operation. Lamoricière's column managed to occupy the whole 
boulevard Beaumarchais by the evening and join up with Duvivier's 
troops on the Place de la Bastille. 
The capture of the Damiette Bridge enabled Duvivier to dislodge 
the insurgents from the lie St. Louis and the former lie Louvier. He 
did this with a commendable display of Algerian barbarity. Hardly 
anywhere in the city was heavy artillery used with such devastating 
effect as in the lie St. Louis. But what did that matter? The 
insurgents were either driven out or massacred and among the 
blood-stained ruins "order" triumphed. 
One more post remained to be seized on the left bank of the Seine. 
The Austerlitz Bridge, which east of the St. Martin Canal links the 
Faubourg St. Antoine with the left bank of the Seine, was heavily 
barricaded and had a strong bridgehead on the left bank where it 
adjoins the Place Valhubert in front of the Botanical Gardens. This 
bridgehead, which after the fall of the Panthéon and the Place 

=====第193页=====
The June Revolution 163 
Maubert was the last stronghold of the insurgents on the left bank, 
was taken after stubborn resistance. 
Only their last bulwark, the Faubourg St. Antoine and a part of the 
Faubourg du Temple, was thus left to the insurgents on the 
following day, the 26th. Neither of these faubourgs is very suitable 
for street-fighting; the streets there are fairly wide and almost 
perfectly straight, offering full play for the artillery. Their western 
side is well protected by the St. Martin Canal, but the northern side is 
completely exposed. Five or six perfectly straight, wide streets run 
from the north right into the centre of the Faubourg Saint Antoine. 
The principal fortifications were at the Place de la Bastille and in 
the rue Faubourg St. Antoine, the main street of the whole district. 
Remarkably strong barricades were set up there, built partly of big 
flagstones and partly of wooden beams. They were constructed in 
the form of an angle pointing inward in order partly to weaken the 
effect of the gun-fire, partly to offer a larger defensive front making 
cross-fire possible. Openings had been made in the fire-proof walls 
of the houses so that the rows of houses were connected with each 
other, thus enabling the insurgents to open rifle-fire on the troops or 
withdraw behind the barricades as circumstances demanded. The 
bridges and quays along the canal as well as the streets running 
parallel to it were also strongly fortified. In short, the two faubourgs 
the insurgents still held resembled a veritable fortress, in which the 
troops had to wage a bloody battle for every inch of ground. 
On the morning of the 26th the fighting was to be resumed, but 
Cavaignac was not keen on sending his troops into this maze of 
barricades. He threatened to shell them; mortars and howitzers were 
brought up. A parley was held. Cavaignac meanwhile ordered the 
nearest houses to be mined, but this could only be done to a very 
limited extent, because the time was too short and because the canal 
covered one of the lines of attack; he also ordered internal 
communication to be established between the occupied houses and 
the adjoining houses through gaps in the fire-proof walls. 
The negotiations broke down and fighting was resumed. Cavaig­
nac ordered General Perrot to attack from the Faubourg du Temple 
and General Lamoricière from the Place de la Bastille. The 
barricades were heavily shelled from both directions. Perrot pushed 
forward fairly rapidly, occupied the remaining section of the 
Faubourg du Temple and even penetrated into the Faubourg St. 
Antoine at several points. Lamoricière's advance was slower. The 
first barricades withstood his guns, although his grenades set the first 
houses of the faubourg on fire. He began once more to negotiate. 
Watch in hand he awaited the moment when he would have the 

=====第194页=====
164 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
pleasure of shelling and razing to the ground the most thickly 
populated district of Paris. Some of the insurgents at last capitulated, 
while others, attacked in the flank, withdrew from the city after a 
short battle. 
It was the end of the June barricade fighting. Skirmishes still 
continued outside the city, but they were of no significance. The 
insurgents who fled were scattered in the neighbourhood and were 
one by one captured by cavalry. 
We have given this purely military description of the struggle to 
show our readers with what heroic courage, unity, discipline and 
military skill the Paris workers fought. For four days 40,000 of them 
opposed forces four times their strength, and were within a 
hairbreadth of victory. They almost succeeded in gaining a footing in 
the centre of Paris, taking the Hôtel de Ville, forming a Provisional 
Government and doubling their number not only by people from the 
captured parts of the city joining them but also from the ranks of the 
mobile guard, who at that time needed but a slight impetus to make 
them go over to their side. 
German newspapers assert that this was the decisive battle between 
the red and the tricolour republics, between workers and bourgeois. 
We are convinced that this battle will decide nothing but the 
disintegration of the victors. Moreover, the whole course of events 
proves that, even from a purely military standpoint, the workers are 
bound to triumph within a fairly short space of time. If 40,000 Paris 
workers could achieve such tremendous things against forces four 
times their number, what will the whole mass of Paris workers 
accomplish by concerted and co-ordinated action! 
Kersausie was captured and by now has probably been shot. The 
bourgeois can kill him, but cannot take from him the fame of having 
been the first to organise street-fighting. They can kill him, but no 
power on earth can prevent his techniques from being used in all 
future street-fighting. They can kill him, but they cannot prevent his 
name from going down in history as the first commander-in-chief of 
barricade fighting. 
Written by Engels on June 30 and July 1, Printed according to the newspaper 
1848 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung Nos. 31 and 32, July 1 and 2, 1848 

=====第195页=====
165 
GERMANY'S FOREIGN POLICY1 
Cologne, July 2. All hitherto existing rulers and their diplomats 
have employed their skill and efforts to set one nation against 
another and use one nation to subjugate another, and in this manner 
to perpetuate absolute rule. Germany has distinguished herself in 
this respect. During the last 70 years alone, she has furnished the 
British, in exchange for English gold, with mercenaries to be used 
against the North Americans fighting for their independence; when 
the first French revolution broke out it was the Germans again who, 
like a rabid pack, allowed themselves to be set upon the French; in a 
vicious manifesto issued by the Duke of Brunswick they threatened 
to raze the whole of Paris to the ground125 ; they conspired with the 
émigré aristocrats against the new order in France and were paid for 
this in the form of subsidies received from England. When the 
Dutch, for the first time in two hundred years, finally hit upon the 
sensible idea of putting an end to the mad rule of the House of 
Orange and establishing a republic, 126 it was the Germans again who 
acted as the hangmen of freedom. The Swiss, too, could tell a tale 
about their German neighbours, and it will be some time before the 
Hungarians recover from the harm which Austria, i.e. the German 
Imperial Court, inflicted upon them. Indeed, German mercenary 
troops were sent as far as Greece to prop up the little throne of dear 
Otto, 127 and German policemen were sent even to Portugal. Then 
there were the congresses after 1815, Austria's expeditions to 
Naples, Turin and the Romagna; the imprisonment of Ypsilanti, the 
German-imposed war of suppression which France waged against 
Spain128 ; Dom Miguel 129 and Don Carlos,130 who were supported by 
Germany; the reaction in Britain had Hanoverian troops at its 
disposal; German influence has led to the dismemberment of 
Belgium and the establishment of a Thermidorian rule there; in the 

=====第196页=====
166 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
very heart of Russia Germans are the mainstay of the one autocrat 
and of the smaller ones; all Europe is flooded with sprigs of the 
House of Coburg. 
Poland has been plundered and dismembered and Cracow 
throttled with the help of German soldiers.131 German money and 
blood have helped to enslave and impoverish Lombardy and Venice, 
and directly or indirectly to stifle any movement of liberation 
throughout Italy by means of bayonets, gallows, prisons and galleys.3 
The list of sins is much longer, let us close it. 
The blame for the infamies committed with the aid of Germany in 
other countries falls not only on the governments but to a large 
extent also on the German people. But for the delusions of the 
Germans, their slavish spirit, their aptitude as mercenaries and 
"benign" jailers and tools of the masters "by divine right", the 
German name abroad would not be so detested, cursed and 
despised, and the nations oppressed by Germany would have long 
since been able to develop freely. Now that the Germans are 
throwing off their own yoke, their whole foreign policy must change 
too. Otherwise the fetters with which we have chained other nations 
will shackle our own new freedom, which is as yet hardly more than a 
presentiment. Germany will liberate herself to the extent to which 
she sets free neighbouring nations. 
Things are indeed beginning to look brighter. The lies and 
misrepresentations which the old government organs have been so 
busy spreading about Poland and Italy, the attempts at stirring'up 
enmity artificially, the turgid phrases proclaiming that German 
honour or German power is at stake—all these formulas have lost 
their magic power. The official patriotism is effective only when 
these patriotic postures conceal material interests, only among a 
section of the big bourgeoisie whose business depends on this official 
patriotism. The reactionary party knows this and makes use of it. But 
the great mass of the German middle class and the working class 
understand or feel that the freedom of the neighbouring nations is 
the guarantee of their own freedom. Is Austria's war against Italy's 
independence or Prussia's war against the restoration of Poland 
popular, or on the contrary do they not destroy the last illusions 
about such "patriotic" crusades? However, neither this understand­
ing nor this feeling is sufficient. If Germany's blood and money are 
no longer to be squandered, to her own detriment, in suppressing 
other nations, then we must achieve a really popular government, 
and the old edifice must be razed to the ground. Only then can an 
a See this volume, pp. 385-87 and 395-98.—Ed. 

=====第197页=====
Germany's Foreign Policy 167 
international policy of democracy take the place of the sanguinary, 
cowardly policy of the old, revived system. How can a democratic 
foreign policy be carried through while democracy at home is stifled? 
Meanwhile, everything possible must be done to prepare the way for 
the democratic system on this side and the other side of the Alps. 
The Italians have issued a number of declarations which make their 
friendly attitude towards Germany perfectly clear. We would 
mention the Manifesto of the Provisional Government at Milan132 
addressed to the German people3  and the numerous articles written 
in the same vein, which are published in the Italian press. We have 
now received further evidence of this attitude—a private letter from 
the administrative committee of the newspaper L'Alba, published in 
Florence, to the editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. It is dated 
June 20, and says among other things: 
"We thank you sincerely for the esteem in which you hold our poor Italy. 
Meanwhile we whole-heartedly assure you that all Italians know who really violates 
and attacks their liberty; they know that their most deadly enemy is not the strong and 
magnanimous German people, but rather their unjust, despotic, and cruel 
government; we assure you that every true Italian longs for the moment when he will 
be free to shake hands with his German brother, who, once his inalienable rights are 
established, will be able to defend them, to respect them himself and to secure the 
respect of all his brothers for them. Placing our trust in the principles to whose careful 
elaboration you have dedicated yourselves, we remain 
Your faithful friends and brothers 
(signed) L. Alinari" 
The Alba is one of the few papers in Italy which firmly advocate 
democratic principles. 
Written by Engels on July 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 33, July 3, 1848 
a II Governo provvisorio alia Nazione Germanica, April 6, 1848.—Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 11-12.—Ed. 

=====第198页=====
168 
MARRAST AND THIERS 
We have continuously drawn the attention of the readers of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung to the intrigues of the party of the National, 
personified by Marrast. We have investigated the underhanded 
means by which this party strives to seize the dictatorship. At the 
same time we have pointed out how the dictatorship of Marrast 
conjures up the dictatorship of Thiers. 
Several facts strikingly illustrate how much the party of the 
National, due to its victory, has already succumbed to the party of 
Thiers which is now closely fused with the dynastic opposition.183 
The appointment of Carnot, a man of the National, as Minister has 
stirred up a violent uproar in the National Assembly. Marie's 
candidature for the presidency of the National Assembly was rivalled 
by Dufaure's candidature and, as the Débats reports, was only 
approved because he was known as "the wisest and most moderate 
man of the old Executive Committee", 3 i.e. because he made the 
most concessions to the old dynastic party and because he drafted the 
Bill on gatherings, the continuation of the September Laws,134 and 
sponsored and defended it in the National Assembly! The fact 
remains that "Marrast" and "Thiers" threw dice for the presidency 
of the National Assembly. 
This does not satisfy, however, the "dynastic opposition". One of 
the first laws that it is preparing is a law concerning the municipal 
councils, a law which is directly aimed against the autocracy and 
influence of Marrast, the Mayor of Paris. And he will fall. 
In a few days the entire National Assembly will tear itself apart. 
The reaction will proceed until the party of the National is excluded 
a "Paris, 29 juillet", Journal des Débats, July 30, 1848.—Ed. 

=====第199页=====
Marrast and Thiers 169 
from all exercise of power. "Republic" and "dynastic opposition" 
will confront each other once more, but the republic will no longer 
win on the terms of February. 
The people will no longer indulge in fancies. It will no longer 
"hide its revenge under a bushel" as Caussidiere puts it and it will no 
longer "fling its wrath into the torrents of Styx".a  Qui vivra verra. 
Written on July 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 33, July 3, 1848 time 
a From Caussidière's speech in the National Assembly on June 27, 1848 {Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung No. 31, July 1, 1848, supplement).—Ed. 

=====第200页=====
170 
THE AGREEMENT DEBATES 
Cologne, July 2. After the tragedy the idyll, after the thunder of the 
Paris June days, the beating of the drums of the Berlin agreers. We 
had completely lost sight of the gentlemen but now we learn that at 
the very moment when Cavaignac shelled the Faubourg St. Antoine, 
Herr Camphausen gave a nostalgic farewell address and Herr 
Hansemann submitted the programme of the new Ministry. 
First of all, we observe with pleasure that Herr Hansemann has 
taken our advice and has not become Prime Minister. 3 He has realised 
that it is greater to make Prime Ministers than to be one. 
The new Government, in spite of the borrowed name (prête-nom) 
of Auerswald, is and remains the Hansemann Government. It shows 
itself as such by presenting itself as the Government of Action and of 
accomplishing things. Herr Auerswald has certainly no claim to be a 
Minister of action! 
Herr Hansemann's programme is well known. We will not 
examine the points of his political programme since they have 
already provided feed for the more or less petty German newspa­
pers.  There is only one point that nobody has dared to examine. We 
want to make up for that omission so that Herr Hansemann should 
not feel neglected. 
Herr Hansemann declares: 
"There is at present no more effective means to revive industry and thus to 
eliminate the poverty of the labouring classes than to restore the weakened confidence 
in the preservation of law and order and to establish soon a firm constitutional 
monarchy. By concentrating all our efforts on this aim, we can best counteract 
unemployment and poverty." 
See this volume, pp. 111-12.—Ed. 

=====第201页=====
The Agreement Debates 171 
At the beginning of his programme, Herr Hansemann has already 
said that he proposes to submit new repressive laws for this purpose 
insofar as the old (police state!) legislation does not suffice. 
That is plain enough. The old despotic legislation does not suffice! 
The abolition of the poverty of the working class is not the province 
of the Minister of Public Works or the Minister of Finance but of the 
Minister of War! First repressive laws, to be followed by grape-shot 
and bayonets—indeed, "there is no more effective means"! Perhaps 
Herr Schreckenstein, 3 whose mere name—according to the 
Westphalian address b—strikes terror into the agitators, wants to 
continue his heroic deeds of Trier135 and become a Cavaignac on a 
reduced Prussian scale? 
But Herr» Hansemann has still other means besides the "most 
effective" one: 
"What is  also  necessary for this purpose is to procure employment by public works 
projects of genuine usefulness to the country." 
Herr Hansemann will thus "order still more comprehensive work 
for the good of all industrious classes of the people" than Herr 
Patow. But he will do this 
"when the Government succeeds in removing the anxieties over the possible 
overthrow of the political system which are nourished by unrest and agitation and in 
restoring the general confidence necessary to obtain the required finances". 
For the moment Herr Hansemann cannot order any public works 
to be started because he cannot obtain any money. He can only 
obtain the money when confidence is restored. But, as he himself 
says,  when confidence is restored, the workers will be employed and 
the Government will no longer need to procure jobs for them. 
Herr Hansemann's measures for the abolition of poverty are going 
round in a circle which is by no means vicious but rather very 
virtuous in a bourgeois sense. For the moment Herr Hansemann has 
nothing to offer the workers but the September Laws and a 
reduced version of Cavaignac. This is indeed a Government of 
Action! 
It is not our purpose to examine the recognition of the revolution 
in his programme. The "well-informed G-correspondent" of the 
Kölnische Zeitung has already hinted to the public how far Herr 
Hansemann has saved the legal basis for the benefit of the 
The name, literally translated, means "terror-stone".— Ed. 
"Adresse der Krieger und Wehrmänner des Kreises Hagen vom 19. Juni 1848" 
(Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 25, June 25, 1848, special supplement).— Ed. 

=====第202页=====
172 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
neighbouring journalist.3  As regards the revolution Herr Han­
semann has recognised that it is basically no revolution. 
Herr Hansemann had hardly finished when Prime Minister 
Auerswald rose, for he was obliged to say something as well. He took 
out a written scrap of paper and read approximately the following 
thoughts, only not in verse: 
Gentlemen! I am happy today 
To tarry at your meeting, 
Where many a noble kindred spirit 
Lovingly howls a greeting. 
My feelings at this very moment 
Are quite beyond all measure; 
And oh! these truly blissful hours 
All my life I'll treasure!0 
We want to emphasise that we have given the most favourable 
interpretation to the somewhat unintelligible scrap of paper of the 
Prime Minister. 
Herr Auerswald has hardly finished when our Hansemann jumps 
up again in order to prove by raising a question of confidence that he 
has not changed his tune. He demands that the draft address 0 be 
referred back to committee and says: 
"The reception which this first motion will find in the Assembly will be a 
measure of the amount of confidence that the High Assembly has in the new 
Ministry." 
This was really too much. Deputy Weichsel, no doubt a reader of 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, angrily rushes to the rostrum and 
protests emphatically against this everlasting method of the question 
of confidence. So far, so good. But once a German has begun to talk, 
it is hard to stop him, and so Herr Weichsel let himself go in a long 
discourse about this and that, about the revolution, the year 1807 
and the year 1815, about a warm heart beating beneath a shirt and 
several other topics. All this he said because "he felt it necessary to 
get these matters off his chest". A dreadful clamour, mingled with a 
few bravos from the Left, forced the worthy fellow to leave the 
rostrum. 
Herr Hansemann assured the Assembly that it was by no means 
the Ministry's intention to raise frivolous questions of confidence. It 
would not be worth the trouble to discuss the issue further since on 
Marx and Engels frequently use this expression when referring to Karl 
Brüggemann, the editor-in-chief of the Kölnische Zeitung. —Ed. 
Heinrich Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput XII.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp.  62-63.—  Ed. 

=====第203页=====
The Agreement Debates 173 
this occasion it was not really a full question of confidence but only 
half a question. 
There ensues debate such as seldom occurs. Everybody speaks at 
once and the debate wanders off into a myriad trivialities. The 
question of confidence, the agenda, standing orders, Polish nationa­
lity, adjournment, accompanied by bravos and clamour, all circulate 
for some time. At last Herr Parrisius observes that Herr Hansemann 
has put a motion on behalf of the Government, whereas the 
Government as such cannot put motions but can only make 
communications. 
Herr Hansemann replies that it was a slip of the tongue. The 
motion was really no motion but merely a request from the 
Government. 
The grandiose question of confidence is thus reduced to a mere 
"request" of the Ministers! 
Herr Parrisius rushes to the rostrum from the left side, Herr Ritz 
from the right. At the summit they confront each other. A collision is 
unavoidable since neither of the two heroes wants to withdraw. At 
this point, the Chairman, Herr Esser, begins to speak and both 
heroes turn back. 
Herr Zachariä adopts the Government's motion as his own and 
demands an immediate debate. 
Herr Zachariä, the obedient servant of this as well as the previous 
Government, who had once before played the redeeming angel by 
just at the right moment, proposing an amendment to Berends' 
motion, could not find anything to say in support of his motion. 
What had been stated by the Finance Minister sufficed entirely. 
A lengthy debate now ensues with the indispensable amendments, 
interruptions, table-banging, blustering and sophistries about rules 
of procedure. It would be asking too much of us to lead our readers 
through this labyrinth. We can merely point out to them some of the 
more charming aspects of this confusion: 
1. Deputy Waldeck enlightens us: the address cannot be referred 
back to the committee since the committee no longer exists. 
2. Deputy Hüffer elaborates: the address is not a reply to the 
Crown but to the Ministers. The Ministers who produced the speech 
from the throne no longer exist. How are we supposed to reply to 
someone who does not exist any more? 
3. Deputy d'Ester draws the following conclusion in the form of 
an amendment: the Assembly wishes to drop the address. 
4. The amendment is disposed of by Chairman Esser in the 
following manner: This proposal seems to be a new motion and not 
an amendment. 

=====第204页=====
174 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
That is the whole skeleton of the debate. To this meagre skeleton, 
however, there adheres a mass of bloated flesh in the form of 
speeches by the Ministers Rodbertus and Kühlwetter, the deputies 
Zachariä, Reichensperger II etc. 
The situation is exceedingly strange. Herr Rodbertus himself says 
that it is 
"unprecedented in the history of parliaments that a Government resigns while the 
draft of an address is on the table and the debate about it is supposed to begin!" 
During its first six weeks of parliamentary life, Prussia has on the 
whole had the good fortune of encountering events almost all of 
which were "unprecedented in the history of parliaments". 
Herr Hansemann finds himself in the same dilemma as the 
Chamber. The address, ostensibly a reply to the speech from the 
throne by Camphausen-Hansemann, is in reality supposed to be a 
reply to the Hansemann-Auerswald programme. The committee 
which was complaisant towards Camphausen is therefore supposed 
to show similar complaisance towards Herr Hansemann. The 
difficulty is merely to convince people of the need for this demand 
which is "unprecedented in the history of parliaments". All means 
are employed. Rodbertus, the Aeolian harp of the Left Centre, 
murmurs the most gentle sounds. Kühlwetter makes soothing 
gestures in all directions: it is, of course, possible that a new 
examination of the draft address "might convince everybody that no 
changes need now be made after all (!) but in order to win this 
conviction" (!!) the draft ought to be returned once more to the 
committee! Finally, Herr Hansemann, who as always is bored by a 
long debate, cuts the knot by stating bluntly why the draft should be 
returned to the committee: he does not want the new changes to slip 
in through the back door in the form of ministerial amendments, 
they should rather, in the form of committee proposals, strut into the 
hall through a large folding-door with wide-open leaves. 
The Prime Minister declares that it is necessary that 
"the Government should collaborate in a constitutional way in the drafting of the 
address". 
Even after much cogitation, we are unable to explain what this is 
supposed to mean and which Constitution Herr Auerswald has in 
mind, particularly since Prussia does not have a Constitution at all at 
this moment. 
Only two speeches from the side of the opposition need be 
mentioned: those of Herr d'Ester and Herr Hüffer. Herr d'Ester 
successfully ridiculed Herr Hansemann's programme by using Herr 

=====第205页=====
The Agreement Debates 175 
Hansemann's former disparaging remarks about abstractions, use­
less quarrels over principles etc. against the very abstract pro­
gramme. D'Ester called upon the Government of Action "at last to 
proceed to action and to set aside questions of principle". We have 
already mentioned above his proposal, which was the only sensible 
one that was made in the course of the day. 
Herr Hüffer, who most clearly expressed the correct point of view 
in relation to the address, also formulated it most clearly in relation 
to Herr Hansemann's request: the Government demands that we 
should have enough confidence in it to send the address back to the 
committee and it makes the continuation of its existence dependent 
upon such a decision. The Government, however, can only demand 
a vote of confidence for actions which it carries out itself but not for 
actions which it requires of the Assembly. 
In short: Herr Hansemann demanded a vote of confidence and 
the Assembly, to spare Herr Hansemann unpleasantness, gave an 
indirect vote of censure to its address committee. Under the 
Government of Action the deputies will soon find out what the 
famous treasury-whip 3 is. 
Written by Engels on July 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 34, July 4, 1848 time 
Engels uses the English term and adds a German translation in brackets.— Ed. 
8-8447 

=====第206页=====
176 
ARRESTS 
Cologne, July 3. Up to now the Government of Action has only 
proved itself as the Ministry of the Police. Its first act was the arrest 
of Herr Monecke and Herr  Fernbach  in Berlin. Its second act was the 
arrest of Bombardier Funk in Saarlouis. Now "action" is beginning 
to make itself felt here in Cologne too. This morning Dr. Gottschalk 
and Lieutenant (ret.) Anneke were arrested. We are reserving our 
judgment since we are still lacking definite information about the 
reasons for their arrest and the manner in which it was carried out. 
The workers will be sensible enough not to let themselves be 
provoked into creating a disturbance. 
Written on July 3, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 34, July 4, 1848 time 

=====第207页=====
177 
ARRESTS 
Cologne, July 4. We promised our readers yesterday that we would 
come back to the arrest of Dr. Gottschalk and Anneke. Up to now we 
have only been able to obtain greater details about Anneke's arrest. 
Six to seven policemen entered Anneke's residence between six 
and seven in the morning, immediately maltreated the maid in the 
hall and then silently sneaked up the stairs. Three of them remained 
in the anteroom while four invaded the bedroom where Anneke and 
his wife, who is in an advanced state of pregnancy, were asleep. One 
of these four pillars of justice was already at this early hour 
somewhat unsteady, being filled with "spirit", the true fluid of life: 
firewater. 
Anneke asked what they wanted. He should go along with them! 
was the laconic answer. Anneke asked that at least his sick wife 
should be spared and asked the gentlemen to go into the anteroom. 
The gentlemen of the Holy Hermandad137  declared that they would 
not leave the bedroom. They urged Anneke to dress quickly and did 
not even permit him to speak to his wife. Once they found 
themselves in the anteroom, the urging turned into assault during 
which one of the policemen smashed a glass door. Anneke was pushed 
down the stairs. Four policemen led him off to the new gaol. Three of 
them remained with Frau Anneke to guard her until the arrival of 
the Public Prosecutor. 
According to the law, there must be at least one official of  the court 
police (a police inspector or similar person) present during an arrest. 
Why such formalities, however, since the people possess two 
assemblies, one in Berlin and one in Frankfurt, to represent their 
rights? 
8* 

=====第208页=====
178 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Half an hour later, Public Prosecutor Hecker and Examining 
Magistrate Geiger came to search the house. 
Frau Anneke complained that the Public Prosecutor had left the 
arrest to police whose brutality was unconstrained by the presence of 
any member of the municipal authorities. Herr Hecker declared that 
he had given no orders to commit brutalities. As if Herr Hecker could 
order brutalities! 
Frau Anneke: It seems that the police were sent ahead  alone  so that 
the authorities would not have to assume the responsibility for their 
brutality. Besides, the arrest was not carried out according to legal 
procedure since none of the police produced a warrant. One of them 
merely pulled a scrap of paper out of his pocket which Anneke was 
not allowed to read. 
Herr Hecker. "The police were judicially commanded to proceed 
with the arrest." Does not the command of a judge also fall under 
the command of the law? The Public Prosecutor and the Examining 
Magistrate confiscated a mass of papers and pamphlets, including 
Frau Anneke's whole briefcase, etc. Incidentally, Examining Magis­
trate Geiger has been designated as Police Superintendent. 
Anneke was interrogated for half an hour in the evening. A 
supposedly seditious speech that he made during the last popular 
assembly at the Gürzenich Hall 138 was given as the reason for his 
arrest. Article 102 of the  Code  pénal* 39 speaks of public orations which 
directly incite to conspiracy against the Emperor and his family or 
which aim at disturbing the public peace by civil war, the illegal use 
of armed force or open vandalism and looting. The Code does not 
contain the Prussian "excitement of dissatisfaction". For lack of the 
Prussian law, Article 102 will be employed for the time being 
wherever its employment is a judicial impossibility. 
A great show of military force accompanied the arrest. From four 
o'clock onwards the troops were confined to barracks. Bakers and 
artisans were allowed in but not let out again. Towards six o'clock the 
hussars moved from Deutz to Cologne and rode through the whole 
city. The new gaol was occupied by 300 men. For today, four new 
arrests have been announced, those of Jansen, Kalker, Esser and a 
fourth one.  Eyewitnesses  assure us that Jansen's posters, in which he 
urged the  workers  to remain calm, were torn down from the walls by the 
police yesterday evening. Was that done in the interest of order? Or 
was someone looking for a pretext to carry out carefully prepared 
plans in the good old city of Cologne? 
Chief Public Prosecutor Zweiffel is supposed to have inquired 
earlier at the Provincial Court of Appeal at Arnsberg whether he 
should arrest Anneke on the basis of his former conviction 140 and 

=====第209页=====
Arrests 179 
have him transported to Jülich. The royal amnesty seems to have 
stood in the way of this well-meaning intention. The matter was 
referred to the Ministry. 
Chief Public Prosecutor Zweiffel, moreover, is supposed to have 
declared that he would within a week put an end to March 19, the 
clubs,  freedom of the press and other outrages that the evil year 
1848 had brought to Cologne on the Rhine. Herr Zweiffel is not 
among the sceptics. 
Is Herr Zweiffel perhaps combining the executive with the 
legislative power? Are the laurels of Chief Public Prosecutor 
supposed to cover the weak points of the people's representative? 
Once again we will scrutinise our much beloved stenographic reports 
and give the public a true picture of the work of the people's 
representative and Chief Public Prosecutor Zweiffel. 3 
Those are the actions of the Government of Action, the Government 
of the Left Centre, the Government of transition to an old 
aristocratic, old bureaucratic and old Prussian Government. As soon 
as Herr Hansemann has fulfilled his transitory function, he will be 
dismissed. 
The Berlin Left, however, must realise that the old regime is 
willing to let it keep its small parliamentary victories and large 
constitutional designs as long as the old regime in the meantime is 
able to seize all the really important positions. It can confidently 
recognise the revolution of March 19 inside the Chamber provided 
the revolution can be disarmed outside of it. 
Some fine day the Left may find that its parliamentary victory 
coincides with its real defeat. Perhaps German development needs such 
contrasts. 
The Government of Action recognises the revolution in principle 
in order to carry out the counter-revolution in practice. 
Written on July 4, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 35, July 5, 1848 time 
a See this volume, pp. 94-95.—Ed. 

=====第210页=====
180 
THE AGREEMENT DEBATES 
Cologne, July 4. Today we will take up the agreement session of 
June 28. The Assembly is confronted by a new President,3 a new set 
of standing orders and new Ministers. One can therefore imagine 
how great is the confusion. 
After lengthy preliminary debates about standing orders and 
other matters, Deputy Gladbach was finally allowed to speak. A few 
days ago in Spandau, the Prussian soldiery forcibly disarmed, and in 
some instances even arrested, on their return from Schleswig-Hol­
stein, the members of the 6th Company of the Volunteer Corps 
which had been disbanded for republican sentiments. It had no 
legitimate reason or legal authority whatever to carry out this act. In 
law, the army cannot take such steps on its own initiative at all. Most 
of these volunteers, however, had formerly fought on the barricades 
of Berlin and the gendemen of the guard had to get even with 
them. 
Herr Gladbach questioned the Ministry on this act of military 
despotism. 
The Minister of War,  Schreckenstein,  declares that he does not know 
anything about this matter and that he must reserve the right to 
demand a report on it from the appropriate authority. 
Hence the people pay a Minister of War so that he does not yet 
know in Berlin on the 28th what steps the military took on the 25th a 
mere three hours from Berlin, in Spandau, and so that, right in front 
of his eyes, as it were, a mere three hours from Berlin, lieutenants of 
the guard should occupy the railway stations and seize the weapons 
from the armed nation (weapons which belong to the people, and 
3 Wilhelm Grabow.— Ed. 

=====第211页=====
The Agreement Debates 181 
which they captured on the batdefield), without even deigning to 
honour the Minister of War with a report! But to be sure, 
Lieutenant-Colonel Schlichting who accomplished this heroic deed 
acted according to "instructions", which he probably receives from 
Potsdam, and it is probably also to Potsdam that he reports! 
Tomorrow, the well-informed Minister of War pleads, tomorrow I 
will perhaps be able to give an answer! 
There follows a question by Zacharias: The Ministry had promised 
a Bill on the civic militia. Will this Bill be based upon the principle of 
arming the whole nation? 
The new Minister of the Interior, Herr Kühlwetter, answers: 
Indeed, a civic militia Bill was under consideration, but it had not yet 
been discussed in the Ministry, hence he could not say anything 
further about it. 
Thus the new Ministry has been formed so precipitously and has 
reached so little agreement upon its guiding principles that even the 
burning question of the arming of the nation has not yet been 
debated! 
A second question by Deputy Gladbach concerned the definitive 
appointing of burgomasters and other officials by the authorities 
hitherto empowered to do so. Since the entire prevailing administra­
tion will continue to exist only on a provisional basis, it will be able to 
fill the existing vacancies also only provisionally until it is determined 
by legislation how and by whom the different authorities are to be 
appointed. Nevertheless, burgomasters and other officials have been 
appointed definitively. 
Minister Kühlwetter expresses his general agreement with Herr 
Gladbach and will allow only provisional burgomasters to be 
appointed. 
President Grabow skilfully evades a further question by Herr 
Gladbach about the suspension of the many officials hated by those 
they administer; during the initial flush of revolutionary ardour a 
number of these officials, especially in the country, having been put 
to flight. 
After some debates on procedure, the question of Deputy 
Dierschke  concerning the Köslin address 141 and its furtherance by the 
governments and the rural district administrations was reached. But 
the deputy had completely forgotten that his question had been put 
on the agenda and he had failed therefore to bring along the papers 
necessary to substantiate his case. Thus there was nothing left for 
him to do but to indulge in a few general phrases about the reaction, 
to accept a highly unsatisfactory reply from the Minister and to be 
told by the President that he must surely be satisfied with it. 

=====第212页=====
182 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
But he had still to put a second question: Whether or not the 
Ministers intended to oppose the reactionary schemes of the 
aristocracy and the party of the officials. 
In this case, too, he seems to have forgotten the necessary papers. 
Once again he spouts declamatory phrases instead of quoting facts 
and demands nothing better from the Ministry than that it issue a 
proclamation against reaction. 
Herr Kühlwetter answers, of course, that the views of lords of the 
manor and of officials were not his concern, only their actions were. 
These people had the same freedom as Herr Dierschke, and besides, 
would Herr Dierschke please cite facts. In duly dignified manner, he 
rejected the absurd idea of an "enactment" against reaction. Herr 
Dierschke then cited the fact that in his district of Ohlau the Landrat 
had stated that the National Assembly would not be unanimous until 
it was glued together with grape-shot, and that their deputy 
(Dierschke himself) had said that it would be a trifle to string up a 
Minister. 
The Chairman deduced from this remark that Herr Dierschke was 
now also satisfied in regard to the second question and Herr 
Dierschke could not think of any objections to raise. 
Herr Hansemann, however, is not satisfied. He accuses the speaker 
of having digressed from the main question. He 
"leaves it to the Assembly to judge the propriety of making personal accusations 
against officials when proof of these accusations is not supplied at the same time". 
After delivering this proud challenge and being greeted by the 
resounding applause of the Right and the Centre, Herr Hansemann 
sits down. 
Deputy Eisner puts an urgent motion. He calls for the immediate 
appointment of a committee of inquiry into the situation of the 
spinners and weavers as well as of the entire Prussian linen 
manufacture. 
In a brief and striking speech Herr Eisner tells the Assembly how 
the old Government had in every single case sacrificed the linen 
industry to dynastic and legitimist interests or rather notions. Spain, 
Mexico, Poland and Cracow served as proofs. 142 
Fortunately the facts were striking and affected only the old 
Government. Therefore no difficulties were raised by any side. The 
Government put itself at the disposal of the committee in advance 
and the motion was passed unanimously. 
There follows a question by d'Ester concerning the shaved Poles. 143 
D'Ester declares that he does not just seek information about the 
fact but specifically about the measures taken by the Government 

=====第213页=====
The Agreement Debates 183 
against this treatment. That was the reason why he was not just 
addressing himself to the Minister of War but to the entire 
Government. 
Herr Auerswald: If d'Ester does not want an answer to this specific 
case "the Government is not interested" in replying. 
Really, the Government is not "interested" in replying to the 
question! What novelty! It is indeed customary to ask questions 
precisely in those cases in which "the Government is not a bit 
interested". Precisely because it is not interested in answering it, 
precisely for that reason, Herr Prime Minister, the Government is 
asked the question. 
The Prime Minister, by the way, must have believed that he was 
not among his superiors but among his subordinates. He attempts to 
make the reply to the question dependent upon the interest shown 
not by the Assembly but by the Government. 
We attribute it solely to the inexperience of President Grabow that 
he did not call Herr Auerswald to order for this bureaucratic 
arrogance. 
The Prime Minister, by the way, gave the assurance that the 
shaving of Poles would be vigorously counteracted but that he could 
not reveal any details until a later date. 
D'Ester is very willing to agree to a delay but wants to know the date 
when Auerswald intends to answer. 
Herr Auerswald, who must be hard of hearing, replies: I believe 
that there is nothing in my declaration which indicates that the 
Ministry does not wish (!) to revert to this matter at a later date. But 
he cannot yet fix the date. 
Behnsch and d'Ester moreover declare explicitly that they are also 
demanding further information about the fact  itself. 
Then follows d'Ester's second question: What was the meaning of 
the military preparations in the Rhine Province, particularly in 
Cologne, and did perhaps the necessity arise to protect the frontier 
with France? 
Herr Schreckenstein replies: For several months now no troops have 
gone to the Rhine with the exception of individual reservists. (To be 
sure,  brave Bayard, but there were already too many troops there.) 
Not just Cologne but all fortresses are being fortified so that the 
fatherland should not be endangered. 3 
Thus if the troops are not drafted into the forts at Cologne where 
they have nothing to do and are in very poor quarters, if the artillery 
units do not get any rifles, if the troops do not receive bread for a 
a See this volume, pp. 68-71.—Ed. 

=====第214页=====
184 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
week in advance and if the infantry is not provided with live bullets 
and the artillery with grape and ball shot, the fatherland is in 
danger? Thus, according to Herr Schreckenstein, the fatherland is 
only out of danger when Cologne and the other big cities are in 
danger! 
By the way, 
"all troop movements must be left entirely to the judgment of a military person, 
i.e. the Minister of War, otherwise he cannot be responsible"! 
Imperial Baron Roth von Schreckenstein 3 of the terror-inspiring 
name sounds like a young girl whose virtue is threatened rather than 
the Prussian pro tempore Bayard without fear and reproach! 
When Deputy d'Ester, M.D., who truly is a dwarf by the side of the 
mighty Imperial Baron Roth von Schreckenstein, asks the said 
Schreckenstein about the meaning of one or another measure, the 
great Imperial Baron believes that the little M.D. wants to take away 
his prerogative freely to decide on the disposition of troops. In such 
an event he could of course no longer be responsible! 
In a word, the Minister of War declares that he must not be  called  to 
account; otherwise he would not be accountable at all. 
By the way, what weight does a deputy's question carry compared 
with the "judgment of a military person, and particularly a Minister 
of War"! 
Although d'Ester declares that he is not satisfied, he nevertheless 
draws from Schreckenstein's answer the conclusion that the military 
preparations are designed to protect the French frontier. 
Prime Minister Auerswald protests against this conclusion. 
If all border fortresses are fortified, it stands to reason that all 
frontiers are "protected". If all frontiers are protected, surely the 
French frontier, too, is "protected". 
Herr Auerswald admits the correctness of the premises but 
"rejects" the deduction "in the name of the Government". 
We, on the other hand, "assume in the name" of common sense 
that Herr Auerswald is not merely hard of hearing. 
D'Ester and Pfahl protest at once.  Reichenbach  declares that Neisse, b 
the most significant Silesian fortress against the East, is not being 
fortified at all and that it is in a most sorry plight. When he begins to 
give details, the Right supported by the Centre makes a terrible 
racket and Reichenbach is forced to leave the rostrum. 
Herr Moritz: 
"Count Reichenbach has given no reason for addressing the Assembly (!). I believe 
that I may speak for the same reason (!!). I consider it to be unparliamentary and 
a The name, literally translated, means "terror-stone".—Ed. 
The Polish name is Nysa.—Ed. 

=====第215页=====
The Agreement Debates 185 
unheard of in the history of parliaments to  embarrass  the Ministry in such a manner ... 
(great commotion), to bring up matters which should not be discussed before the 
public ... we have not been sent here to endanger the fatherland." (A terrible din 
ensues. Our Moritz has to get off the rostrum.) 
Deputy Esser I calms the tumult by a disquisition, as thorough as it 
is appropriate, on Paragraph 28 of the standing orders. 
Herr Moritz protests; he had not intended to correct a fact but 
merely "wanted to speak for the same reason as Count Reichen­
bach"! The conservative faction supports him and grants him a loud 
cheer, whereas the extreme Left bangs on the tables. 
Auerswald: 
"Is it appropriate to discuss in detail the defensive capacity of Prussia either in 
individual cases or as a whole?" 
We note in the first place that the discussion did not deal with the 
defensive capacity of the state but rather with the  defencelessness  of the 
state.  Secondly, what is inappropriate is not that the Minister of War 
should be reminded of his duties but rather that, he should make 
military preparations against domestic opponents and not against 
external foes. 
The Right is terribly bored and calls for an end to the debate. The 
President, in the midst of much noise, declares that the matter is 
settled. 
Next on the agenda is a motion by Jung. Herr Jung deems it 
appropriate to be absent. What a wonderful representation of the 
people! 
Now comes a question by Deputy Scholz. It reads literally as 
follows: 
"Question to the Minister of the Interior inquiring whether he is able or inclined to 
supply information on the inopportune introduction of  constables  in the districts." 
President: To begin with I am asking whether this question has 
been understood. 
(It has not been understood and it is read once again.) 
Minister Kühlwetter: Indeed, I do not know what information is 
demanded of me. I do not understand the question. 
President: Is there support for the question? (It is not supported.) 
Scholz: I withdraw my motion for the time being. 
We, too, are "withdrawing" for today after this priceless scene 
which is "unheard of in the history of parliaments". 
Written by Engels on July 4, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 35, July 5, 1848 time 

=====第216页=====
186 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE NEUE 
RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
Cologne, July 6. We have just received the following rejoinder to 
the article printed in yesterday's [Neue] Rheinische Zeitung dated 
"Cologne, July 4" which dealt with the arrest of Dr. Gottschalk and 
Anneke. 3 
"I declare it to be a falsehood that I answered the complaint of Frau Anneke 
concerning the arrest of her husband without the presence of a member of the 
municipal authorities in the following manner: 
"'I have given no orders to commit brutalities.' 
"Rather, I merely remarked that I should regret it if the police had conducted 
themselves in an unseemly manner. 
"I furthermore declare it to be a falsehood to state that I used the expression: 
'"The police were judicially commanded to proceed with the arrest.' 
"I merely observed that the arrest was effected by virtue of a warrant to appear in 
court issued by the Examining Magistrate. 
"Under the law, such warrants are discharged by court bailiffs or agents of the 
armed forces. The presence of an official of the court police is nowhere prescribed. 
"The defamations and insults contained in this article, directed against Chief 
Public Prosecutor Zweiffel and the police who carried out the arrest, will be 
evaluated in the legal proceedings which will be initiated on this count. 
Cologne, July 5, 1848 
Hecker, Public Prosecutor" 
Our esteemed readers may perceive from the preceding that the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung has gained a new contributor of great 
promise—the Public  Prosecutor's  office. 
We have erred on a single point of law. During an arrest there is no 
need for an "official of the court police" but merely for an agent of  the 
a See this volume, pp. 177-79.— Ed. 

=====第217页=====
Legal Proceedings against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 187 
public authority. With what careful guarantees the Code assures the 
safety of the person! 
Incidentally, the fact that the police did not produce their warrant 
remains illegal. It also remains illegal that they, as we are 
subsequently informed, scrutinised documents even  before  the appear­
ance of Herr Hecker and his companion. But above all the brutalities, 
which Herr Hecker regretted, remain illegal. We are amazed to see 
court proceedings pending not against the police but against the 
newspaper that has denounced their impropriety. 
The insult could only refer to one of the policemen of whom it was 
said that he "was unsteady" at an early hour for more or less spiritual 
or spirituous reasons. If the investigation, however, as we do not 
doubt for one moment, should prove the correctness of the evidence, 
namely the brutalities committed by the agents of the public 
authority, then we believe that we shall have only acted in the 
interests of the gentlemen accused by us by carefully emphasising, 
with the complete impartiality becoming the press, the only 
"extenuating circumstance". And this affable statement of the only 
extenuating circumstance is transformed into an "insult" by the 
Public Prosecutor. 
And now as to the insult or defamation of Chief Public Prosecutor 
Zweiffell 
We have simply reported, and as we have ourselves indicated in 
the report, we have reported rumours, rumours which reached us 
from a reliable source. The press not only has the right but the duty 
to keep a close watch on the conduct of the people's representatives. 
At the same time we pointed out that Herr Zweiffel's past 
parliamentary activity seems to be in line with the anti-popular 
remarks ascribed to him. Is it really the intention to deprive the press 
of the right to judge the parliamentary activity of a representative of 
the people? What then is the purpose of the press? 
Or does not the press have the right to detect in the people's 
representative Zweiffel too much of the Chief Public Prosecutor and 
in the Chief Public Prosecutor too much of the people's representa­
tive? Why then in Belgium, France etc. the debate on incom­
patibilities? 
As to the constitutional usage, one should read again how the 
Constitutionnel, the Siècle and the Presse during the reign of Louis 
Philippe judged the parliamentary activity of Hébert, Plougoulm etc. 
at the time when these men occupied the highest positions in the 
Public Prosecutor's office and at the same time served as deputies. 
One should read how the Belgian newspapers, particularly the 
strictly constitutional ones such as the Observateur, the Politique and 

=====第218页=====
188 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
the Emancipation, barely a year ago judged the parliamentary activity 
of M. Bavay when he combined in one person the office of deputy 
and Public Prosecutor-General. 
And what was always allowed under the Guizot Ministry and the 
Rogier Ministry should not be allowed under a monarchy built on the 
broadest  democratic foundation? A right which was not contested by any 
Administration of the French Restoration becomes a wrong under 
the Government of Action which recognises the revolution in principle? 
Incidentally, the public has been able to convince itself from our 
special supplement of this morning just how correctly we have 
judged the course of events. Rodbertus has left the Government and 
Ladenberg has entered it. The Government of the Left Centre has 
transformed itself in a few days into a decidedly old-Prussian reactionary 
Government. The Right has dared a coup d'état, 145 and the Left has 
withdrawn with the threats. 
And is it not palpably clear that the most recent acts in Cologne 
were part of the great plan of campaign of the Government of Action? 
Just now we are being informed that the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
has been banned from the house of detention. Do the prison rules 
provide for such a prohibition? Or are the politically accused 
condemned to the penalty of having to read exclusively the Kölnische 
Zeitung? 
Written by Marx on July 6, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 37, July 7, 1848 time 

=====第219页=====
189 
THE BERLIN AGREEMENT DEBATES 
Cologne, July 6. While ministerial crisis No. 2 continues in Berlin, 
we would like for the time being, in the words of Deputy Mätze, 
to return "from these tempests" to the hitherto "calm lake" of the 
agreement debates. Say what you like, we have spent here more than 
one hour of genial cheerfulness — 
Here, breeding and custom hold sway, 
And many a quiet pleasure blooms 
Amidst us to this day.a 
It is the turn of the session of June 30. Right from the beginning it 
opens with significant and very peculiarly characteristic occur­
rences. 
Who has not heard of the great campaign of the 57 family heads 
from Berg and Mark who set out to save the fatherland? Who does 
not know with what defiance of death this cream of conservative 
philistinism, forsaking wives, children and business, set out to step 
into the breach to give battle to the revolution in a fight to the death, 
in a word, to go to Berlin and present to the Ministry a petition 
against agitators? 
These 57 paladins then also presented to the Agreement Assembly 
an address containing mild, reactionary pious wishes. The address is 
read. A few gentlemen of the Right wish also to have the signatures 
read. The secretary begins to read but is interrupted by shouts of 
"Enough, enough!" 
Deputy Berg: 
"The document which has just been read must be either a motion or a petition. If it 
is a motion I would like to know which member has adopted it. If it is a petition, let it 
be sent to the appropriate committee so that we may no longer be bored with it." 
Heinrich Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput XXV.— Ed. 

=====第220页=====
190 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
This laconic answer of Herr Berg disposes of the matter. The 
President 3 stammers a few apologies and puts aside the address of 
the 57 family heads. 
Thereupon rises an old friend of ours and of the Left, Deputy 
Schultz from Wanzleben: 
"The day before yesterday I withdrew my motions concerning civil marriage etc. 
with the explanation that my proposed Bills are to be drafted differently by me. I find 
in the stenographic reports that my remarks are followed by the comment: 'Laughter.' 
It may be that somebody or other has laughed at my remarks, but if so, he certainly 
did it without reason." (Renewed laughter.) 
Deputy Schultz from Wanzleben explains now with the most 
ingenuous good nature that he only wanted to do his best, that he 
would be happy to be taught better, that he had been convinced of 
the imperfections of his Bills, that he could, however, hardly move 
amendments to his own proposals and that he therefore considered 
it his duty not to "submit" his motion to the Assembly in its 
original form but to withdraw it for the time being. 
"I cannot find anything laughable in this and I must protest if by the word 
'laughter' my judicious procedure is presented as laughable." 
Deputy Schultz from Wanzleben fares like the Knight Tann­
häuser: 
Whenever I think about this laughter, 
My eyes shed sudden tears. 
Deputy Brill remarks that the otherwise excellent stenographic 
reports lack the statement by Minister Hansemann that the 
programme of the present Ministry is a continuation of the speech 
from the throne. He remembered this particularly well because 
being a printer it had reminded him of the phrase "to be continued", 
which he used to print so often. 
This frivolous treatment of the most serious subjects enrages 
Deputy Ritz exceedingly. He rushes to the rostrum and states: 
"Gentlemen, I believe that the dignity of this Assembly demands that in our 
speeches we refrain from relating parables and comparisons which are out of place 
here.  They are also unparliamentary. (Considerable agitation.) I do not consider our 
great hilarity during the previous session as commensurate with the dignity of the 
Assembly ... in the interest of this Assembly's dignity I would recommend a certain 
sobriety." 
"In the interest" of the "sobriety" recommended by Deputy Ritz 
we would recommend that "in the interest of the Assembly's dignity" 
a Wilhelm Grabow.— Ed 
Heinrich Heine, "Der Tannhäuser", Caput 2.— Ed 

=====第221页=====
The Berlin Agreement Debates 191 
Deputy Ritz should speak as little as possible because his words are 
always followed by "great hilarity". 
It became revealed at once, however, how much the well-
meaning intentions of such worthies as Herr Schultz from Wanzle­
ben and Herr Ritz are inevitably misunderstood in this wicked world. 
For President Grabow appointed the scrutineers and among them 
were to be found none others than Herr Schultz from Wanzleben for 
the Left Centre (laughter) and Herr Brill for the Right Centre 
(hilarity). Concerning Herr Brill, our readers should know that this 
deputy who belongs to the extreme Left has seated himself in the 
Right Centre smack into the midst of the Upper Silesian and 
Pomeranian peasants where, by his popular oratorical talents, he has 
defeated quite a number of the reactionary party's insinuations. 
Then follows the question of Herr Behnsch concerning the Russian 
Note which is supposed to have caused the withdrawal of Wrangel 
from Jutland. 3 Auerswald denies the existence of this Note despite the 
Morning Chronicle and the Russian Bee.b  We believe that Herr 
Auerswald is right. We do not believe that Russia has sent an official 
"Note" to Berlin. But neither we nor Herr Auerswald can know 
what Nicholas sent to Potsdam. 
Herr Behnsch also puts a question on the Note of Major 
Wildenbruch addressed to the Danish Government 146 according to 
which the Danish war was merely a feigned war and a dalliance 
designed to work off "superabundant patriotism".0 
Herr Auerswald finds some reason for not answering this question. 
After a boring and confused discussion about the committee of 
experts there occurs finally a truly interesting parliamentary scene, a 
scene during which a certain amount of indignation and passion 
victoriously rises above the stereotyped drumming of the Right. We 
owe this scene to Deputy Gladbach. The Minister of War had 
promised today to answer his question on the disarming and arrest 
of the returned volunteers. d 
As soon as the President indicates that this subject is reached, 
Lieutenant-Colonel Griesheim, who is an old acquaintance of ours, 
rises and begins to speak. This bureaucratic-soldierly importunity is, 
however, rejected at once by a vigorous interruption. 
The President states that under Paragraph 28 of standing orders 
a See this volume, pp. 42-44.— Ed. 
A reference to the Russian periodical Severnaya Pchela (The Bee of the 
North).—  Ed. 
c Heinrich Heine, "Bei des Nachtwächters Ankunft zu Paris". In Zeitgedichte. —Ed. 
d See this volume, pp.  180-81.—  Ed. 

=====第222页=====
192 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
assistants to Ministers may only speak with the permission of the 
Assembly. 
Griesheim: I am here as representative of the Minister of War. 
President: I have not been so informed. 
Griesheim: Well, if the gentlemen do not want to listen to what I have 
to say.... (Aha! Agitation.) 
"The gentlemen!" For Herr Griesheim "the gentlemen" surely 
ought to be the "High Assembly"! The President should have called 
Herr Griesheim to order because of his repeated disregard for all 
propriety. 
The Assembly wants to listen to Herr Griesheim. First, however, 
Herr Gladbach'h given the floor to amplify his question. He explains 
first of all that he has put the question to the Minister of War and he 
demands that he be present and under standing orders the Assembly 
has the right to demand this. The President, however, sets this aside 
and Mr. Gladbach, bearing in mind the urgency of the matter, goes 
into the substance of his question. He relates that the volunteers, 
after they had left their corps and returned home because of the 
application of military despotism, had been branded in Spandau as 
vagabonds "by the execrable police system that had crept out of its 
hiding places overnight". He relates that in Spandau they had been 
disarmed, detained and sent home under police orders. Herr 
Gladbach is the first deputy who has succeeded in relating such an 
ignominious deed with entirely appropriate indignation. 
Herr Griesheim declares that this measure was taken upon the 
request of police headquarters in Berlin. 
Herr Gladbach now reads the honourable discharge of one of the 
volunteers signed by Prince Friedrich of Schleswig-Holstein and 
contrasts it to the police pass, quite vagabond-like in tone, which was 
issued to the same volunteer "upon ministerial decision" in Spandau. 
He points to the arrest, forced labour and cash fines threatened in the 
police pass, gives the lie to Herr Griesheim's assertion that this 
measure originated with the Chief of Police by citing an official 
document, and asks whether perhaps there existed a special Russian 
Ministry in Spandau. 
For the first time the Ministry was caught out in a direct lie. The 
entire Assembly becomes extremely excited. 
The Minister of the Interior, Herr Kühlwetter, finally has to get 
up perforce and stammer a few apologies. All that had happened had 
been the disarming of 18 armed men — merely an illegal act! One 
could not tolerate armed bands moving through the countryside 
without permission — 22 volunteers who are returning home! 
(Without permission!) 

=====第223页=====
The Berlin Agreement Debates 193 
The initial words of the Minister are received with unambiguous 
signs of displeasure. Even the Right is still too much under the 
depressing influence of the facts not to keep at least quiet. But they 
soon pull themselves together as they perceive how their unfortunate 
Minister painfully manoeuvres under the laughter and the grum­
bling of the Left, and greet his lame excuses with loud cheers; part of 
the Centre joins in and Herr Kühlwetter finally gathers enough 
courage to say: Not I, but my predecessor has ordered this measure, 
but I herewith declare that I fully approve it and should the case 
arise I would do the same. 
The Right and the Centre reward the courage of their heroic 
Kühlwetter with a thundering cheer. 
Gladbach, however, does not let himself be intimidated. He mounts 
the rostrum amidst the noise and clamour of the conservatives and 
asks once more: How is it possible that Herr Schreckenstein, who was 
the Minister already before the Spandau incident, did not know 
anything about it? How is it possible that four volunteers with good 
testimonials can endanger the security of the state? (Interrup­
tion— the gentlemen of the Centre raise points of order.) The 
question is not settled. How can one forcibly send these people home 
like vagabonds? (Interruption and noise.) I still have not received an 
answer to my question about the police pass. These people have been 
maltreated. Why does one tolerate a pack of Sunday-school heroes 
who to the disgrace of the capital (loud noise) have arrived armed 
from Wuppertal? (Noise. Cheers.) 
Kühlwetter finally comes clean: this action had been taken under 
the pretext of a doubtful proof of identity! Thus an honourable 
discharge signed by the General Staff of Schleswig-Holstein is for the 
police bureaucrats of Herr Kühlwetter proof of identity which is 
"open to doubt"? What a strange bureaucracy! 
Several more deputies speak against the Ministers until the 
President finally drops the matter and Deputy Mätze leads the 
Assembly from the tempests of this debate to the calm seas of the life 
of a schoolteacher where we leave them, wishing them the most 
beautiful idyllic joys. 
We are pleased that a deputy of the Left has at long last succeeded 
by a well-reasoned question and resolute demeanour in forcing the 
Ministers to run the gauntlet and in causing a scene which recalls 
French and English parliamentary debates. 
Written by Engels on July 6, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 37, July 7, 1848 time 

=====第224页=====
194 
THE GOVERNMENT OF ACTION 
Cologne, July 7. We have a new ministerial crisis. The Camphausen 
Ministry fell, the Hansemann Ministry faltered. The Government of 
Action had a life-span of a week in spite of all the little household 
remedies, cosmetics, press trials, arrests, in spite of the arrogant 
impudence with which the bureaucracy once again reared its 
document-dusty head, hatching petty, brutal plots of vengeance for 
its dethronement. The "Government of Action", composed entirely of 
mediocrities, was at the start of the Agreement Assembly's most 
recent session still so deluded as to believe in its own imperturba­
bility. 
By the end of the session3  it was completely routed. This 
momentous session convinced Prime Minister von Auerswald that he 
should tender his resignation; nor did Minister von Schreckenstein 
want any longer to remain as Hansemann's train-bearer and thus the 
entire Ministry yesterday betook themselves to the King at Sanssouci. 
What was decided there we shall learn tomorrow. 
Our Berlin4+ correspondent writes in a postscript: 
"Just now the rumour is spreading that Vincke, Pinder and Mevissen have been 
urgently sent for to help in the formation of a new Ministry." 
If this rumour is confirmed we shall finally have come from the 
Government of mediation through the Government of Action to the 
Government of the counter-revolution. At last! The very brief 
life-span of this ministerial counter-revolution would suffice to show 
to the people in full life-size these dwarfs who raise their diminutive 
heads at the slightest stirring of reaction. 
Written by Marx on July 7, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 39, July 9, 1848 time 
a July 4, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第225页=====
195 
THE AGREEMENT DEBATE 
Cologne, July 8. Simultaneously with the news of the dissolution of 
the Hansemann Ministry the stenographic report about the agree­
ment session of July 4 reached us. It was during this session that the 
resignation of Herr Rodbertus, the first symptom of this dissolution, 
was announced, and at the same time the two contradictory votes 
concerning the Posen committee and the exodus of the Left have 
greatly accelerated the Ministry's disintegration. 
The announcements of the Ministers regarding the resignation of 
Rodbertus published in the stenographic report contain nothing 
new. We shall skip them. 
Herr Forstmann rose: He had to protest against the expressions 
which Herr Gladbach used on June 30 a in referring to the 
"deputation of the most honourable men of Rhineland and 
Westphalia". 
Herr Berg: I have already a few days ago observed in connection 
with the standing orders that the reading of this petition is out of 
place here and that it bores me. b (Exclamation: It bores its!) Well 
then, us. I have spoken for myself and several others and the 
circumstance that we are being bored today by a supplementary 
observation does not invalidate this remark. 
Herr Tüshaus, the expert adviser of the central section on the 
question of the Posen committee, gives a report. The central section 
proposes that a committee be formed to investigate all questions 
concerning the Posen affair, and leaves open the question what 
funds shall be put at the committee's disposal for this purpose. 
See this volume, p. 193.— Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 189.— Ed. 

=====第226页=====
196 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Herr  Wolff,  Herr Müller, Herr Reichensperger II and Herr 
Sommer have proposed amendments which have all met with 
support and are down for discussion. 
Herr Tüshaus adds to his report a few comments directed against 
the idea of a committee. The truth, in this case, too, was evidendy to 
be found as always in the middle and after long and contradictory 
reports one would merely arrive at the conclusion that both sides 
were to blame. With that one would be exacdy where one is at 
present. One should at least first ask for a detailed report by the 
Government and then decide what to do further. 
Why did the central section select a reporter who speaks against his 
own report? 
Herr Reuter explains the reasons which caused him to put the 
motion to appoint the committee. Finally he remarks that he had 
no intention of making an accusation against the Ministers and that 
as a jurist he knew only too well that up to now all ministerial 
responsibility was illusory so long as there existed no law concerning 
this point. 
Herr Reichensperger II rises. He protests his boundless sympathies 
for Poland and hopes that the day may not be far when the German 
nation pays off its old debt of honour to the grandchildren of 
Sobieski. (As if this debt of honour had not been paid off a long time 
ago by the eight partitions of Poland, by shrapnel, lunar caustic and 
canings!) 
"We must, however, also maintain the calmest circumspection since German 
interests must always come first." 
(The German interests are, of course, to keep as much as possible 
of this territory.) And Herr Reichensperger is especially opposed to 
the appointment of a committee to investigate the evidence: 
"This is a question which should be dealt with expressly by  history  or the courts." 
Has Herr Reichensperger forgotten that he himself declared 
during the debate on the revolution that the gentlemen were here "to 
make history"} 3 He concludes with a juridical sophistry about the 
position of the deputies. We shall return later to the question of 
competence. 
Now, however, Herr Bauer from Krotoschin, b himself a German 
Pole,  rises to defend the interests of his community. 
"I would like to ask the Assembly to draw a veil over the past and to occupy itself 
solely with the future of a people that has every right to lay claim to our sympathy." 
a See this volume, p. 84.— Ed. 
The Polish name is Krotoszyn.— Ed. 

=====第227页=====
The Agreement Debate 197 
How touching! Herr Bauer from Krotoschin is so taken up with 
sympathy for the future of the Polish people that he wants to "draw a 
veil" over its past, over the barbarities of the Prussian soldiery, the 
Jews and the German Poles. The matter should be dropped in the 
interest of the Poles themselves! 
"What does one hope to gain from such depressing discussions? If you find the 
Germans guilty will you, therefore, be less concerned for the preservation of their 
nationality, and the safety of their person and their property?" 
That was, indeed, a magnificent show of candour! Herr Bauer 
from Krotoschin admits that the Germans could possibly be wrong, 
but even so German nationality must be supported at the expense of 
the Poles! 
"I am unable to perceive how digging through the rubbish of the past can produce 
anything beneficial for a satisfactory solution of these difficult questions." 
There certainly would not be anything "beneficial" in store for the 
German Poles and their fervent allies. That is why they are so much 
opposed to it. 
Herr Bauer then seeks to intimidate the Assembly: such a 
committee would inflame the minds of people once again, incite 
fanaticism anew, and might lead to a new bloody clash. These 
philanthropic considerations prevent Herr Bauer from voting for 
the committee. Nor can he vote against it since that might create the 
impression that his mandataries have reason to fear the committee. 
Thus out of consideration for the Poles he is against the committee 
and out of consideration for the Germans he is for it, and to maintain 
his perfect impartiality in this dilemma, he does not vote at all. 
Bussmann of Gnesen,3  another deputy from Posen, regards his 
mere presence as proof that Germans, too, live in Posen. He wants to 
prove statistically that there are "whole masses of Germans" who live 
in his region. (Interruption.) Furthermore, over two-thirds of the 
entire property is supposed to be in German hands. 
"On the other hand I believe that I can provide the proof that we Prussians 
not merely  conquered  Poland with our  weapons  (! ?!) in 1815 but that we have conquered 
it a second time by our intelligence" (of which this session offers samples) "through 33 
years of peace. (Interruption. The President asks Herr Bussmann not to digress from 
the question.) I am not opposed to a reorganisation; but the most sensible 
reorganisation would be a system of local government with election of officials. Such a 
measure combined with the Frankfurt decisions for the protection of all nationalities 
would offer Poland every guarantee. I am, however, very much opposed to the line of 
demarcation. (Interruption. A second reprimand.) Well, if I must not digress from the 
subject, I am against the committee because it is useless and provocative; incidentally, 
a The Polish name is Gniezno.— Ed. 

=====第228页=====
198 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
I am not afraid of it and I shall support the committee if it comes to the point.... 
(Interruption: He is therefore speaking in favour of it!) No, I am speaking against it.... 
Gentlemen, in order that you may at least understand why the insurrection came 
about I will explain to you in a few words...." (Interruption. Disagreement.) 
Cieszkowski: "Don't interrupt! Let him finish speaking!" 
President: "I am asking the speaker again to speak strictly to the 
question." 
Bussmann: "I have spoken out against the idea of a committee and 
I have nothing further to add!" 
With these angry words the enraged German-Polish lord of the 
manor leaves the rostrum and hurries back to his seat to the ringing 
laughter of the Assembly. 
Herr Heyne, the deputy from the Bromberg district, tries to save 
the honour of his countrymen by voting for the committee. Never­
theless, he cannot refrain either from accusing the Poles of deceit, 
fraud etc. 
Herr Baumstark, also a German Pole, is likewise against the com­
mittee. The reasons are always the same. 
The Poles abstain from the discussion. Only Pokrzywnicki speaks 
for the committee. It is well known that the Poles have all along 
pressed for an investigation while it now becomes apparent that the 
German Poles, with one exception, have all protested against it. 
Herr Pohle is so much a Pole that he regards all Posen as part of 
Germany and declares the border between Germany and Poland to 
be a "dividing wall running through Germany". 
The defenders of the committee were mostly long-winded and 
their arguments betrayed little acumen. Just like their opponents, 
they repeated themselves over and over again. Their arguments 
were mostly of a hostile and trivial nature and much less entertaining 
than the biassed protestations of the German Poles. 
Tomorrow we shall come back to the attitude of the Ministers and 
officials in regard to this question and to the well-known question of 
competence. 
Written by Engels on July 8, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 39, July 9, 1848 time 
Wilhelm Grabow.— Ed. 

=====第229页=====
THE MINISTERIAL CRISIS 
Cologne, July 8.147  With great tenacity, the Hansemann Ministry 
postpones its dissolution by a few days. The Finance Minister 
especially seems to be too patriotic to leave the administration of the 
exchequer in unskilled hands. From a parliamentary point of view 
the Ministry was dissolved, and yet it continues to exist in fact. It 
seems that it has been decided in Sanssouci to make one more 
attempt to prolong its life. The Agreement Assembly  itself,  on the 
point of administering the death blow to the Ministry at any moment, 
recoils the next, frightened by its own desires, and the majority 
seems to surmise that if the Hansemann Ministry is not yet a Ministry 
to its liking, a Ministry to its liking would at the same time be a 
Ministry of crisis and of decision. Hence its vacillations, its 
inconsistencies, its wanton invectives and its sudden turns to 
remorse. And the Government of Action, with unshakeable, almost 
cynical equanimity, accepts this borrowed, humiliating life which at 
any moment may be called into question and which only feeds on the 
alms of weakness. 
Duchâtel! Duchâtel! The inevitable demise of the Ministry, 
laboriously postponed by only a few days, will be as inglorious as its 
existence. Tomorrow's edition 3 will present to our readers a further 
contribution to the evaluation of this existence by our Berlin 
Correspondent. We can summarise the agreement session of July 7 
in a few words.b  The Assembly teases the Hansemann 0 Ministry, it 
takes pleasure in inflicting partial defeats upon it; the Ministry bows 
its head half smiling, half frowning, but at the leave-taking, the High 
Assembly calls after it: "No harm meant!" and the stoic triumvirate 
Hansemann-Kühlwetter-Milde murmurs in response: Pas si  bête!  Pas si 
bhe\ d 
Written by Marx on July 8, 1848 
First published in the special supplement 
to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 39, July 
9, 1848, and in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
No. 40, July 10, 1848 
The version printed in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 40 has: "Today's 
edition".— Ed. 
For a more detailed report see this volume, pp. 216-22 and  226-31.—  Ed. 
In the original a play on the words hänseln (to tease) and Hansemann.— Ed. 
d We are not that stupid!— Ed. Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第230页=====
200 
THE AGREEMENT SESSION OF JULY 4 
(SECOND ARTICLE) 
Cologne, July 9. The series of articles3 based upon authentic 
documents, which we started three days ago, clearly show that the 
appointment of an investigation committee with unrestricted 
powers is an urgent and necessary act of justice towards the Poles. 
The old-Prussian officials, who from the outset assumed a hostile 
attitude towards the Poles, saw their existence threatened by the 
promises of reorganisation. They sensed danger in the smallest act of 
justice towards the Poles. Hence the fanatical fury with which, 
supported by the unrestrained soldiery, they fell upon the Poles, 
broke the conventions, maltreated the most harmless people and 
permitted or sanctioned the greatest infamies merely to force the 
Poles to a fight in which the Poles were bound to be crushed by 
vastly superior forces. 
The Camphausen Ministry, which was not only weak, perplexed 
and badly informed but remained  deliberately,  on principle, inactive, 
allowed everything to go its own way. The most horrifying 
barbarities were perpetrated, and Herr Camphausen did not stir. 
What reports are now available on the civil war in Posen? 
On the one hand there are the brassed, slanted reports of the 
originators of this war: the officials and the officers, and the data 
based on their evidence which the Ministry can quote. The Ministry 
itself is biassed as long as it includes Herr Hansemann. These 
documents are biassed, but they are official. 
On the other hand there are the facts collected by the Poles, their 
written complaints to the Ministry, especially the letters of Arch-
[Ernst Dronke,] "Die preussische Pacificirung und Reorganisation Posens", Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung Nos. 38-40, July 8-10, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第231页=====
The Agreement Session of July 4 201 
bishop Przyluski to the Ministers.3 These documents for the most 
part have no official character, but their authors are prepared to 
prove the truth of their statements. 
The two kinds of reports totally contradict each other and the 
committee is supposed to investigate which side is right. 
The committee, except in a few instances, can only do this by 
travelling to the spot in order to clear up at least the most significant 
points by the hearing of witnesses. If it is forbidden to do this, its 
entire activity becomes illusory. It may practise a certain historical-
philological criticism and it may declare that one or another report is 
more trustworthy, but it will not be able to resolve anything. 
Thus the entire importance of the committee depends on its 
authority to question witnesses, hence the eagerness of all the 
Polonophobes in the Assembly to remove this authority by all sorts of 
subtle and ingenious arguments, hence also the coup d'état at the 
end of the session. 148 
Deputy Bloem said in the debate on the 4th [of  July]: 
"Does one genuinely seek the truth if, as a few amendments want it, the truth is 
to be derived from documents submitted by the Government? Most certainly not! 
Whence did the government documents originate? For the most part from the reports 
of officials. Whence did the officials originate? From the old system. Have these 
officials vanished? Have new Landräte been appointed through new, popular 
elections? By no means. Do the officials inform us about the true mood? The old 
officials report today just as they did formerly. It is, therefore, apparent that a mere 
examination of ministerial records will lead us nowhere." 
Deputy Richter goes even further. He sees in the behaviour of the 
Posen officials only the most extreme, but inevitable, result of the 
preservation of the old system of administration and the old officials 
in general. Similar conflicts between the duties and the interests of 
the old officials could also occur at any time in other provinces. 
"Since the revolution we have had a new Ministry and even a second one but a 
Ministry is, of course, only the soul which has to set up a uniform organisation 
everywhere. In the provinces, however, the old administrative organisation has 
remained the same everywhere. Do you expect a different picture? One does not pour 
new wine into old rotten skins. Accordingly we have the most terrible complaints in 
the Grand Duchy. Should we not  therefore  form a committee even if only to show how 
very necessary it is in the other provinces as well as in Posen to replace the old 
organisation by a new one suited to the times and circumstances?" 
Deputy Richter is right. After a revolution, the first necessity is to 
replace all civil and military officials as well as part of the judiciary, 
a Leon Przyluski, ["Die Korrespondenz des Erzbischofs von Posen, Przyluski, mit 
dem Berliner Kabinett",] Neue Rheinische ZeitungNos. 5, 7, 10, 14, 38 and 39, June 5, 
7, 10 and 14, and July 8 and 9, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第232页=====
202 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
and especially officials in the Public  Prosecutor's  office. Otherwise the 
best measures of the Central Authority fail through the obstinacy of 
subordinates. The weakness of the French Provisional Government 
and the weakness of the Camphausen Ministry are the bitter fruits of 
just such a situation. 
In Prussia, however, where for forty years a thoroughly organised 
bureaucratic hierarchy has dominated the administration and the 
military with absolute force, in Prussia where that very same 
bureaucracy was the chief enemy that was vanquished on March 19, 
there the complete replacement of all civil and military officials was 
infinitely more urgent. The Government of mediation, of course, 
did not feel called upon to carry through revolutionary necessities. It 
had admittedly the task not to do anything and therefore left the 
real power for the time being in the hands of its old enemies, the 
bureaucrats. It "mediated" between the old bureaucracy and the 
new conditions. In return the bureaucracy through its "mediation" 
presented the Ministry with the civil war in Posen and the 
responsibility for barbarities such as have not occurred since the 
Thirty Years' War. 149 
As heir to the Camphausen Ministry, the Hansemann Ministry was 
forced to take over all the assets and liabilities of its testator, that is 
not only the majority in the Chamber but also the events and officials 
in Posen. Thus the Ministry had a direct interest in making the 
committee's investigation as illusory as possible. The speakers 
representing the Ministry's majority, especially the jurists, used their 
entire stock of casuistry and sophistry to discover a profound, 
principled reason for prohibiting the committee from questioning 
witnesses. We would stray too far afield if we allowed ourselves to be 
involved here in admiring the jurisprudence of a Reichensperger 
etc. We have to limit ourselves to bringing to light the painstaking 
disquisition of Minister Kühlwetter. 
Herr Kühlwetter, leaving entirely aside the material question, 
begins with the declaration that the Government would be extremely 
pleased if such committees were to assist it in performing its difficult 
task by clarifications etc. Indeed, if Herr Reuter had not had the 
fortunate idea of proposing such a committee, 3 Herr Kühlwetter 
himself would undoubtedly have insisted upon it. One should give 
the committee the most far-reaching tasks (so that it may never finish 
its business); he entirely agreed that any scrupulous weighing of its 
actions was unnecessary. Let the committee include the entire past, 
a See this volume, pp.  57-61.—  Ed. 

=====第233页=====
The Agreement Session of July 4 203 
present and future of the Province of Posen in the scope of its 
activity; the Ministry would not scrupulously examine the commit­
tee's competence insofar as it was only a question of clarifications. 
One could, of course, go too far, but he would leave it up to the 
wisdom of the committee whether it wanted to take into its scope, for 
example, the question of the dismissal of the Posen officials as well. 
So much for the introductory concessions of the Minister which, 
embellished with a few philistine declamations, were given several 
vigorous cheers. However the "buts" were to follow. 
"But since it has been remarked that the reports about Posen cannot possibly 
shed accurate light because they came only from officials, and moreover old-time 
officials, I consider it to be my duty to defend an honourable profession. If it be 
proved true that individual officials have neglected their duty, then let us punish the 
individuals who neglect their duty but officialdom as such must never be denigrated 
just because a few individuals have violated their duty." 
What a bold stand Herr Kühlwetter has taken! To be sure a few 
individual violations of duty have taken place but on the whole the 
officials have done their duty honourably. 
And, indeed, the mass of Posen officials have done their "duty", 
their "duty to their official oath", to the entire old-Prussian system of 
bureaucracy and to their own interests which concur with this duty. 
They have fulfilled their duty by using every means to destroy 
the 19th of March in Posen. It is exactly for that reason, 
Herr Kühlwetter, that it is your "duty" to dismiss these officials en 
masse. 
But Herr Kühlwetter speaks of a duty which is determined by 
pre-revolutionary laws, whereas here it is a matter of an entirely 
different duty which arises after every revolution and which consists 
of interpreting correctly the altered conditions and of furthering 
their development. To ask of the officials to replace the bureaucratic 
with the constitutional standpoint and to support the revolution in 
the same way as the new Ministers, that means, according to Herr 
Kühlwetter, to denigrate an honourable profession. 
Herr Kühlwetter also rejects the general accusation that favourit­
ism was shown to party chiefs and that crimes remained unpunished. 
Specific cases should be cited. 
Does Herr Kühlwetter perhaps maintain in all seriousness that 
even a small part of the brutalities and atrocities committed by the 
Prussian soldiery, tolerated and supported by the officials and 
cheered by the German Poles and Jews, have been punished? Herr 
Kühlwetter states that he has not yet been able to examine the 
colossal amount of material in all its aspects. Indeed, he seems at the 
most to have examined it in one aspect alone. 

=====第234页=====
204 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
It is now that Herr Kühlwetter takes up "the most difficult and 
delicate question", namely the forms in which the committee should 
transact its business. Herr Kühlwetter would have liked to have this 
question discussed more thoroughly, for, 
"as has been rightly remarked, this question contains a question of principle, the 
question of the droit d'enquête".* 
Herr Kühlwetter now blesses us with a longish discourse about 
the separation of powers in the state which surely contains much that 
is new for the Upper Silesian and Pomeranian peasants in the 
Assembly. To hear in the year of our Lord 1848 a Prussian Minister, 
and a "Minister of action" at that, solemnly interpreting Montes­
quieu from the rostrum makes a strange impression. 
The separation of powers which Herr Kühlwetter and other great 
political philosophers regard with the deepest reverence as a sacred 
and inviolable principle is basically nothing but the profane 
industrial division of labour applied for purposes of simplification 
and control to the mechanism of the state. Just like all sacred, eternal 
and inviolable principles it is only applied as long as it suits existing 
conditions. Thus, for example, in a constitutional monarchy, the 
ruler possesses both legislative and executive power; in the 
Chambers, furthermore, legislative power mingles with control over 
executive power etc. This indispensable limitation on the division of 
labour in the state is expressed by political sages of the calibre of a 
"Minister of action" in the following manner: 
"The legislative power, inasmuch as it is exercised by popular representation, 
has its own organs; the executive power has its own organs, and the judicial power no 
less so. It is therefore (!) inadmissible for one branch to lay claim to the organs of 
another unless such power has been transferred to it by a special law." 
A divergence from the separation of powers is inadmissible 
"unless" it is dictated "by a special law". And the other way round: 
the application of the dictated separation of powers is similarly 
inadmissible "unless" it is dictated "by special laws"! What 
profundity! What revelations! 
Herr Kühlwetter does not mention the case of a revolution 
where the separation of powers comes to an end without "a special 
law". 
Herr Kühlwetter now argues at great length that the authority of 
the committee to question witnesses under oath, to summon 
officials etc., in short, to see with its own  eyes,  is an infringement upon 
the separation of powers and must be established by a special law. As 
The right of investigation.— Ed. 

=====第235页=====
The Agreement Session of July 4 205 
an example, the Belgian Constitution is cited, Article 40 of which 
expressly gives the Chambers the droit d'enquête. 
But, Herr Kühlwetter, is there in Prussia legally and factually a 
separation of powers in the sense that you interpret it, i.e. in the 
constitutional sense? Is not the existing separation of powers the 
limited, trimmed one which corresponds to the absolute, the 
bureaucratic monarchy? How then can one use constitutional 
phrases for it before it has been reformed constitutionally? How can 
Prussia have an Article 40 of a Constitution as long as this 
Constitution itself does not yet exist at all? 
Let us summarise. According to Herr Kühlwetter the appointment 
of a committee with unlimited authority is an infringement on the 
constitutional separation of powers. The constitutional separation of 
powers does not yet exist at all in Prussia; hence there can also be no 
infringement upon it. 
It is supposed to be introduced, however, and according to Herr 
Kühlwetter it must be regarded as already existing during the 
provisional revolutionary state of affairs in which we live. If Herr 
Kühlwetter were right we would surely also have to presume the 
existence of constitutional exceptionsl And these constitutional 
exceptions surely include the right of legislative bodies to carry out 
investigations! 
But Herr Kühlwetter is by no means right. On the contrary: the 
provisional revolutionary state of affairs consists in the fact that the 
separation of powers has been provisionally abolished and that the 
legislative authority seizes executive power or that the executive 
authority seizes legislative power for the time being. It does not make 
any difference whether the revolutionary dictatorship (and it is a 
dictatorship no matter how feebly it is enforced) is in the hands of 
the Crown or of an Assembly or both. French history since 1789 
provides plenty of examples of all three cases if Herr Kühlwetter 
wants them. 
The provisional state of affairs to which Herr Kühlwetter appeals 
actually speaks against him. It gives the Assembly yet other attributes 
besides the mere right of investigation; it even empowers it, if need 
be, to transform itself into a court of justice and to judge without laws! 
Had Herr Kühlwetter been able to foresee these results, he might 
perhaps have been more careful in speaking of the "recognition of 
the revolution". 
But he may rest assured: 
Germany, pious nursery, 
Is not a Roman cutthroats' den,a 
Heinrich Heine, "Zur Beruhigung". In Zeitgedichte. —Ed. 

=====第236页=====
206 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
and Messrs. the agreers may sit as long as they like, they will never 
become a "Long Parliament".150 
We find, by the way, a significant difference when we compare the 
bureaucratic doctrinaire of the Government of Action with his 
doctrinaire predecessor, Herr Camphausen. Herr Camphausen, at 
any rate, possessed infinitely more originality. He almost ap­
proached Guizot whereas Herr Kühlwetter does not even reach the 
tiny Lord John Russell. 
We have sufficiendy admired the state philosophical wealth of 
Kühlwetter's oration. Let us now examine the purpose, the actual 
practical reason for this moss-covered wisdom, for this entire 
separation theory à la Montesquieu. 
For Herr Kühlwetter now comes to the results of his theory. The 
Ministry, by way of exception, is inclined to instruct the authorities to 
comply with the requirements of the committee. It must, however, 
oppose the committee giving direct instructions to the authorities, 
i.e. the committee, which has no direct connection with the 
authorities and which has no power over them, cannot force them to 
convey other information to it than they consider appropriate. In 
addition there is the tedious routine and the endless hierarchy of 
appeals authorities! It is quite a pretty trick to render the committee 
illusory under the pretext of the separation of powers! 
"It cannot be the intention to transfer to the committee the entire job of the 
Government!" 
As if anybody intended giving the committee the right to  govern}. 
"In addition to the committee, the Government would have to continue its 
inquiry into the underlying causes of dissension in Posen" (it is exactly because it has 
already "inquired" for such a long time without finding out anything that there is 
reason enough to exclude it now altogether from such an inquiry), "and since this 
purpose would be served by a double road there would often be unnecessary waste of 
time and effort and conflicts could hardly be avoided." 
According to all hitherto existing precedents, the committee would 
certainly spend much "unnecessary time and effort" if it were 
to agree to Herr Kühlwetter's proposal for the protracted hierarchy 
of appeals authorities. In this way, conflicts would also occur much 
more easily than if the committee were to deal directly with the 
authorities and could immediately clear up misunderstandings as 
well as put down bureaucratic obduracy. 
"It seems therefore (!) to be in the nature of things that the committee will seek to 
achieve its purpose in agreement with the Ministry and with its constant co-operation." 
It gets better and better! A committee which is supposed to 
control the Ministry is also supposed to work in agreement with it 

=====第237页=====
The Agreement Session of July 4 207 
and with its constant co-operation! Herr Kühlwetter is not at all 
embarrassed to let it be known that he would find it desirable to have 
the committee under his control and not the other way round. 
"If, on the other hand, the committee should want to assume an isolated position, 
the question must arise whether the committee wants to and is able to assume the 
responsibility which rests with the Government. It has already been observed with as 
much truth as intelligence that the inviolability of the deputies is incompatible with 
this responsibility." 
The question is not one of administration but merely of 
establishing facts. The committee is to receive the authority to 
employ the means necessary for this purpose. That is all. It goes 
without saying that the committee will be responsible to the Assembly 
for either the neglect or the excessive use of these means. 
The whole matter has as litde to do with ministerial responsibility 
and deputies' irresponsibility as with "truth" and "intelligence". 
In short, under the pretext of the separation of powers Herr 
Kühlwetter warmly recommends these proposals to the agreers for 
the solution of the conflict without, however, making a precise 
proposal. The Government of Action feels that it stands on 
uncertain ground. 
We cannot go into the debate which ensued. The results of the 
voting are known: the defeat of the Government in the roll-call vote 
and the coup d'état of the Right which adopted a motion after it had 
already been defeated. We have already reported all that. 3 We only 
add that among the Rhinelanders who voted against giving unlimited 
authority to the committee we noticed the names of: 
Arntz, LL. D., Bauerband, Frencken, Lensing, von Loe, 
Reichensperger II, Simons and last but not least our Chief Public 
Prosecutor Zweiffel. 
Written by Engels on July 9, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 41, July 11, 1848 time 
a See this volume, p. 188.— Ed. 
9-3447 

=====第238页=====
208 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE NEUE 
RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
Cologne, July 10. Yesterday  eleven  compositors of our newspaper as 
well as Herr Clouth were summoned to appear as witnesses before 
the examining magistrate on Tuesday, July 11. It is still a question of 
finding the author of the incriminatory article. 3 We recall that at the 
time of the old Rheinische Zeitung, the time of the censorship and the 
Arnim Government, when they tried to find out who had sent in the 
famous "Marriage Bill", 151 there were neither house searches nor 
were examinations of compositors and the printshop owner resorted 
to. In the meantime, of course, we have experienced a 
revolution which had the misfortune to be recognised by Herr 
Hansemann. 
We have to revert once again to the July 5 "rejoinder" of Public 
Prosecutor Hecker.h 
In this rejoinder Herr Hecker accuses us of lying with respect to 
one or another remark which, we ascribed to him. Perhaps we have 
now the means at our disposal to correct the correction, but who will 
vouch that during this unequal battle we will not once again be 
answered with Paragraph 222 or Paragraph 367 of the Penal Code? 
Herr Hecke?s rejoinder ends with the following words: 
"The defamations and insults contained in this article" (dated Cologne, July 4), 
"directed against Chief Public Prosecutor Zweiffel and the police who carried out the 
arrest, will be evaluated in the legal  proceedings  which will be initiated on this count." 
Evaluation! Have the  black-red-gold  colours been "evaluated" in the 
"legal proceedings" which were initiated by the Kamptz Govern­
ment? 152 
a See this volume, pp. 177-79.— Ed. 
Ibid., p. 186. In the Neue Rheinische Zeitung: "July 6", which is a misprint.— Ed. 

=====第239页=====
Legal Proceedings against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 209 
Let us consult the Penal Code.153 Paragraph 367 reads: 
"Whosoever at public places ... or in an authentic and public document, or in a 
printed or unprinted piece of writing which has been posted, sold or distributed, 
accuses someone of facts which, if  they  were true,3 could result in the prosecution of the 
accused in a criminal or police court, or merely expose him to the contempt and 
hatred of his fellow citizens, is guilty of the offence of defamation." 
Paragraph 370: "If the fact which forms the subject of the accusation should, 
after due  process  of law,  prove to be true, then the originator of the accusation shall go 
free of all punishment. Only proof which is derived from a verdict or some other 
authentic document is regarded as legal." 
In order to elucidate this paragraph we shall still add Paragraph 
368: 
"Consequently it will be of  no avail to the originator of the accusation  to plead in his 
defence that  he will undertake to  provide  proof;  nor can he enter  the plea  that the  documents 
or the facts  are notorious  or that the accusations which gave rise to the prosecution were 
copied or extracted from foreign papers or other printed matter." 
The imperial era with all its crafty despotism radiates from these 
paragraphs. 
According to ordinary human understanding, somebody is defamed 
if he is charged with fictitious evidence. According to the extraordina­
ry understanding of the Penal Code, however, he is defamed if he is 
charged with real facts that can be proved but not in an exceptional 
manner, not by a verdict or by an official document. Oh for the 
miraculous power of verdicts and official documents! Only facts 
which have been judged in  court,  only officially documented facts are true 
and genuine facts. Has there ever been a penal code which has more 
maliciously defamed the most ordinary common sense? Has any 
bureaucracy ever thrown up a similar Chinese Wall between itself 
and the public? Covered with the shield of this paragraph, officials 
and deputies are immune like constitutional kings. These gendemen 
may commit as many facts as they deem proper "which will expose 
them to the hatred and contempt of their fellow citizens", but these 
facts must not be pronounced, written or printed on penalty of loss 
of civil rights in addition to the inevitable prison sentence and fine. 
Long live the freedom of the press and free speech moderated by 
Paragraphs 367, 368 and 370! You are arrested illegally. The press 
denounces this illegality. Result: the denunciation is "evaluated" in 
"legal proceedings" because of the "defamation" of the venerable 
official who has committed the illegality, unless a miracle occurs and 
a verdict has already been rendered yesterday about the illegality 
which he commits today. 
All italics in the quotations from the Penal Code are by Marx.— Ed. 
9* 

=====第240页=====
210 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
No wonder that the Rhenish jurists, among them the people's 
representative Zweiffel, voted against a Polish commission with absolute 
authority! From their point of view, the Poles ought to have been 
sentenced to loss of their civil rights and also mandatory imprison­
ment and fine because of their "defamation" of Colomb, Steinäcker, 
Hirschfeld, Schleinitz, the Pomeranian army reserve and the 
old-Prussian police. Thus this peculiar pacification of Posen would 
be most gloriously crowned. 
And what a contradiction it is to use these paragraphs of the Penal 
Code in order to label the rumour of the threat of getting rid of 
"March 19, the clubs and freedom of the press" a "defamation"]a  As 
if the use of Paragraphs 367, 368 and 370 of the Penal Code against 
political speeches and writings were not the real definitive destruc­
tion of March 19, clubs and freedom of the press! What is a club 
without freedom of speech? And what is freedom of speech with 
Paragraphs 367, 368 and 370 of the Penal Code? And what is March 
19 without clubs and freedom of speech? The suppression of 
freedom of speech and the press in  deed:  is there a more striking 
proof that only defamation could tell fables about the intention of this 
deed? Beware of signing the address which was drawn up yesterday 
at the Gürzenich Hall. 154 The Public Prosecutor's office would 
"appreciate" your address by initiating "legal proceedings" on the 
count of the "defamation" of Hansemann and Auerswald Or may only 
Ministers be defamed with impunity, defamed in the sense of the 
French Penal Code, that code of political slavery carved in such a 
pithy style? Do we have responsible Ministers and irresponsible 
policemen? 
Thus it is not that the incriminatory article can be evaluated by the 
use of the paragraphs on "defamation in a juridical sense", a 
defamation in the sense of despotic fiction which is an outrage to 
common sense. All that can thereby be evaluated are purely and 
simply the accomplishments of the March revolution, that is the 
height reached by the counter-revolution and the recklessness with 
which the bureaucracy may revive and enforce weapons still to be 
found in the arsenal of the old legislation against the new political 
life. This use of the calumny paragraphs in attacks upon the  people's 
representatives is a marvellous method of shielding these gentlemen 
from criticism and of depriving the press of the protection of the 
jury system. 
Let us now pass from the charge of defamation to the charge of 
insult. Here Paragraph 222 is applicable; it reads as follows: 
a See this volume, p. 179.— Ed. 

=====第241页=====
Legal Proceedings against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung Zl 1 
"If one or more officials from the administrative or judicial authorities during  the 
exercise  of their official duties or as a result of  these  duties suffer any verbal insults which aim 
at an attack upon their honour or delicacy of feeling, the person who insults them in 
this way shall be punished with imprisonment of from one month to two years." 
When the article appeared in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Herr 
Zweiffei was acting as  people's  representative in Berlin and by no means 
as an official of the judicial authorities in Cologne. It was indeed 
impossible to insult him in the exercise of his official duties or as a 
result of these duties since he was not performing any official duties. 
The honour and delicacy of feeling of the gentlemen of the police, 
however, could only then come under the protection of this article if 
they had been insulted in words (par parole). We have written, 
however, and not spoken, and par écrit is not par  parole.  Thus, what is 
there left to do? The moral is to speak with more circumspection of 
the lowest of policemen than of the foremost of princes and in 
particular not to take liberties with the most irritable gentlemen of 
the Public Prosecutor's office. We remind the public once more that 
similar prosecutions have been started simultaneously in different 
places such as Cologne, Düsseldorf and Koblenz. What a strange 
method of coincidence! 
Written by Marx on July 10, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 41, July 11, 1848 time 

=====第242页=====
212 
GERMAN FOREIGN POLICY 
AND THE LATEST EVENTS IN PRAGUE 
Cologne, July 11. Despite the patriotic shouting and beating of the 
drums of almost the entire German press, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
from the very first moment has sided with the Poles in Posen, the 
Italians in Italy, and the Czechs in Bohemia. From the very first 
moment we saw through the machiavellian policy which, shaking in 
its foundations in the interior of Germany, sought to paralyse 
democratic energies, to deflect attention from  itself,  to dig conduits 
for the fiery lava of the revolution and forge the weapon of 
suppression within the country by calling forth a narrow-minded 
national hatred which runs counter to the cosmopolitan character of 
the Germans, and in national wars of unheard-of atrocity and 
indescribable barbarity trained a brutal soldiery such as could hardly 
be found even in the Thirty Years' War. 155 
What deep plot it is to let the Germans under the command of 
their governments undertake a crusade against the freedom of 
Poland, Bohemia and Italy at the same moment that they are 
struggling with these same governments to obtain freedom at home! 
What an historical paradox! Gripped by revolutionary ferment, 
Germany seeks relief in a war of restoration, in a campaign for the 
consolidation of the old authority against which she has just revolted. 
Only a war against Russia would be a war of revolutionary Germany, a 
war by which she could cleanse herself of her past sins, could take 
courage, defeat her own autocrats, spread civilisation by the sacrifice 
of her own sons as becomes a people that is shaking off the chains of 
long, indolent slavery and make herself free within her borders by 
bringing liberation to those outside. 
The more the light of publicity reveals in sharp outlines the most 
recent events, the more facts confirm our view of the national wars 

=====第243页=====
German Foreign Policy and the Latest Events in Prague 213 
by which Germany has dishonoured her new era. As a contribution 
to this enlightenment we publish the following report by a German in 
Prague even though it reached us belatedly: 
Prague, June 24, 1848 (delayed) 
The Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung of the 22nd [of this month] contains an article 3 
about the assembly of Germans held in Aussig on the 18th [of this month] in which 
speeches were made which show such ignorance of our recent events and, in part, to 
put it mildly, such a willingness to heap abusive accusations upon our independent 
press that [this] writer considers it his duty to correct these errors as far as this is now 
possible and to confront these thoughtless and malicious persons with the firmness of 
truth. It comes as a surprise when a man like "the founder of the League to Preserve 
German Interests in the East" c exclaims before an entire assembly: "There can be no 
talk of forgiveness so long as the battle in Prague continues and, should the victory be 
ours,  we must make full use of it in future." What victory then have the Germans 
achieved and what conspiracy then has been crushed? Whoever, of course, lends 
credence to the correspondent of the Deutsche Allgemeine, who, it seems, is always only 
superficially informed, and whoever trusts the pathetic catchwords of "a small-time 
Polonophobe and Francophobe" or the articles of the perfidious Frankfurter Journal 
which seeks to incite Germans against Bohemians just as it stirred up Germans against 
Germans during the events in Baden, such a person will never obtain a clear view of 
the situation here. Everywhere in Germany the opinion seems to prevail that the battle 
in the streets of Prague was aimed solely at the suppression of the German element 
and the founding of a Slav republic. We will not even discuss the latter suspicion, for it 
is too naive; in regard to the former, however, not the smallest trace of a rivalry 
between nationalities could be observed during the fighting on the barricades. 
Germans and Czechs stood side by side ready for defence, and I myself frequendy 
requested a Czech-speaking person to repeat what he had said in German, which was 
always done without the slightest remark. One hears it said that the outbreak of the 
revolution came two days too early; this would imply that there must already have 
been a certain degree of organisation and at least provisions made for the supply of 
ammunition; however, there was no trace of this either. The barricades grew out of 
the ground in a haphazard way wherever ten to twelve people happened to be 
together; incidentally, it would have been impossible to raise any more barricades, for 
even the smallest alleys contained three or four of them. The ammunition was 
mutually exchanged in the streets and was exceedingly sparse. There was no question 
whatsoever of a supreme command or of any other kind of command. The defenders 
stayed where they were being attacked and fired without direction and without 
command from houses and barricades. No thought of a conspiracy could have had 
any foundation in such an unguided and unorganised resistance, unless this is 
suggested by some official declaration and publication of the results of an 
investigation. The Government, however, does not seem to find this appropriate, for 
nothing has transpired from the castle that might enlighten Prague about its bloody 
June days. With the exception of a few, the imprisoned members of the Svornost 
have all been released again. Other prisoners are also being released, only Count 
a "Aussig, 18. Juni", Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, supplement to No. 174, June 22, 
1848.—  Ed. 
The Czech name is Usti.— Ed. 
c Johann Wuttke. — Ed. 

=====第244页=====
214 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Buquoy, Villâny and a few others are still under arrest, and one fine morning we will 
perhaps read a poster on the walls of Prague according to which it was all based on a 
misunderstanding. The operations of the commanding general do not suggest 
protection of Germans against Czechs either; for in that case, instead of winning the 
German population to his side by explaining the situation to them, storming the 
barricades and protecting the life and property of the "loyal" inhabitants of the city, 
he evacuates the Old City, moves to the left bank of the Moldau 3 and shoots down 
Czechs and Germans alike; for the bombs and bullets that flew into the Old City could 
not possibly seek out only Czechs, they mowed people down without looking at the 
cockade. How can one rationally deduce a Slav conspiracy when the Government up 
to now has been unable or unwilling to give any clarification? 
Dr. Göschen, a citizen of Leipzig, has drawn up a letter of thanks to Prince von 
Windischgrätz, to which the general should not ascribe too much importance as an 
expression of the popular voice. Citizen Göschen is one of those circumspect liberals 
who suddenly turned liberal after the February days; he was the initiator of a letter of 
confidence to the Saxon Government concerning the electoral law while the whole of 
Saxony cried out in indignation, for one-sixth of her inhabitants, especially some of 
her more able citizens, thereby lost their first civil right, the right to vote; he is one of 
those who spoke out emphatically in the German League against the admission of 
German non-Saxons to the election in Saxony and—listen to the double-
dealing—who shordy afterwards in the name of his club promised to the League of 
the non-Saxon German citizens who reside in Saxony complete co-operation in the 
election of a deputy of its own for Frankfurt. In short, to characterise him in a word: 
he is the founder of the German League. This man has addressed a letter of thanks to 
the Austrian general and thanked him for the protection which he allegedly bestowed 
upon the entire German fatherland. I believe that I have shown that the events do not 
as yet prove at all to what extent, if any, Prince von Windischgrätz has deserved well of 
the German fatherland. Only the result of the investigation will determine that. We 
will, therefore, leave the "high courage, the bold enterprise and firm endurance" of 
the general to the judgment of history. As for the expression "cowardly assassination" 
in regard to the death of the Princess we will only mention that it has by no means 
been proved that that bullet was intended for the Princess who had enjoyed the 
undivided respect of all Prague. If it should be the case, however, the murderer will 
not escape his punishment, and die grief of the Prince was surely no greater than that 
of the mother who saw her nineteen-year-old daughter, also an innocent victim, 
carried off with a shattered skull. I am in complete agreement with Citizen Göschen 
concerning the passage in the address which speaks of "brave bands that fought so 
gallandy under your leadership", for if he had been able to observe, as I did, the 
warlike vehemence with which these "brave bands" rushed upon the defenceless 
crowd in die Zeltner Lane on Monday at noon, he would have found his expressions 
much too weak. Much as it hurts my military vanity, I have to admit that I  myself, 
peacefully strolling among a group of women and children near the temple, allowed 
thirty to forty royal and imperial grenadiers to put myself to flight together with these 
people and so effectively that I had to leave my entire baggage, i.e. my hat, in the 
hands of the victors, for I considered it unnecessary to wait for the beatings, which 
were being administered to the crowd behind me, to reach me as well. I had the 
opportunity, nevertheless, to observe that six hours later at the Zeltner Lane barricade 
these same royal and imperial grenadiers thought it proper to fire for half an hour 
with canister-shot and six-pounders at this barricade which was defended by at most 
The Czech name is Vltava.— Ed. 
Maria Eleonora Windischgrätz. — Ed. 

=====第245页=====
German Foreign Policy and the Latest Events in Prague 215 
twenty men, and then not to take it, however, until it was abandoned by its defenders 
around midnight. There was no hand-to-hand fighting except in a few instances 
where the superior strength was on the side of the grenadiers. To judge by the 
devastation of the houses, the Graben and the Neue Allee were largely cleared by 
artillery, and I leave it open whether or not it takes great defiance of death to clear a 
broad avenue of a hundred barely armed defenders with canister-shot. 
Concerning the most recent speech by Dr. Stradal from Teplitz3  according to 
which "the Prague newspapers are acting for foreign interests", that is presumably 
Russian, I declare in the name of the independent press of Prague that this comment 
is either an abundance of ignorance or an infamous calumny whose absurdity has 
been and will be sufficiently proved by the attitude of our newspapers. Prague's free 
press has never defended any other goal than the preservation of Bohemia's 
independence and the equal rights of both nationalities. It knows, however, very well 
that German reaction is seeking to rouse a narrow-minded nationalism just as in Posen 
and in Italy, partly in order to  suppress  the revolution in the interior of Germany and partly 
to train the soldiery for civil war. 
Written on July 11, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 42, July 12, 1848 time 
a The Czech name is Teplice.— Ed. 

=====第246页=====
216 
THE AGREEMENT DEBATES OF JULY 7 
Cologne, July 12. It was not until late last night that we received the 
report about the agreement session of July 7. The stenographic 
reports, which usually arrived here not more than 24 hours after the 
epistolary reports, are constantly arriving later instead of earlier. 
How easily this delay could be remedied is demonstrated by the 
speed with which the French and English newspapers carry the 
reports of their legislative assemblies. The sessions of the English 
Parliament often last until four o'clock in the morning and yet four 
hours later the stenographic report of the session is printed in The 
Times and distributed to all parts of London. The French Chamber, 
which seldom began its sessions before one o'clock, terminated them 
between five and six and yet already around seven o'clock the 
Moniteur had to deliver a copy of the deliberations taken down in 
shorthand to all Paris newspaper offices. Why cannot the praise­
worthy Staats-Anzeiger get ready just as quickly? 
Let us now turn to the session of the 7th, the session during which 
the Hansemann Ministry was teased. We shall pass over the protests 
which were submitted immediately at the start, d'Ester's motion 
concerning the repeal of the decision adopted towards the end of the 
session of the 4tha (this motion remained on the agenda) and several 
other motions which were on the agenda. We shall begin right away 
with the questions and the disagreeable motions which today were 
raining down-upon the Ministry. 
Herr Philipps was the first to speak. He asked the Ministry what 
measures had been taken to protect our borders against Russia. 
a See this volume, p. 207.— Ed. 

=====第247页=====
The Agreement Debates of July 7 217 
Herr Auerswald: I do not consider this question suitable for an 
answer in this Assembly. 
We very readily believe Herr Auerswald. The only reply that he 
could possibly give would be "None", or, if you want to be precise: 
the transfer of several regiments from the Russian frontier to the 
Rhine. The only thing that surprises us is that the Assembly allowed 
this amusing reply of Herr Auerswald, this appeal to the car tel est 
notre bon plaisir* to pass, without much ado, with merely some hissing 
and cheering. 
Herr Borries proposes that the graduated income tax of the lowest 
tax level should be remitted for the last six months of 1848 and that 
all coercive measures to collect the arrears for the first six months at 
the same level should be discontinued immediately. 
The motion goes to the relevant committee. 
Herr Hansemann rises and declares that such financial matters 
ought to be very thoroughly examined. One could, incidentally, wait 
the more readily as next week he proposes to table several financial 
Bills among which will be one referring to the graduated income tax. 
Herr Krause asks the Minister of Finance whether it would be 
possible to replace the milling and slaughter taxes as well as the 
graduated income tax with an income tax by the beginning of 1849. 
Herr Hansemann has to get up again and declare irritably that 
he had already stated that he will table the financial Bills next 
week. 
But his ordeal is not yet over. Only now Herr Grebel rises and 
submits a lengthy motion every word of which must be a stab 
through Herr Hansemann's heart: 
Considering that it was by no means sufficient to motivate the 
prospective compulsory loan by merely asserting that the treasury 
and finances were exhausted; 
Considering that for the debate on the compulsory loan itself 
(against which Herr Grebel protests as long as a Constitution is not in 
force which fulfils all promises) an examination of all books and 
records of the state budget was necessary, Herr Grebel submits: 
that a committee be appointed which will inspect all books and 
records concerning the administration of the finances and the 
treasury since 1840 and report on the matter. 
But even worse than Herr Grebel's motion are his arguments in 
support of it. He mentions the many rumours about the squandering 
and unlawful spending of the state treasury that alarm public 
a Because this is our will (the closing phrase of royal edicts introduced by Louis 
XI).—  Ed. 

=====第248页=====
218 Articles from-the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
opinion. In the interest of the people, he demands to know where all 
the money has gone that it has paid during 30 years of peace. He 
declares that the Assembly could not vote a single penny as long 
as such an explanation is not given. The compulsory loan has created 
an enormous sensation. The compulsory loan condemns the entire 
hitherto existing financial administration. The compulsory loan is 
the penultimate step towards the bankruptcy of the state. The 
compulsory loan surprised us all the more since we were accustomed 
to hear constantly that the financial situation was excellent and that 
the state treasury would make unnecessary any loan even in the case 
of an important war. Herr Hansemann himself had estimated at the 
United Diet that the state funds must amount to at least 30 million. 
This,  of course, was only to be expected since not only were the same 
high taxes paid as during the war years, but the amount of the taxes 
was constantly increasing. 
Then, suddenly, there came the news of the intended compulsory 
loan and with that, with this painful disappointment, confidence 
sank at once to zero. 
The only means of restoring confidence was the immediate, 
unreserved explanation of the financial situation of the state. 
Herr Hansemann, to be sure, had attempted to sweeten the bitter 
pill of his communication on the compulsory loan by a humorous 
address; but he had nevertheless to admit that a compulsory loan 
would produce an unpleasant impression. 
Herr Hansemann answers: It goes without saying that if the 
Ministry requests money, it will also give all the necessary 
information as to how the money that has so far been raised was 
spent. You should wait until I submit the financial Bills which I have 
already mentioned twice. As to the rumours, it is incorrect that the 
state treasury contained enormous sums and that they have been 
reduced during recent years. It is natural that an excellent financial 
position should have been transformed into a critical one, consider­
ing the recent years of distress and the current political crisis which 
goes hand in hand with unprecedented economic stagnation. 
"It has been stated that the compulsory loan will be a precursor of the state's 
bankruptcy. No, gentlemen, it must not be that. On the contrary, it must serve the 
invigoration of credit." 
(It must, it must, as if the effect of the compulsory loan upon credit 
depends upon the pious wishes of Herr Hansemann!) How 
unfounded these apprehensions are is shown by the rise of the 
government securities. Gentlemen, wait for the financial Bills which 
I am herewith promising you for the fourth time. 
(Hence the credit of the Prussian state is in such bad shape that no 

=====第249页=====
The Agreement Debates of July 7 219 
capitalist will advance money even at usurious rates of interest and 
Herr Hansemann sees no other alternative than the compulsory 
loan, the last resort of bankrupt states. And all the while Herr 
Hansemann speaks of rising state credit because the government 
stocks have laboriously crept upward by two to three per cent to the 
same extent that March 18 has receded! And how the stocks will 
tumble when the compulsory loan is put into effect!) 
Herr Behnsch urges the appointment of the proposed financial 
investigation committee. 
Herr Schramm: The relief of want from state funds was not worth 
mentioning and if freedom has cost us money, it has up to now 
certainly not cost the Government anything. On the contrary, the 
Government has rather spent money in order that freedom may not 
advance to its present state. 
Herr Mätze: In addition to our knowledge that there was nothing 
left in the state treasury, we are now being informed that it has been 
empty for a long time. This piece of news is new proof of the need to 
appoint a committee. 
Herr Hansemann has to get up once more: 
"I have never said that there is nothing and that there has not been anything in the 
state treasury. On the contrary, I declare that the state treasury has significantly 
increased during the past six to seven years." 
(Compare Herr Hansemann's memorandum to the United Diet 
with the speech from the throne and now we shall all the less know 
where we stand.) 
Cieszkowski: I am in favour of Grebel's motion because Herr 
Hansemann keeps making us promises and yet every time when 
financial matters come up for debate, he refers us to elucidations 
that he will make in the near future but that are never given. This 
dilatoriness is the more incomprehensible as Herr Hansemann has 
now been a Minister for over three months. 
Herr Milde, the Minister of Trade, at last comes to the aid of his 
hard pressed colleague. He implores the Assembly not to appoint the 
committee. He promises the greatest frankness on the part of the 
Ministry. He protests that it will be given a detailed account of the 
state of affairs. But now the Government should be left alone, for at 
the moment it is busy steering the ship of state out of the difficulties 
in which it finds itself at present. The Assembly will surely lend a 
helping hand. (Cheers.) 
Herr Baumstark, too, attempts to some extent to come to Herr 
Hansemann's aid. The Minister of Finance, however, could not have 
found a worse and more tactless defender: 

=====第250页=====
220 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
"It would be a bad Minister of Finance who attempted to conceal the financial 
situation, and if a Minister of Finance says that he will make the necessary submissions 
we must either consider him an honest man or the contrary (!!!). (Commotion.) 
Gentlemen, I have not insulted anybody. I have said if a Minister of Finance, not if the 
Minister of Finance (!!!)." 
Reichenbach: What has happened to the wonderful days of the 
great debates, of questions of principle and of confidence? In those 
days Herr Hansemann longed for nothing more than to be able to 
enter the fray and now, when he has the opportunity to do so, and in 
his own field at that, he is evasive! Indeed, the Ministers keep making 
promises and establishing principles for the sole purpose of violating 
them a few hours later. (Commotion.) 
Herr Hansemann waits to see whether anyone will rise to defend 
him, but there is no one to speak for him. At last he sees with horror 
that Deputy Baumstark is rising and in order to prevent him from 
labelling him once again as an "honest man", he quickly takes the 
floor  himself. 
We expect the tormented Lion Duchâtel, pricked by needles and 
tugged by the whole opposition, to rise to his full stature, to crush his 
opponents, in short, to ask for a vote of confidence in the Government. 
Alas,  there is nothing left of his original firmness and daring, and the 
old greatness has all melted away just like the state treasury during 
the hard times! The great financier stands bent, broken and 
misunderstood; things have come to such a pass that he has to give 
reasons] And what reasons, to boot! 
"Anybody who concerns himself with financial affairs and the many figures (!!) 
which occur in them, knows that a thorough discussion of financial matters is not 
possible on the occasion of a question, that the problems of taxation are so 
comprehensive that legislative assemblies have spent days and even weeks debating 
them" (Herr Hansemann thinks of his brilliant speeches in the erstwhile United Diet). 
But who is demanding a thorough discussion? What has been 
requested of Herr Hansemann first of all has been an answer, a 
simple yes or no, concerning the question of taxes. Furthermore, he 
has been asked for his approval of a committee to investigate the 
administration of the state treasury etc. up to now. When he refused 
both, reference was made to the contrast between his former 
promises and his present reticence. 
The committee should start its work immediately precisely 
because it takes time "to discuss financial affairs and the many 
figures which occur in them". 
"I had good reasons, by the way, for not raising financial matters at an earlier date 
since I believed that it would be better for the country's position if I waited a little 
longer. I had hoped that the peace of the country and with it the state credit would 

=====第251页=====
The Agreement Debates of July 7 221 
somewhat increase. I do not want to see these hopes disappointed and it is my 
conviction that I did well not to table these Bills at an earlier date." 
What disclosures! Herr Hansemann's financial Bills which were 
supposed to shore up the state credit are of such a nature that they 
are a threat to the state credit! 
Herr Hansemann deemed it better to keep the financial situation 
of the country a secret for the time being! 
If the state finds itself in such a situation, it is irresponsible of Herr 
Hansemann to make such a vague statement instead of immediately 
presenting the state of the finances frankly and, by letting the facts 
speak for themselves, vanquish all doubts and rumours. In the 
English Parliament, such a tactless utterance would immediately be 
followed by a vote of no confidence. 
Herr Siebert: 
"Up to now we have done nothing. All important questions, as soon as they 
matured for solution, were broken off and pushed aside. We have not yet made a 
single decision which contained anything in its entirety, we have not completed 
anything. Shall we once more proceed in this fashion today and postpone answering 
the question merely on the basis of promises? Who can guarantee that the Ministry will 
remain at the helm for another week?" 
Herr Parrisius moves an amendment according to which Herr 
Hansemann is called upon to present within a fortnight the 
necessary documents on the administration of the finances and the 
treasury from the year 1840 to an auditing committee of 16 members 
to be elected immediately. Herr Parrisius explains that this is a 
special mandate from his electorate: they want to know what has 
happened to the state funds which had amounted to over 40 
million in 1840. 
Surely this amendment, which is stronger than the original 
motion, will sting the weary Duchâtel into action! Surely he will now 
put the question of confidence in the Government! 
On the contrary! Herr Hansemann who opposed  the motion has no 
objections whatsoever to this amendment with its insulting time 
limit! He merely observes that the matter will require an astonishing 
amount of time and expresses his sympathy for the unfortunate 
members of the committee who will have to take on this laborious 
task. 
There follows a debate about the voting during which a few more 
unpleasant comments are made concerning Herr Hansemann. Then 
the vote is taken, the various motivated and unmotivated demands to 
proceed to the order of the day are rejected and the Parrisius 
amendment, which is supported by Herr Grebel, is almost unanim­
ously adopted. 

=====第252页=====
222 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Herr Hansemann escaped a decisive defeat only by his lack of 
resistance and the self-abnegation with which he accepted Parrisius' 
insult. Bent, broken and destroyed he sat on his bench like a 
defoliated tree that arouses the compassion of even the most cruel 
mockery. Let us remember the words of the poet: 
It ill beseems the sons 
Of Germany to mock the fallen 
Great with heartless puns!a 
The second half of the session will be reported tomorrow. 
Written by Engels on July 12, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Nette Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 44, July 14, 1848 time 
Heinrich Heine, "Der Tambourmajor". In Zeitgedichte. — Ed. 

=====第253页=====
223 
HERR FORSTMANN ON THE STATE CREDIT 
Cologne, July 13. During the agreement session of the 7th [of this 
month],  Herr Forstmann knocked down all doubts of the unprinci­
pled Left concerning the imperturbability of the Prussian state credit 
by the following irrefutable argument: 
"Please decide whether the confidence in Prussia's finances sank to zero when 
yesterday on the Stock Exchange aS/2 per cent government security stood at 72 per 
cent while the rate of discount was 5  1% per cent." 
One can see that Herr Forstmann is no more a speculator on the 
Stock Exchange than he is an economist. If Herr Forstmann's 
hypothesis that the price of government securities stands always in 
an inverse relationship to the price of money were correct, then the 
quotations of the Prussian 3V2 per cent securities would indeed be 
unusually favourable. In that case, with a discount rate of 5V2 per 
cent, they should be listed not at 72 per cent but only at 63 7/n- But 
who has told Herr Forstmann that this inverse relationship exists at 
every particular moment of a business slump and not as an average 
over 5 to 10 years. 
On what does the price of money depend? It depends on the 
relationship of supply and demand at a given time and upon the 
currently existing scarcity or abundance of money. On what does the 
scarcity or abundance of money depend? It depends on the state of 
industry at the particular time and on the stagnation or prosperity of 
commerce in general. 
On what does the price of government securities depend? It 
depends likewise on the relationship of supply and demand at the 
time.  But on what does this relationship depend? It depends on 
many circumstances, which in Germany, in particular, are extremely 
complicated. 

=====第254页=====
224 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
State credit is of decisive importance in France, England, Spain 
and in general in those countries whose government securities are 
traded on the world market. State credit plays a secondary role in 
Prussia and the smaller German states whose securities are quoted 
only on the small local exchanges. Here most government securities 
are not used for speculation but for the safe investment of capital 
and to secure a fixed rent. Only a disproportionately small part 
reaches the stock exchanges and is traded. Almost the entire national 
debt is in the hands of small pensioners, widows and orphans, boards 
of guardians, etc. A fall of the exchange quotations due to the 
decrease of the state credit is an additional reason for this type of 
state creditors not to sell their stocks. The interest is just enough for 
them to get by. If they sell these stocks at a heavy loss, they are 
ruined. The small number of securities which circulates on the few 
small local exchanges cannot, of course, be subject to the enormous 
and rapid fluctuations of supply and demand, of rise and fall like the 
enormous mass of French, Spanish etc. securities which are mainly 
designed for speculation and are traded on all the world's great stock 
exchanges in large quantities. 
Hence it happens only rarely in Prussia that capitalists, through 
lack of money, are forced to sell their bonds at any price and thereby 
push down the exchange prices, while in Paris, Amsterdam etc. that 
is an everyday occurrence, which particularly after the February 
revolution affected the incredibly rapid fall of the French govern­
ment securities much more than the diminished state credit. 
In addition, fictitious purchases  (marchés  à terme), 157 which make up 
the bulk of the stock exchange transactions in Paris, Amsterdam etc., 
are prohibited in Prussia. 
This entirely different commercial position of the Prussian 
securities based on local exchanges and the French, English, Spanish 
etc. securities which are traded on the world market, explains the 
fact that the prices of the Prussian securities do not reflect the 
most minute political complications of their state in anything like the 
measure in which this is the case with French etc. securities, that the 
state credit has not by a long shot the decisive and rapid influence on 
the market price of the Prussian stocks that it has upon the securities 
of other states. 
In the measure in which Prussia and the small German states are 
pulled into the maelstrom of European politics and in which the 
domination of the bourgeoisie is developing, in the same measure 
government securities, just like landed property, will lose this 
patriarchal, inalienable character, will be drawn into circulation, 
become an ordinary, frequently exchanged article of commerce, and 

=====第255页=====
Herr Forstmann on the State Credit 225 
perhaps even be allowed to lay claim to a modest existence on the 
world market. 
Let us draw from these facts the following conclusions: 
Firstly: It is not contested that the market price of government 
securities will on average over a lengthy period rise everywhere in the 
same ratio as the rate of interest falls and vice versa, given that the 
state credit remains unchanged. 
Secondly: In France, England etc. this ratio prevails even during 
shorter periods because there the speculators own the largest part of 
the government securities and because, due to shortage of money, 
people are frequently compelled to sell and this governs the daily 
ratio between the exchange price and the rate of interest. Hence, this 
ratio often really prevails even at a particular moment. 
Thirdly: In Prussia, on the other hand, this ratio exists only on 
average over relatively long periods because the amount of 
disposable government securities is small and the stock exchange 
business is limited; because sales due to shortage of money, which 
actually govern this relation, occur only rarely; because the prices of 
securities at these local stock exchanges are primarily determined by 
local influences whereas the price of money is determined by the 
influence of the world market. 
Fourthly: If thus Herr Forstmann wants to draw conclusions for the 
Prussian state credit from the ratio of the price of money to the 
market price of the government securities, he only proves his total 
ignorance of these relations. The quotation of 72 for the 3  V2 per cent 
stocks, with a discount rate of 5V2 per cent, demonstrates nothing in 
favour of the Prussian state credit, and the compulsory loan speaks 
entirely against it. 
Written on July 13, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 44, July 14, 1848 time 

=====第256页=====
226 
THE AGREEMENT DEBATES 
Cologne, July 14. Today we come to the second half of the 
agreement session of the 7th [of this month]. After the debate about 
the financial committee, which was so painful for Herr Han­
semann, there occurred yet another series of small woes for the 
ministerial gentlemen. It was a day of urgent motions and questions, 
of attacks on and embarrassment for the Ministry. 
Deputy Wander proposed that any official who orders the unjust 
arrest of a citizen should be obliged to make full reparation and 
besides should be jailed for a period four times as long as the person 
he arrested. 
The motion, as not urgent, is sent to the relevant committee. 
Minister of Justice Märker declares that the adoption of this motion 
would not only fail to strengthen the legislation hitherto in force 
against officials who carry out unlawful arrests, but that it would 
actually weaken this legislation. (Cheers.) 
The Minister of Justice only forgot to observe that according to the 
laws hitherto in force, particularly the old Prussian Law, it is hardly 
possible for an official to arrest anybody unlawfully. The most 
arbitrary arrest may be justified by the paragraphs of the most 
time-honoured Prussian Law. 
We want to call attention, by the way, to the most unparliamentary 
method which the Ministers have fallen into the habit of using. They 
wait until a motion is referred to the relevant committee or 
section and then they still continue to discuss it. They are then 
certain that  nobody  can answer them. Thus Herr Hansemann acted in 
the case of Herr Borries' motion a and now Herr Märker follows suit. 
a See this volume, p. 217.— Ed. 

=====第257页=====
The Agreement Debates 227 
Ministers trying to get away with such parliamentary improprieties in 
England and France would have been called to order very 
differently. But not in Berlin! 
Herr Schulze (from Delitzsch): A motion to request the Govern­
ment at once to hand over to the Assembly for debate in committee 
the already completed or soon to be completed constitutional Bills. 
This motion again contained an indirect reproof of the Govern­
ment for its negligence or intentional delay in submitting Bills to 
supplement the Constitution. The reproof was the more painful as 
during that same morning two Bills had been submitted, including 
the Bill on the civic militia. Thus, had the Prime Minister shown any 
energy, he would have decisively rejected this motion. But instead he 
makes only a few general remarks about the Government's desire to 
meet all just wishes of the Assembly in every possible way and the 
motion is adopted by a large majority. 
Herr Besser asks the Minister of War about the absence of service 
regulations. The Prussian army is the only one which lacks such 
regulations. Hence there exist in all army units down to company 
and squadron level the greatest differences of opinion about the 
most important service matters, particularly about the rights and 
duties of the various ranks. There exist, to be sure, thousands of 
orders, ordinances and instructions but they are worse than useless 
precisely because of their countless number, their confusion and the 
contradictions which prevail in them. Besides, every such official 
document is mixed up and rendered unrecognisable by as many 
different corollaries, elucidations, marginal notes and notes to the 
marginal notes as there are intermediate authorities through which it 
passes. This confusion naturally works to the advantage of the 
superior in all kinds of arbitrary acts whereas the subordinate only 
reaps the disadvantage of it. The subordinate, therefore, knows no 
rights but only duties. There used to be service regulations called the 
pigskin regulations, but they were taken away from those individuals 
who had a  copy  of them  during the 1820s. Since then no subordinate may 
cite them  to his advantage whereas the higher authorities are allowed to 
cite them constantly against the subordinates! It is the same with the 
service regulations of the guard corps which are never communi­
cated to the army or made accessible to subordinates who are 
nevertheless punished under them! The staff officers and generals 
naturally only profit from this confusion which allows them to 
exercise the most extreme arbitrariness and the harshest tyranny. 
The subaltern officers, non-commissioned officers and soldiers, 
however, suffer under it and it is in their interest that Herr Besser 
questions General Schreckenstein. 

=====第258页=====
228 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
How Herr Schreckenstein must have been astonished when he had 
to listen to this lengthy "quill-driving"—to use a popular term from 
the year 1813! What, the Prussian army does not have service 
regulations? What absurdity! Honestly, the Prussian army has the 
best, and at the same time the shortest, regulation in the world 
consisting of only two words: "Obey orders!" If a soldier of this 
"unbeaten" army is cuffed, kicked and struck with rifle-butts, if he 
has his beard or nose pulled by a lieutenant not yet of age and just 
escaped from officers' training school, and if he should complain, it 
is: "Obey orders!" If a tipsy major after dinner and for his special 
amusement marches his battalion into a swamp up to the waist, and 
there lines them up in square formations, and a subordinate dares to 
complain, it is: "Obey orders!" If officers are forbidden to visit one or 
another café and they take the liberty to comment, it is: "Obey 
orders!"This is the best service regulation, for it fits every occasion. 
Of all the Ministers, Herr  Schreckenstein is the only one who has not 
yet lost heart. This soldier who served under Napoleon, who for 
thirty-three years has practised the senseless Prussian spit and polish 
and has heard many a bullet whistle, will certainly not be afraid of 
agreers and questioners, particularly not when the great "Obey 
orders!" is in danger! 
Gentlemen, he says, I am bound to know better. I ought to know 
what changes have to be made. It is here a question of tearing down, 
and tearing down must not be allowed to prevail since rebuilding is 
very difficult. The military organisation has been created by 
Scharnhorst, Gneisenau, Boyen and Grolmann, it comprises 600,000 
armed and tactically trained citizens and offers a secure future to 
every citizen as long as there is discipline. I shall maintain it and that 
is all I have to say. 
Herr  Besser:  Herr Schreckenstein has not answered the question at 
all. It seems evident, however, from his remarks that he believes 
service regulations would slacken discipline! 
Herr Schreckenstein: I have already stated that I will do what is 
expedient for the army and benefits the service. 
Herr Behnsch: We can at least demand that the Minister answers 
yes or no or declares that he does not wish to reply. Up to now we 
have only heard evasive phrases. 
Herr Schreckenstein, annoyed: I do not consider it in the interest of 
the service to discuss this question any further. 
The service, always the service! Herr Schreckenstein believes that 
he is still the commander of a division and that he is speaking to his 
officer corps. He imagines that as Minister of War, too, he only needs 
be concerned with the service and not with the legal relations 

=====第259页=====
The Agreement Debates 229 
between the individual ranks of the army, least of all with the 
relations of the army to the state as a whole and its citizens! We are 
still living under Bodelschwingh; the spirit of the old Boyen seems to 
prevail unbroken at the Ministry of War. 
Herr Piegsa asks about the maltreatment of Poles at Mielzyn on 
June 7. 
Herr Auenwald declares that he must first wait for full reports. 
Thus an entire month of 31 days after the event Herr Auerswald is 
not yet fully informed! What a wonderful administration! 
Herr Behnsch asks Herr Hansemann as to whether at the 
presentation of the budget he will give a survey of the administration 
of the Seehandlung 158 since 1820 and of the state treasury since 1840. 
Herr Hansemann declares amidst resounding laughter that he will 
be able to reply in a week's time. 
Herr Behnsch once again inquires about government support of 
emigration. 
Herr Kühlwetter replies that this is a German affair and refers Herr 
Behnsch to Archduke John. 
Herr Grebel asks Herr Schreckenstein about the officials of the 
Military Administration who are simultaneously officers of the army 
reserve and who do active service during the army reserve exercises 
thereby depriving other officers of the army reserve of the 
opportunity to perfect their training. He moves that these officials be 
released from service in the army reserve. 
Herr Schreckenstein declares that he will do his duty and even take 
the matter into consideration. 
Herr Feldhaus asks Herr Schreckenstein about the soldiers who lost 
their lives on the march from Posen to Glogau a on June 18 and the 
measures taken to punish this barbarity. 
Herr  Schreckenstein:  The matter has taken place. The report of the 
regimental commander has been submitted. The report of the 
General Command which arranged the stages of the march is still 
lacking. I cannot yet say, therefore, whether the order of march 
was transgressed. Besides, we are in this case passing judgment on a 
staff officer and such judgments are painful. It is to be hoped that 
the "High General Assembly" (!!!) will wait until the reports have 
arrived. 
Herr Schreckenstein does not consider this barbarity a 
barbarity, he merely asks whether the major in question has  "obeyed 
orders". What does it matter if 18 soldiers die miserably like so many 
heads of catde on a country road so long as  orders  are obeyedl 
a The Polish name is Glogöw. — Ed. 

=====第260页=====
230 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Herr Behnsch who had asked the same question as Herr Feldhaus 
says:  I withdraw my question which has now become superfluous but 
I demand that the Minister of War fixes a day on which he will 
answer. Three weeks have already passed since this incident and the 
reports could have been here long ago. 
Herr Schreckenstein: We have not wasted a moment; the reports 
from the General Command were requested immediately. 
The President wants to skip over the matter. 
Herr Behnsch: I am only asking the Minister of War to give an 
answer and to fix a day. 
President: Would Herr Schreckenstein.... 
Herr Schreckenstein: It is not yet possible to surmise when that will 
be. 
Herr Gladbach: Paragraph 28 of standing orders lays the obligation 
upon Ministers to fix a day. I also insist upon it. 
President: I am asking the Minister once again. 
Herr Schreckenstein: I cannot fix a specific day. 
Herr Gladbach: I insist upon my demand. 
Herr Temme: I am of the same opinion. 
President: Would the Minister of War perhaps in a fortnight.... 
Herr  Schreckenstein:  That could very well be. I shall answer as soon 
as I know whether or not orders have been obeyed. 
President: All right then, in a fortnight. 
This is how the Minister of War carries out "his duty" to the 
Assembly! 
Herr Gladbach has yet another question, directed to the Minister of 
the Interior concerning the suspension of unpopular officials and 
the merely temporary, provisional filling of vacancies. 
Herr Kühlwetter's answers are most unsatisfactory and further 
remarks of Herr Gladbach are drowned after brave resistance by the 
muttering, shouting and hissing of the Right which is at last moved to 
fury by so much insolence. 
A motion by Herr Berends to place the army reserve, which has 
been called up for domestic service, under the command of the civic 
militia is not recognised as urgent and is thereupon withdrawn. 
Thereafter a pleasant conversation begins about all sorts of subtleties 
linked to the Posen committee. The storm of questions and urgent 
motions has passed and the last conciliatory sounds of the famous 
session of July 7 fade away like the soft whispering of zephyr and the 
pleasant murmuring of a meadow brook. Herr Hansemann returns 
Wilhelm Grabow. — Ed. 

=====第261页=====
The Agreement Debates 231 
home with the consolation that the blustering and table-banging of 
the Right has woven a few flowers into his crown of thorns, and Herr 
Schreckenstein smugly twirls his moustache and murmurs: "Obey 
orders!" 
Written by Engels on July 14, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 45, July 15, 1848 time 

=====第262页=====
232 
THE DEBATE ON JACOBY'S MOTION 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 48, July 18, 1848] 
Cologne, July 17. Again a "great debate", to use an expression of 
Herr Camphausen, has taken place, a debate which lasted two full 
days. 
The substance of the debate is well known—the reservations the 
Government advanced regarding the immediate validity of the 
decisions passed by the National Assembly and Jacoby's motion 
asserting the Assembly's right to pass legally binding decisions 
without having to await anyone's consent, and at the same time 
objecting to the resolution on the Central Authority.160 
That a debate on this subject was possible at all may seem 
incomprehensible to other nations. But we live in a land of oaks and 
lime-trees3 where nothing should surprise us. 
The people send their representatives to Frankfurt with the 
mandate that the Assembly assume sovereign power over the whole 
of Germany and all her governments, and, by virtue of the 
sovereignty the people have vested in the Assembly, adopt a 
Constitution for Germany. 
Instead of immediately proclaiming its sovereignty over the 
separate states and the Federal Diet,161 the Assembly timidly avoids 
any question relating to this subject and maintains an irresolute and 
vacillating attitude. 
Finally it is confronted with a decisive issue—the appointment of 
a provisional Central Authority. Seemingly independent, but in fact 
guided by the governments with the help of Gagern, the Assembly 
elects as Imperial Regent a man whom these governments had in 
advance designated for this post.b 
Heinrich Heine, "Zur Beruhigung". In Zeitgedichte. —Ed. 
Archduke John of Austria.— Ed. 

=====第263页=====
The Debate on Jacoby's Motion 233 
The Federal Diet recognises the election, pretending, as it were, 
that only its confirmation makes the election valid. 
Reservations are nevertheless made by Hanover and even by 
Prussia, and it is the Prussian reservation that has caused the debate 
of the 11th and 12th. 
This time, therefore, it is not so much the fault of the Chamber in 
Berlin3 that the debates are vague and hazy. The irresolute, 
weak-kneed, ineffectual Frankfurt National Assembly itself is to 
blame for the fact that its decisions can only be described as so much 
twaddle. 
Jacoby introduces his motion briefly and with his usual precision. 
He makes things very difficult for the speakers of the Left, because 
he says everything that can be said about the motion if one is to avoid 
enlarging upon the origin of the Central Authority, whose history is 
so discreditable to the National Assembly. 
In fact, the deputies of the Left who follow him advance hardly 
any new arguments, while those of the Right fare much worse—they 
lapse either into sheer twaddle or juridical hair-splitting. Both sides 
endlessly repeat themselves. 
Deputy Schneider has the honour of first presenting the case for 
the Right to the Assembly. 
He begins with the grand argument that the motion is  self-
contradictory. On the one hand, the motion recognises the 
sovereignty of the National Assembly, on the other hand, it calls 
upon the Agreement Chamber to censure the National Assembly, 
thus placing itself above it. Any individual could express his 
disapproval but not the Chamber. 
This subtle argument, of which the Right seems to be very proud 
seeing that it recurs in all the speeches of its deputies, advances an 
entirely new theory. According to this theory, the Chamber has few­
er rights with regard to the National Assembly than an individual. 
This first grand argument is followed by a republican one. 
Germany consists for the most part of constitutional monarchies, and 
must therefore be headed by a constitutional, irresponsible authority 
and not by a republican, responsible one. This argument was 
rebutted on the second day by Herr Stein, who said that Germany, 
under her federal constitution, had always been a republic, indeed a 
very edifying republic. 
"We have been given a mandate," says Herr Schneider, "to agree on a 
constitutional monarchy, and those in Frankfurt have been given a similar mandate, 
i.e. to agree with the German governments on a Constitution for Germany." 
a The Prussian National Assembly.— Ed, 

=====第264页=====
234 Articles from the Nette Rheinische Zeitung 
The reaction indulges in wishful thinking. When, by order of the 
so-called Preparliament162—an assembly having no valid man­
date—the trembling Federal Diet convened the German National 
Assembly, there was no question at the time of any agreement; the 
National Assembly was then considered to be a sovereign power. But 
now things have changed. The June events in Paris have revived the 
hopes of both the big bourgeoisie and the supporters of the 
overthrown system. Every squire from the backwoods hopes to see 
the old rule of the whip re-established, and a clamour for "an 
agreed German Constitution" is already arising from the Imperial 
Court at Innsbruck to the ancestral castle of Henry LXXII. The 
Frankfurt Assembly has no one but itself to blame for this. 
"In electing a constitutional supreme head the National Assembly has therefore 
acted according to its mandate. But it has also acted in accordance with the will of the 
people; the great majority want a constitutional monarchy. Indeed, had the National 
Assembly come to a different decision, I would have regarded it as a misfortune. Not 
because I am against the republic; in principle I admit that the republic—and I have 
quite definitely made up my mind about it—is  the most perfect  and most  noble  form of state, 
but in reality we are still very far from it. We cannot have the form unless we have the 
spirit. We cannot have a republic while we lack republicans, that is to say, noble minds 
capable, at all times, with a clear conscience and noble selflessness, and not only in a fit 
of enthusiasm, of subordinating their own interests to the common interest." 
Can anyone ask for better proof of the virtues represented in the 
Berlin Chamber than these noble and modest words of Deputy 
Schneider? Surely, if any doubt still existed about the fitness of the 
Germans to set up a republic, it must have completely vanished in 
face of these examples of true civic virtue, of the noble and most 
modest self-sacrifice of our Cincinnatus-Schneider! Let Cincinnatus 
pluck up courage and have faith in himself and the numerous noble 
citizens of Germany who likewise regard the republic as the most 
noble form of state but consider themselves bad republicans—they 
are ripe for the republic, they would endure the republic with the 
same heroic equanimity with which they have endured the absolute 
monarchy. The republic of worthies would be the happiest republic 
that ever existed—a republic without Brutus and Catiline, without 
Marat and upheavals like those of June, it would be a republic of 
well-fed virtue and solvent morality.3 
How mistaken is Cincinnatus-Schneider when he exclaims: 
"A republican mentality cannot be formed under absolutism; it is not possible to 
create a republican spirit offhand, we must first educate our children and 
grandchildren in this way. At present I would regard a republic as the greatest 
Modified quotation from Heinrich Heine's "Anno 1829". In Romanzen. — Ed. 

=====第265页=====
The Debate on Jacoby's Motion 235 
calamity, for it would be anarchy under the desecrated name of republic, despotism 
under the cloak of liberty." 
On the contrary, as Herr Vogt (from Giessen) said in the National 
Assembly, the Germans are republicans by nature, and to educate his 
children in the republican spirit Cincinnatus-Schneider could do no 
better than bring them up in the old German tradition of propriety, 
modesty and God-fearing piety, the plain and honest way in which 
he himself grew up. Not anarchy and despotism, but those cosy 
beer-swilling proceedings, in which Cincinnatus-Schneider excels, 
would be brought to the highest perfection in the republic of 
worthies. Far removed from all the atrocities and crimes which 
defiled the First French Republic, unstained by blood, and detesting 
the red flag, the republic of worthies would make possible something 
hitherto unattainable: it would enable every respectable burgher to 
lead a quiet, peaceful life marked by godliness and propriety. Who 
knows, the republic of worthies might even revive the guilds together 
with all the amusing trials of non-guild artisans. This republic of 
worthies is by no means a fanciful dream; it is a reality existing in 
Bremen, Hamburg, Lübeck and Frankfurt, and even in some parts 
of Switzerland. But its existence is everywhere threatened by the 
contemporary storms, which bid fair to engulf it everywhere. 
Therefore rise up, Cincinnatus-Schneider, leave your plough and 
turnip field, your beer and agreement policy, mount your steed and 
save the threatened republic, your republic, the republic of  worthiest 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 49, July 19, 1848] 
Cologne, July 18. Herr Waldeck takes the floor after Herr 
Schneider, in support of the motion. 
"The present position of the Prussian state is surely quite without precedent, and 
one really cannot conceal the fact that it is also somewhat precarious." 
This beginning is likewise somewhat precarious. We get the 
impression that we are still listening to Deputy Schneider: 
"It must be said that Prussia was destined to exercise hegemony in Germany." 
This is the same old-Prussian illusion, the cherished dream of 
merging Germany in Prussia and of declaring Berlin the German 
Paris.  Herr Waldeck, it is true, sees this cherished hope dwindling, 
but he hankers after it with painful feelings, and he blames both the 
previous and the present Government for the fact that Prussia is not 
at the head of Germany. 

=====第266页=====
236 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Unfortunately the fine days have passed when the Customs 
Union16s paved the way for Prussian hegemony in Germany, days 
when provincial patriots could believe that "the Brandenburg stock 
has determined the fate of Germany for 200 years" and will continue 
to do so in the future, the fine days when the disintegrating Germany 
of the Federal Diet could regard even the Prussian bureaucratic 
strait jacket as a last means of maintaining some sort of cohesion. 
"The Federal Diet, on which public opinion has passed judgment long since, is 
disappearing and suddenly the Constituent National Assembly in Frankfurt emerges 
before the eyes of an astonished worldl" 
The "world" was naturally "astonished" when it saw this 
Constituent National Assembly. One need only read the French, 
English and Italian newspapers to understand this. 
Herr Waldeck then explains at some length that he is against the 
idea of a German emperor and gives up his place on the rostrum to 
Herr Reichensperger II. 
Herr Reichensperger II declares the supporters of Jacoby's motion 
to be republicans and desires them to state their aims as candidly as 
did the republicans in Frankfurt. Then he too asserts that Germany 
is not yet in possession of the 
"full measure of civic and political virtues which have been described by a great 
political scientist3 as the essential precondition for a republic". 
If Reichensperger, the patriot, says this, Germany must be in a bad 
way! 
Herr Reichensperger continues, the Government has made no 
reservations (!) but merely expressed wishes. There was reason 
enough for this and I also hope that the National Assembly will not 
always ignore the opinions of governments when making decisions. 
It is outside our competence to lay down the sphere of competence 
of the Frankfurt National Assembly; the National Assembly itself has 
refused to advance theories concerning its own competence; it has 
acted in a practical manner when necessity has demanded action. 
In other words, at the time when the Frankfurt Assembly was 
omnipotent, it failed during the revolutionary agitation to settle the 
inevitable conflict with the German governments with one decisive 
stroke. It has preferred to postpone the decision and to fight small 
skirmishes with one or another Government over each individual 
resolution, skirmishes which weaken the Assembly the further 
it recedes from the time of the revolution and the more it 
compromises itself in the eyes of the people by its feeble actions. And 
Montesquieu.— Ed. 

=====第267页=====
The Debate on Jacoby's Motion 237 
in this respect, Herr Reichensperger is quite right: it is not worth our 
while to come to the aid of an Assembly which has forsaken  itself! 
But it is touching when Herr Reichensperger says: 
"It is therefore unstatesmanlike to discuss such questions of competence; what 
matters is simply to solve practical questions as they arise." 
It is indeed "unstatesmanlike" to dispose of these "practical 
questions" once and for all by means of a forceful decision; it is 
"unstatesmanlike" if, in the face of reactionary attempts to halt the 
movement, the revolutionary mandate were asserted, a mandate 
which every Assembly that has come into being as a result of 
barricade fighting possesses. Cromwell, Mirabeau, Danton, Na­
poleon and the entire English and French revolutions were 
indeed exceedingly "unstatesmanlike", but Bassermann, Bieder­
mann, Eisenmann, Wiedenmann and Dahlmann behave in a very 
"statesmanlike" manner! "Statesmen" disappear altogether when a 
revolution takes place, and the revolution must be temporarily 
dormant for "statesmen" to re-emerge, and, moreover, statesmen of 
the caliber of Herr Reichensperger II, the deputy for the Kempen 
district. 
"If you depart from this system, it will be difficult to avoid conflicts with the 
German National Assembly and with the governments of individual [German] states; 
at any rate you will unfortunately promote discord and, as a result of discord, anarchy 
will raise its head and nothing will then save us from civil war. Civil war, however, 
marks the beginning of still greater misfortune.... It is not out of the question that 
people may in that case say—order has been restored in Germany, by our Eastern and 
Western friends!" 
Herr Reichensperger may be right. If the Assembly engages in a 
discussion of competence, it may give rise to clashes, possibly leading 
to a civil war and intervention by the French and the Russians. If the 
Assembly does not discuss this, however, and, in fact, it has not done 
so, a civil war is even more certain. The conflicts which, at the 
beginning of the revolution, were still fairly simple, every day 
become more involved, and the longer the decision is delayed, the 
more difficult and the more bloody will be the solution. 
A country like Germany, which is forced to work its way up from 
indescribable fragmentation to unity, which, if it does not want to 
perish, needs the more stringent revolutionary centralisation, the 
more divided it has been up to now, a country which contains twenty 
Vendees,164 which is sandwiched between the two most powerful and 
most centralised states of the Continent and surrounded by 
numerous small neighbours, with whom it is on strained terms, if not 

=====第268页=====
238 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
at war—such a country cannot, in the present period of universal 
revolution, avoid either civil war or war with  other  countries.  These wars, 
which we will certainly have to face, will be the more perilous and 
devastating, the more irresolute is the conduct of the people and its 
leaders and the longer the decision is postponed. If Herr 
Reichensperger's "statesmen" remain at the helm, we might witness 
another Thirty Years' War. 165 But, fortunately, the force of events, 
the German people, the Emperor of Russia and the French people 
also have a say in the matter. 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 53, July 23, 1848] 
Cologne, July 22. Current events, Bills, armistice proposals etc. at 
last allow us once more to return to our beloved agreement debates. 
On the rostrum we see Deputy von Berg from Jülich, a man in whom 
we are interested for two reasons; first, because he is a Rhinelander, 
and second, because he is a ministerialist of very recent date. 
Herr Berg has several reasons for opposing Jacoby's motion. The 
first is this: 
"The first part of the motion, which requires us to express our disapproval of a 
decision made by the German Parliament, this first part is nothing but a protest made 
in the name of a minority against a legal majority. It is nothing but an attempt by a 
party which has been defeated within a legislative body to obtain  support  from  outside;  it is 
an attempt whose consequences are bound to lead to civil war." 
Mr. Cobden, with his motion to abolish the Corn Laws, also be­
longed to the minority in the House of Commons from 1840 to 1845. 
He belonged to "a party which" had "been defeated within a 
legislative body". What did he do? He sought "support from 
outside". He did not simply state his disapproval of parliamentary 
decisions, he went much further; he set up and organised the 
Anti-Corn Law League166  and the Anti-Corn Law press, in short, the 
whole enormous agitation against the Corn Laws. According to Herr 
Berg, this was an attempt that was "bound to lead to civil war". 
The minority in the erstwhile United Diet likewise sought 
"support from outside". Herr Camphausen, Herr Hansemann and 
Herr Milde had no scruples whatever over this. The facts that stand 
as proof of this are well known. It is obvious that the consequences of 
their conduct, according to Herr Berg, were "bound to lead to civil 
war". They led not to civil war, however, but to the Ministry. 
We could cite a hundred more such examples. 
The minority in a legislative body, if it does not want to bring 
about civil war, must not, therefore, seek support from outside. But 

=====第269页=====
The Debate on Jacoby's Motion 239 
what then does "from outside" mean? It means the constituents, i.e. 
the people who create the legislative body. If one is no longer 
supposed to obtain "support" by influencing these constituents, 
where is one to gain support? 
Are the speeches of Hansemann, Reichensperger, von Berg and so 
on, delivered merely for the benefit of the Assembly or also for the 
public, to whom they are presented in stenographic reports? Are not 
these speeches likewise means by which this "party within a 
legislative body" seeks, or  hopes,  to obtain "support from outside"? 
In short, Herr Berg's principle would lead to the abolition of all 
political propaganda. For propaganda is simply the practical 
application of the immunity of advocates of freedom of the press and 
of freedom of association, i.e. of freedoms which legally exist in 
Prussia. Whether these freedoms lead to civil war or not is not our 
concern. It is sufficient that they exist, and we shall see where it 
"leads",  if they continue to be infringed. 
"Gentlemen, these efforts of the minority to find strength and recognition outside 
the legislative authority did not begin today or yesterday, they date from the first day 
of the German uprising. The minority expressed its objections and left the 
Preparliament, and the result was civil war." 
First, as regards Jacoby's motion, there is no question of a 
"minority objecting and leaving". 
Secondly, "the efforts of the minority to find recognition outside 
the legislative authority" did, it is true, "not begin today or 
yesterday", for they date from the moment when legislative 
authorities and minorities came into being. 
Thirdly, it is not the fact that the minority expressed its objections 
and left the Preparliament which led to civil war, but Herr 
Mittermaier's "moral conviction" that Hecker, Fickler and their 
associates were traitors to their country, and the measures which the 
Government of Baden consequently took and which were dictated b\ 
the most abject fear. 167 
The civil war argument, which is, of course, apt to throw the 
German burgher into a dreadful state of alarm, is followed by the 
argument about the absence of a mandate. 
"We have been elected by our constituents in order to establish a Constitution in 
Prussia; the same constituents have sent other citizens to Frankfurt, to set up a Centrai 
Authority there. It cannot be denied that the constituent who gives the mandate is 
certainly entitled to approve or disapprove the mandatary's actions, but the 
constituents have not authorised us to speak on their behalf in this respect." 
This weighty argument has been greatly admired by the legal 
experts and legal dilettanti in the Assembly. We have no mandate! 
10-3447 

=====第270页=====
240 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Nevertheless, two minutes later, the same Herr Berg asserts that the 
Frankfurt Assembly was "convoked in order to create the future 
Constitution of Germany, in concert with the German govern­
ments", and it is to be hoped that the Prussian Government will not, 
in this case, ratify it without consulting the Agreement Assembly or 
the Chamber which is to be elected under the new Constitution.The 
Ministry has nevertheless immediately informed the Assembly of its 
recognition of the Imperial Regent, 3 as well as of its reservations, 
thereby inviting the Assembly to pronounce its decision. 
It is therefore precisely the point of view expressed by Herr Berg, 
his own speech and Herr Auerswald's information which lead to the 
conclusion that the Assembly certainly has a mandate to deal with the 
Frankfurt resolutions. 
We have no mandate! Hence, if the Frankfurt Assembly 
reintroduces censorship, if it sends Bavarian and Austrian troops to 
Prussia to support the Crown in a conflict between the Chamber and 
the Crown, then Herr Berg has "no mandate"! 
What mandate has Herr Berg? Literally only this: "to agree with 
the Crown upon the Constitution". By no means has he, therefore, a 
mandate to put down parliamentary questions, and to agree to laws 
on immunity, on the civic militia, on redemption and to all other laws 
not mentioned in the Constitution. This is what reactionaries daily 
assert. Berg himself says: 
"Every step beyond this mandate is a breach of faith, it is an abandonment of the 
mandate or even a betrayal!" 
Nevertheless, under the force of necessity, Herr Berg and the 
entire Assembly constantly abandon their mandate. The Assembly 
must do so due to the revolutionary, or rather, at present, 
reactionary, provisional state of affairs. Because of this provisional 
state,  everything serving to safeguard the achievements of the March 
revolution falls within the competence of the Assembly and if it can 
achieve this by exerting moral influence on the Frankfurt Assembly, 
then the Agreement Chamber is not only entided, but even obliged, 
to do so. 
Then follows the Rhenish-Prussian argument, which is of special 
importance for us Rhinelanders, because it shows how we are 
represented in Berlin. 
"We Rhinelanders and Westphalians and the inhabitants of other provinces as well 
have absolutely no bond with Prussia other than the fact that we have come under the 
jurisdiction of the Prussian Crown. If we dissolve this bond, the state disintegrates. I do 
not understand at all, and I believe most deputies from my province do not 
a Archduke John of Austria.—Ed. 

=====第271页=====
The Debate on Jacoby's Motion 241 
understand either, what benefit a Berlin republic would be to us. We might prefer 
rather a republic in Cologne." 
We shall not discuss at all the idle speculations about what we 
"might prefer" if Prussia is turned into a "Berlin republic", nor the 
new theory about the conditions of existence of the Prussian state 
etc. As Rhinelanders, we simply protest against the statement that 
"we have come under the jurisdiction of the Prussian Crown". On 
the contrary the "Prussian Crown" has come to us. 
The next speaker against the motion is Herr Simons from 
Elberfeld. He repeats everything that Herr Berg has said. 
He is followed by a speaker from the Left and then by Herr 
Zachariä. Zachariä repeats everything that Herr Simons has said. 
Deputy Duncker repeats everything that Herr Zachariä has said, 
but he also adds a few other things, or lie expresses what has been 
said before in such an extreme way, that we find it advisable to deal 
briefly with his speech. 
"Do we, the Constituent Assembly of 16 million Germans, reinforce the authority 
of the German Central Government and the authority of the German Parliament in 
the minds of the people by thus censuring the Constituent Assembly of all Germans? 
Do we not thereby undermine the willing obedience which the individual nationalities 
must [accord] it, if it is to work for Germany's unity?" 
According to Herr Duncker, the authority of the Central 
Government and the National Assembly and this "willing obedi­
ence"  exist; the obedience consists in the  people  submitting blindly to 
this authority, whereas the individual governments make reservations 
and, when it suits them, refuse to obey. 
"What is the point of making theoretical statements in our time, when the force of 
fact is so immense?" 
Recognition of the sovereignty of the Frankfurt Assembly by the 
representatives "of 16 million Germans" is thus merely a "theoreti­
cal statement"!? 
"If, in future, a resolution passed in Frankfurt were to be regarded by the 
Government and Parliament of Prussia as impossible and impracticable, would there 
then be any possibility of carrying through such a resolution?" 
Hence, the mere opinions, the views held by the Prussian 
Government and Parliament are supposed to be capable of making 
fhe resolutions of the National Assembly impossible. 
"Today, we may say whatever we like, but the Frankfurt resolutions could not be 
carried through, if the entire Prussian people, if two-fifths of Germany, refused to 
submit to them." 
Here we have again all the old Prussian arrogance, the Berlin 
national patriotism in all its old glory, with the pigtail and crooked 
10* 

=====第272页=====
242 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
stick of old Fritz.3 It is true, we are only a minority, only two-fifths 
(and not even that) but we will certainly show the majority that  we are 
masters in Germany, that we are Prussians! 
We do not advise the gentlemen of the Right to provoke a conflict 
of this kind between "two-fifths" and "three-fifths". The numerical 
balance may prove to be quite different, and many a province may 
remember that it has been German from time immemorial, but that 
it has been Prussian for only thirty years. 
Herr Duncker has a remedy, however. Those in Frankfurt must, 
along with us, "pass only those resolutions that express the 
reasonable collective will, the true opinion of the public, so that they 
can be approved by the moral consciousness of the nation", i.e. 
resolutions after Deputy Duncker's own heart. 
"If we, and those in Frankfurt, pass such resolutions then we are, and they are, 
sovereign, otherwise we are not sovereign, even if we decree it ten times over." 
After this profound definition of sovereignty, which is in keeping 
with his moral consciousness, Herr Duncker heaves a sigh: "In any 
case,  this belongs to the future", and thus concludes his speech. 
Lack of space and time prevents us from discussing the speeches of 
the Left made on the same day. Nevertheless, even from the 
speeches of the Right presented here, our readers will have realised 
that Herr Parrisius was not entirely mistaken when he moved the 
adjournment because "the temperature in the hall has risen so high 
that it is impossible to maintain absolute clarity of thought" ! 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 55, July 25, 1848] 
Cologne, July 24. A few days ago, when the pressure of world 
events caused us to interrupt our account of the debate, a 
neighbouring journalist0  was kind enough to carry on the report in 
our stead. He has already drawn the attention of the public to "the 
profusion of penetrating thoughts and bright ideas" and to "the fine 
and healthy feeling for true freedom" displayed by "the speakers of 
the majority", and especially by our incomparable Baumstark, 
"during this great debate, which lasted two days". c 
We must bring our report of the debate to a hasty close, but can­
not refrain from presenting a few examples from the "profusion" 
King Frederick II of Prussia.— Ed. 
Karl Brüggemann. — Ed. 
"Köln, 20. Juli. Die Debatte über den Jacobyschen Antrag", Kölnische Zeitung 
No. 203, July 21, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第273页=====
The Debate on Jacoby's Motion 243 
of "penetrating thoughts and bright ideas" expressed by the 
Right. 
Deputy Abegg opened the second day of the debate3 with a threat 
to the Assembly: to get to the bottom of this motion, one would have 
to repeat all the Frankfurt debates in their entirety—and the High 
Assembly is obviously not entitled to do this! Their constituents 
"with their practical tact and practical sense" would never approve 
of this! Incidentally, what is to become of German unity, if (now 
follows a particularly "penetrating thought") people "do not simply 
confine themselves to making reservations", but express their "firm 
approval or disapproval of the Frankfurt resolutions". In this case 
nothing remains but "purely formal submissiveness"! 
Of course, "purely formal submissiveness" can be evaded by 
''reservations" and, if need be, even directly denied—that cannot 
harm German unity; but to approve or disapprove of these 
resolutions and to judge them with regard to their style, logic or 
usefulness—that's the limit! 
Herr Abegg concludes with the observation that it was for the 
Frankfurt Assembly, and not the Berlin Assembly, to comment upon 
the reservations presented to the Assembly in Berlin, not that in 
Frankfurt. One ought not to anticipate the Frankfurt deputies as this 
would surely be an insult to them! 
The gentlemen in Berlin are not competent to express an opinion 
on statements made by their own Ministers. 
Let us skip the idols of the small people, such as Baltzer, Kämpf 
and Graff,  and make haste to hear the hero of the day, the 
incomparable Baumstark. 
Deputy Baumstark declares that he would never pronounce himself 
incompetent, unless he is forced to admit no knowledge of the 
matter in hand—and surely eight weeks of debate cannot leave one 
with no knowledge of the matter? 
Consequently, Deputy Baumstark is competent. Namely, in the 
following manner: 
"I ask whether, as a result of the wisdom we have shown so far, we are fully 
entitled" (i.e. competent) "to confront an Assembly, which has attracted 
general interest in Germany, 
and the admiration of the whole of Europe, 
thanks to its noble-mindedness, 
its high intelligence 
and its moral political standpoint, 
that is thanks to everything that has made the name of Germany great and glorious 
throughout history? I submit to it" (i.e. I declare myself incompetent) "and wish that the 
Assembly, sensing the truth (!!), would likewise submit" (i.e. declare itself incompetent)! 
a July 12, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第274页=====
244 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
"Gentlemen," continues the "competent" Deputy Baumstark, "it was stated at 
yesterday's session that there has been talk of a republic etc. which is unphilosophical. 
But it cannot possibly be unphilosophical to describe the responsibility of the person 
who heads the state, as a characteristic feature of the republic, in the democratic sense. 
Gentlemen, it is certain that all political philosophers, from Plato down to Dahlmann" 
(Deputy Baumstark could indeed not go further "down"), "have expressed this view, 
and we must not contradict this more than a thousand-year-old truth (!) and historical 
fact, without very special reasons, which have yet to be adduced." 
Herr Baumstark thinks, therefore, that sometimes there can be 
"very special reasons" to contradict even "historical facts". Indeed, 
the gentlemen of the Right usually have no scruples in this respect. 
Herr Baumstark, moreover, declares himself once again incompe­
tent, by pushing the competence on to the shoulders of "all political 
philosophers, from Plato down to Dahlmann". Herr Baumstark, of 
course, does not belong to this category of political philosophers. 
"Let us consider this political edifice! One Chamber and a responsible Imperial 
Regent, and this on the basis of the present electoral law! Further examination will 
show that it is against all common sense." 
Then Herr Baumstark makes the following penetrating pro­
nouncement which, even on the closest examination, will not be 
against all "common sense". 
"Gentlemen, a republic requires two things, popular opinion and leading 
personalities. If we make a closer examination of our German popular opinion, we 
shall find that it contains very little about this republic (namely that of the Imperial 
Regent previously mentioned). 
Thus,  Herr Baumstark once more declares himself incompetent, 
and this time, in his place, it is popular opinion that is competent to 
judge the republic. Popular opinion, therefore, has more "knowl­
edge"  about the matter than Deputy Baumstark. 
At last, however, the speaker proves that there are also matters 
about which he has some "knowledge", and first and foremost 
among these is popular sovereignty. 
"Gentlemen, history—I have to return to this—proves that we have had popular 
sovereignty since time immemorial, but it has assumed different forms under different 
conditions." 
Then follows a series of "extremely penetrating thoughts and 
bright ideas" about Brandenburg-Prussian history and popular 
sovereignty causing the neighbouring journalist to forget all worldly 
sufferings in a fit of constitutional ecstasy and doctrinaire bliss. 
"When the Great Elector3 disregarded, and indeed (!) crushed" (to "crush" 
something is certainly the best way of disregarding it), "the decaying elements of the 
Frederick William of Brandenburg.— Ed. 

=====第275页=====
The Debate on Jacoby's Motion 245 
estates, which were infected with the poison of French demoralisation" (the right of 
the first night had in fact been gradually buried by the "French demoralised" 
civilisation!), "he was generally acclaimed by the people, deeply imbued with the 
moral feeling that this gave strength to the German, and especially the Prussian, 
political edifice." 
One has to admire the "deep moral feeling" of the Brandenburg 
philistines of the seventeenth century who, profoundly moved by 
their profits, acclaimed the Elector when he attacked their enemies, 
the feudal lords, and sold privileges to the philistines—but one has to 
admire even more the "common sense" and "bright ideas" of Herr 
Baumstark, who regards this acclamation as an expression of 
"popular sovereignty"! 
"At that time, everybody, without exception, paid homage to the absolute 
monarchy" (since otherwise he would have been flogged) "and the Great Frederick 
would never have achieved such importance had he not been supported by genuine 
popular sovereignty." 
The popular sovereignty of flogging, serfdom and soccage services 
is, for Herr Baumstark, genuine popular sovereignty. An artless 
admission! 
From genuine popular sovereignty, Herr Baumstark now goes on 
to consider false popular sovereignties. 
"But there followed a different period, that of constitutional monarchy." 
This is then proved by a long "constitutional rigmarole" in which, 
to cut a long story short, he asserts that, from 1811 to 1847, the 
people of Prussia called continuously for a Constitution, and never 
for a Republic (!). This is naturally followed by the remark that "the 
people has turned away in indignation" from the recent republican 
insurrection in Southern Germany. 
From this it follows quite naturally that the second kind of popular 
sovereignty (although it is no longer the "genuine" one) is the 
"constitutional sovereignty proper". 
"This is the kind of popular sovereignty which divides political power between 
the King and the people, it is divided popular sovereignty" (let the "political 
philosophers, from Plato down to Dahlmann", tell us what this is supposed to mean), 
"which the people must receive unimpaired and unconditionally (11), but without 
depriving the King of any of his constitutional power" (what laws define this power in 
Prussia since the 19th March?). "This point is quite clear" (especially in Deputy 
Baumstark's mind); "the concept has been determined by the history of the 
constitutional system and no one can still entertain any doubts about it" (it is only 
when one reads Deputy Baumstark's speech that, unfortunately, "doubts" arise 
again). 

=====第276页=====
246 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Finally "there is a third kind of popular sovereignty, the democratic-republican 
kind, which is supposed to rest on the so-called broadest basis. What an unfortunate 
expression is 'broadest basis'l" 
Then Herr Baumstark "raises a word" against this broadest basis. 
This basis leads to the decline of countries, to barbarism! We have no 
Cato,  who could give the republic a moral foundation. Herr 
Baumstark then begins to blow Montesquieu's old hörn of republi­
can virtue—a horn which has long been out of tune and full of 
dents—and to blow it so loudly that the neighbouring journalist, 3 
in transports of admiration, chimes in likewise and, to the astonish­
ment of all Europe, demonstrates brilliandy that it is "precisely 
republican virtue ... which leads to constitutionalism"! Mean­
while, Herr Baumstark changes his tune and also comes to con­
stitutionalism but through the absence of republican virtue. The 
reader can imagine the splendid effect of this duet when, after 
a series of the most heart-rendingly discordant notes, the two 
voices finally unite to produce the conciliatory chord of consti­
tutionalism. 
After a lengthy argument, Herr Baumstark comes to the 
conclusion that the Ministers have actually made "no real reserva­
tion" at all, but merely "a slight reservation concerning the future" 
and, in the end, he finds himself on the broadest basis, since he 
considers only a democratic and constitutional state to be Germany's 
salvation. He is so "overwhelmed by the prospect of Germany's 
future" that he gives vent to his feelings by crying: 
"Cheers, three cheers for the popular-constitutional, hereditary German 
monarchy!" 
He was indeed quite right when he said—this unfortunate 
broadest basis! 
Several speakers from both sides then take the floor but, after 
Deputy Baumstark, we dare not present them to our readers. We 
shall just mention Deputy Wachsmuth's declaration that his principal 
tenet is the point made by the noble Stein: The will of free men is the 
unshakeable support of every throne. 
"That strikes» right to the core of the matter!" exclaims our enraptured 
neighbouring journalist. "Nowhere does the will of free men prosper more than in 
the shelter of the unshakeable throne, and nowhere does the throne rest more 
securely than on the intelligent love of free men!" 
Karl Brüggemann. — Ed. 
"Köln, 20. Juli. Die Debatte über den Jacobyschen Antrag", Kölnische Zeitung 
No. 203, July 21, 1848.—Ed. 

=====第277页=====
The Debate on Jacoby's Motion 247 
Indeed, the "profusion of penetrating thoughts and bright ideas" 
and the "healthy feeling for true freedom" displayed by the speakers 
of the majority in this debate are far from matching the depth and 
penetration of the thoughts of the neighbouring journalist! 
Written by Engels between July 17 Printed according to the newspaper 
and 24, 1848 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in full in English for the 
ZeitungNos. 48, 49, 53 and 55, July 18, 19, first time 
23 and 25, 1848 

=====第278页=====
248 
THE SUPPRESSION OF THE CLUBS 
IN STUTTGART AND HEIDELBERG 
Cologne, July 19. 
My Germany got drunk with toasts, 
You, you believed them all, 
And every black-red-golden tassel 
As well as each pipe-bowl!a 
And that, upright German, has indeed been your fate once again. 
You believe you have made a revolution? Deception! You believe 
that you have overcome the police state? Deception! You believe that 
you possess freedom of association, freedom of the press, the arming 
of the people and other beautiful slogans which were bandied about 
on the March barricades? Deception, nothing but deception! 
But when the blissful glow wore off, 
Beloved friend, you stood bewildered. 
Bewildered about your indirecdy chosen, so-called National 
Assemblies,168  bewildered about the renewed expulsions of German 
citizens from German cities, bewildered about the tyranny of the 
sabre in Mainz, Trier, Aachen, Mannheim, Ulm, and Prague, 
bewildered about the arrests and political trials in Berlin, Cologne, 
Düsseldorf, Breslau 0 etc. 
But there was one thing left to you, upright German, the clubs! 
You were able to attend the clubs and to complain to the public 
about the political swindles of the last few months. You could pour 
out your heavy heart to like-minded fellow citizens and find 
consolation in the words of like-minded, equally oppressed patriots! 
Heinrich Heine, "An Georg Herwegh". In Zeitgedichte. — Ed. 
b Ibid.— Ed. 
c Wroclaw.— Ed. 

=====第279页=====
The Suppression of the Clubs in Stuttgart and Heidelberg 249 
But now even this has come to an end. The clubs are 
incompatible with the preservation of "order". In order that 
"confidence may be restored" it is urgently necessary to put an end 
to the subversive activities of the clubs. 
Yesterday we related that the Württemberg Government downright 
prohibited the Democratic District Association in Stuttgart by a royal 
ordinance. 3 One does not even bother any longer to haul the leaders 
of the clubs before a court but instead falls back upon the old 
police measures. Yes, the gentlemen Harpprecht, Duvernoy and 
Maucler who countersigned this ordinance go even further: they 
prescribe extra-legal penalties for the violators of this prohibition, 
penalties of up to one-year imprisonment. They devise penal laws, 
without the Chambers' approval, and exceptional penal laws at that, 
merely "on the strength of Paragraph 89 of the Constitution". 
It is no better in Baden. Today we report the prohibition of the 
Democratic Student Union in Heidelberg.*5 There, generally, the 
right of association is not so openly contested except in the case of 
the students, on the strength of the old, long abolished special laws of 
the Federal Diet,169 the students are threatened by the penalties 
prescribed by these invalid laws. 
We shall now probably have to expect the suppression of our 
clubs next. 
We have a National Assembly in Frankfurt so that the govern­
ments may take such measures in complete safety without incurring 
the wrath of public opinion. This Assembly will, of course, pass over 
these police measures to the agenda just as lightly as over the 
revolution in Mainz. 0 
Thus it is not in order to achieve anything in the Assembly but 
merely in order to force the majority of the Assembly to proclaim 
once again before all Germany its alliance with reaction that we call 
upon the deputies of the extreme Left in Frankfurt to propose: 
That the originators of these measures, particularly Herr 
Harpprecht, Herr Duvernoy, Herr Maucler and Herr Mathy, be 
impeached for violating the fundamental rights of the German 
people. 
Written by Engels on July 19, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 50, July 20, 1848 time 
a "Stuttgart, 15. Juli", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 49, July 19, 1848.— Ed. 
b "Heidelberg, 17. Juli", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 50, July 20, 1848.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 17-19.— Ed. 

=====第280页=====
250 
THE PRUSSIAN PRESS BILL1 
Cologne, July 19. We had thought that today we might be able to 
amuse our readers once again with the agreement debates, in 
particular to present to them the brilliant speech of Deputy 
Baumstark, 3 but events prevent us from doing so. 
Charity begins at home. When the existence of the press is 
threatened, even Deputy Baumstark is abandoned. 
Herr Hansemann has submitted to the Agreement Assembly a 
provisional press law. The paternal solicitude of Herr Hansemann 
for the press calls for immediate consideration. 
In former times the Code Napoléon was beautified by the most 
edifying headings of the Prussian Law. Now, after the revolution, 
this has been changed: now, the Prussian Law is enriched by the 
most fragrant blossoms of the Code and the September Laws. Du-
châtel, of course, is no Bodelschwingh. 
We have already several days ago given the main points of the 
press Bill.b  No sooner had a defamation trial given us the chance to 
prove that Articles 367 and 368 of the Code pénal stand in starkest 
contradiction to freedom of the press, c than Herr Hansemann 
proposes not only to extend them to the entire kingdom" but also to 
make them three times worse. We rediscover in the new draft all that 
has already become dear and valued to us by practical experience: 
See the end of the article "The Debate on Jacoby's Motion", July 24, 1848 (this 
volume, pp. 242-47).— Ed. 
"Berlin, 14. Juli (Pressgesetz)", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 47, July 17, 
1848.—  Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 209-10.— Ed. 

=====第281页=====
The Prussian Press Bill 251 
We find it prohibited—on pain of imprisonment from three 
months to three years—to make a charge against anybody which 
would make him punishable by law or merely "expose him to public 
contempt". We find it prohibited to demonstrate the truth of the 
matter in any other way than by a "valid legal document", in short, 
we rediscover the most classical monuments of the Napoleonic 
despotism over the press. 
Indeed, Herr Hansemann keeps his promise to let the old 
provinces share in the advantages of Rhenish legislation! 
Paragraph 10 of the Bill tops all these regulations: in the case of 
calumny directed at state officials in respect to the exercise of their 
official duties, the ordinary punishment may be increased by  half. 
If an official in the exercise or on the occasion (à l'occasion)  of the 
exercise of his duties is insulted in words (outrage par parole), the 
punishment under Article 222 of the Penal Code is a prison sentence 
of from one month to two years. Despite the benevolent efforts of 
the Public Prosecutor's office, this article has hitherto not been used 
against the press, and for very good reasons. In order to remedy this 
situation, Herr Hansemann has transformed this article into the 
above-mentioned Paragraph 10. In the first place, "on the occasion" 
is transformed into the more convenient "in  respect  to the exercise 
of their duties". Secondly, the troublesome par parole is changed to 
par écrit. In the third place, the penalty is trebled. 
From the day when this Bill becomes law, Prussian officials may 
relax. If Herr Pfuel brands Polish hands and ears with lunar caustic 
and the press publishes it—four and a half months to four and a half 
years imprisonment! If citizens are inadvertently thrown into prison 
even though it is known that they are not the right ones and the press 
communicates this fact—four and a half months to four and a half 
years imprisonment! If Landräte turn themselves into commis 
voyageurs for reaction and collectors of signatures for royalist 
addresses and the press unmasks these gentlemen—four and a half 
months to four and a half years imprisonment! 
From the day when this Bill becomes law, officials, may with 
impunity carry out any arbitrary act, any tyrannical and any unlawful 
act. They may calmly administer beatings or order them, arrest and 
detain people without a hearing; the press, the only effective control, 
has been rendered ineffective. On the day when this Bill becomes 
law, the bureaucracy may celebrate a festival: it will have become 
mightier, less restrained and stronger than it was in the pre-March 
period. 
Indeed, what remains of freedom of the press if that which  deserves 
public contempt can no longer be held up to public contempt? 

=====第282页=====
252 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
According to the laws hitherto in force the press could at least 
adduce facts to back up its general assertions and accusations. This 
will now come to an end. The press will no longer report, it will be 
allowed merely to speak in general phrases so that well-meaning 
people from Herr Hansemann down all the way to the beer-parlour 
politicians will have the right to say that the press is merely reviling 
and is not proving anything! Precisely for this reason the press is 
being prohibited from offering proofs! 
We recommend, by the way, that Herr Hansemann make the 
following addition to his well-meaning draft. He should also declare 
it punishable to expose the officials to public ridicule besides 
penalising their exposure to public contempt. This omission might 
otherwise be painfully regretted. 
We will not go in detail into the paragraphs dealing with obscenity 
or the regulations concerning confiscations etc. They surpass the 
crème of the press legislation of Louis Philippe and the Restoration. 
We do want to mention just one regulation: under Paragraph 21, the 
Public Prosecutor may request the confiscation not only of materials 
already printed but even of a manuscript which has only just been 
handed over for printing, if its contents condone a crime or offence that 
is liable to official prosecution! What a wide field of activity for phi­
lanthropic prosecutors! What a charming diversion to be able to go 
at any time to newspaper offices and demand to be shown for 
examination any "manuscript which has just been handed over for 
printing" since it might just be possible that it condoned a crime 
or offence! 
Compared with this, how odd seems the solemn paragraph of the 
draft Constitution and of the "Fundamental Rights of the German 
Nation" which reads: The censorship can never again be restored! 
Written by Marx on July 19, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 50, July 20, 1848 

=====第283页=====
253 
THE FAEDRELAND ON THE ARMISTICE 
WITH DENMARK171 
Cologne,  July 20. In order that the fatherland may see for itself that 
the so-called revolution with its National Assembly, Imperial Regent3 
etc. accomplished nothing more than a thorough revival of the 
famous Holy Roman Empire of the German nation,172  we reprint the 
following article from the Danish Faedreland. It is to be hoped that 
the article will suffice to prove to even the most trusting friends of 
the established order that forty million Germans have once again 
been duped by two million Danes with the assistance of English 
mediation and Russian threats just as happened all the time under 
the "constant augmenters of the Empire". 0 
The Faedreland, Minister Orla Lehmann's own newspaper, speaks 
about the armistice as follows0: 
"If one looks at the armistice solely from the vantage point of our own hopes 
and wishes one cannot, of course, be satisfied with it; if one assumes that the 
Government had the choice between this armistice and the prospect of expelling the 
Germans from Schleswig with Swedish and Norwegian aid, forcing them to recognise 
Denmark's right to settle the affairs of this duchy in conjunction with its 
inhabitants—then, indeed, one would have to admit that the Government has acted 
irresponsibly by agreeing to the armistice. This choice, however, did not exist. One has 
to assume that both England and Russia, the two great powers which have the most 
direct interest in this controversy and its settlement, have demanded the conclusion of 
an armistice as a condition for their future sympathy and mediation; that the 
Swedish-Norwegian Government has likewise demanded that an attempt at a peaceful 
arrangement be made before it decides to render any effective aid and that it will give 
such aid only with the delimitation set out at the very beginning, namely that such aid 
must not serve a reconquest of Schleswig but merely the defence of Jutland and the 
Archduke John of Austria.— Ed. 
Part of the title of the Holy Roman Emperors.— Ed. 
c No. 179 of July 13, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第284页=====
254 Articles from the Neue Rheinische -Zeitung 
islands. Thus the alternative was as follows: on the one hand the gain of a respite so as 
to await the course of events abroad and to complete the political and military 
organisation at home; on the other hand the prospect of desperate single combat 
against superior strength; even if our army, which is half as strong as the federal army, 
were to have launched an assault upon the advantageous positions of the enemy, it 
would have been as good as impossible to achieve victory but the fight could well have 
led to the occupation of the entire peninsula by the Germans after the withdrawal of 
the Swedish-Norwegian forces; a combat which would at best have led to dearly 
bought, useless victories and at worst held out the prospect of the exhaustion of all our 
defence forces and a humiliating peace." 
The Danish newspaper then proceeds to defend the conditions of 
the armistice as advantageous to Denmark. It describes as groundless 
the fear that the resumption of war would occur during the winter 
when the German troops could cross the ice to Fünen and Alsen. a 
The Germans would be as incapable as the Danes of sustaining a 
winter campaign in such a climate whereas the advantages of a 
three-month truce would be very great for both Denmark and the 
loyal population of Schleswig. If no peace was concluded within the 
three months, the armistice would be automatically prolonged until 
spring. The paper continues: 
"The lifting of the blockade and the freeing of the prisoners will be approved; the 
return of the seized ships, however, may perhaps have aroused the dissatisfaction of 
certain individuals. It must be remembered that the capture of German ships was 
rather a means of coercion to deter the Germans from crossing our frontier, and had 
by no means the purpose of enriching ourselves by the acquisition of foreign private 
property; moreover, the value of these ships is not nearly so great as some would like 
to believe. If these ships were to come under the hammer during the present 
stagnation both in our own and in European trade generally, they would at the very 
most fetch l'/s million, i.e. the cost of the war for two months. And in exchange for 
these ships we obtain the evacuation of both duchies by the Germans as well as 
compensation for the goods requisitioned in Jutland. Thus the means of coercion we 
have used has fulfilled its purpose and its now being halted is quite in order. It seems 
to us that the evacuation of  three  counties by a superior army which we had no prospect of 
evicting by our own strength makes up tenfold for the small advantage that the state 
might have derived from the sale of the seized ships." 
Paragraph 7 is described as the most questionable one. It is 
supposed to prescribe the continuation of the special Government 
for the duchies which in fact means a continuation of "Schleswig-
Holsteinism". The King of Denmark is supposed to be bound to the 
notables of Schleswig-Holstein for the selection of the two members 
of the Provisional Government and it would be quite difficult to find 
one who is not a "Schleswig-Holsteinian". In return, however, the 
"entire insurrection" is expressly disavowed, all decisions of the 
The Danish names are Fyn and Als.— Ed. 

=====第285页=====
The Faedreland on the Armistice with Denmark 255 
Provisional Government are annulled and the status quo ante March 
17 is restored. 
"Thus we have examined the most essential conditions of the armistice from a 
Danish point of view. Now, for a change, let us try to take the German point of view. 
"All that Germany is demanding is the release of the ships and the lifting of the 
blockade. 
"It gives up the following: 
"Firstly, the duchies, occupied by an army which up to now has suffered no defeat 
and is strong enough to maintain its positions against an army twice as strong as the 
one which has confronted it up to now; 
"Secondly, Schleswig's admission  to the Confederation, which was solemnly announced 
by the Federal Diet and confirmed by the National Assembly's admission of the 
deputies from Schleswig; 
"Thirdly, the Provisional Government, which it recognised as legitimate and with 
which it negotiated in that capacity; 
"Fourthly, the Schleswig-Holstein party, whose demands, which were supported by 
the whole of Germany, have not been ratified but referred to the decision of 
non-German powers; 
"Fifthly, the Augustenburg pretenders, 3 to whom the King of Prussia had 
personally pledged his support but who are not mentioned at all in the armistice, and 
who have been assured of neither amnesty nor asylum; 
"Finally, the  costs  caused by the war, which are borne in part by the duchies and in 
part by the Confederation, but which will  be refunded insofar  as they were borne by  Denmark 
proper. 
"It seems to us that our overwhelmingly strong enemies have much more to find 
fault with in this armistice than we, the small, despised nation." 
Schleswig has had the incomprehensible desire to become 
German. It is quite in order that it should be punished for that and 
that it should be left in the lurch by Germany. 
Tomorrow we shall carry the text of the armistice.b 
Written by Engels on July 20, 1848 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 51, July 21, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
Duke Christian August and Prince Frederick of Schleswig-Holstein. — Ed. 
See this volume, pp. 266-69.— Ed. 

=====第286页=====
256 
THE CIVIC MILITIA BILL 
[Neue Rheinische ZeitungNo. 51, July 21, 1848] 
Cologne, July 20. The civic militia is disbanded, that is the chief 
paragraph of the Bill on the establishment of a civic militia, even 
though this paragraph appears at the very end of it as Paragraph 
121, in the modest form: 
"By the establishment of the civic militia under this law, all armed units, which at 
present either belong to or exist side by side with the civic militia, are herewith 
disbanded." 
The disbandment of the units which do not belong directly to the 
civic militia has started without much ado. The disbandment of the 
civic militia itself can only be brought about under the pretext of 
reorganising it. 
Legislative propriety necessitated the inclusion of the conventional 
constitutional phrase in Paragraph 1: 
"It is the function of the civic militia to protect constitutional freedom and lawful 
order." 
In order to live up to the "nature of  this function", however, the civic 
militia may neither think nor speak of public affairs nor consult or 
decide about them (Paragraph 1), neither assemble nor arm 
(Paragraph 6), nor show any sign of life except by permission of the 
superior authorities. It is not that the civic militia "protects" the 
Constitution from the authorities but rather the authorities protect 
the Constitution from the civic militia. Thus the civic militia has to 
"obey" blindly the "demands of the authorities" (Paragraph 4) and 
to abstain from all interference "in the activities of communal, 
administrative or judicial authorities", and must also abstain from all 
arguments. If it "refuses" to obey passively, the Regierungspräsident 

=====第287页=====
The Civic Militia Bill 257 
may "suspend it from service" for four weeks (Paragraph 4). If it 
should moreover arouse the royal displeasure, a "royal decree" may 
order "its suspension" for "six months", or even "disbandment"; 
thereupon it shall be re-formed only after six months have passed 
(Paragraph 3). Thus there "shall exist a civic militia in every 
community of the kingdom" (Paragraph 2), that is insofar as the 
Regierungspräsident or the King does not find it necessary to order the 
exact opposite in every community. Whereas matters of state are not 
within the "competence" of the civic militia, the civic militia, on the 
contrary, is "within the competence of the Minister of the Interior", 
i.e. the Police Minister who is its natural superior and who "by the 
nature of his function" is the faithful Eckart of "constitutional 
freedom" (Paragraph 5). Insofar as the civic militia is not ordered by 
the Regierungspräsident and the other officials "to protect constitu­
tional freedom", i.e. to carry out the judgment of the authorities, i.e. 
to be commandeered for service, its specific life's work is to 
implement a set of service regulations designed by a royal  colonel.  This 
set of service regulations is its Magna Carta 173 for whose protection 
and execution it was, so to speak, created. Long live the service 
regula$ionsl Finally, enrolment in the civic militia provides the 
occasion to make every Prussian "after completion of his 24th and 
before the completion of his 50th year of life" swear the following 
oath: 
"I swear loyalty and obedience to the King, the Constitution and the laws of the 
kingdom." 
The poor Constitution! How cramped, bashful, civilly modest and 
with what submissive attitude it stands between the King and the law. 
First there is the royalist oath, the oath of the dear faithful ones, then 
the constitutional oath and finally" an oath which does not make any 
sense at all unless it be a legitimist one indicating that besides the laws 
derived from the Constitution there are still other laws which 
originate from royal authority. And now the good citizen belongs 
from head to foot to the "competence of the Ministry of the 
Interior". 
This worthy fellow has received weapons and uniform on 
condition that he first of all relinquish his primary political rights, 
the right of association, etc. He fulfils his task to protect "constitu­
tional freedom", according to the "nature of the function", by 
blindly carrying out the orders of the authorities, by exchanging the 
usual civil liberty which was tolerated even under the absolute 
monarchy for the passive, automatic and disinterested obedience of 
the soldier. A fine school, as Herr Schneider said in the Agreement 

=====第288页=====
258 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Assembly,3 to bring up the republicans of the future! What has 
become of our citizen? A hybrid between a Prussian policeman and 
an English constable! Yet for all his losses he is consoled by the set of 
service regulations and the knowledge that he is obeying orders. 
Would it not be more original to dissolve the nation in the army 
rather than to dissolve the army in the nation? 
This transformation of constitutional phrases into Prussian facts is a 
truly bizarre spectacle. 
If Prussianism condescends to become constitutional, con­
stitutionalism ought surely to take the trouble to become Prussian. 
Poor constitutionalism! Worthy Germans! They have been moaning 
for so long that the "most solemn" promises were not fulfilled. Soon 
they will have only one fear, the fear of seeing the fulfilment of these 
solemn promises! The nation is punished par où il a  péché. h You have 
demanded freedom of  the press?  You will be punished by freedom of the 
press,  and you will get censorship without censors, censorship by the 
Public Prosecutor's office, censorship by a law that discovers in the 
"nature of the function" of the press that it must be concerned with 
everything except the authorities, the infallible authorities, the 
censorship of prison sentences and fines. As the hart panteth after 
the water brooks, so you are to pant after the good old much-
maligned and much-misunderstood censor, the last of the Romans 
under whose ascetic providence you led such a comfortable and safe 
life. 
You demanded a people's militia? You will get a set of service 
regulations. You will be put at the disposal of the authorities. You 
will get military drill and schooling in passive obedience until your 
eyes water. 
Prussian acumen has found out that every new constitutional 
institution offers the most interesting opportunity for new penal 
laws,  new rules, new punishments, new supervision, new chicanery 
and new bureaucracy. 
Still more constitutional demands! Still more constitutional 
demands! exclaims the Government of Action. We have an act for 
every demand! 
Demand: Every citizen must be armed to protect "constitutional 
freedom". 
Answer: From now on every citizen comes under the competence 
of the Ministry of the Interior. 
a See this volume, pp. 233-35.— Ed. 
' By its sins.— Ed. 

=====第289页=====
The Civic Militia Bill 259 
It would be easier to recognise the Greeks in the shape of the 
animals into which Circe transformed them than to recognise the 
constitutional institutions in the fantastic images into which they 
have been transfigured by Prussianism and its Government of Action. 
The Prussian reorganisation of Poland is followed by the Prussian 
reorganisation of the civic militial 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 52, July 22, 18481 
Cologne, July 21. We have seen that the "general stipulations" of 
the civic militia Bill amount to the following: the civic militia has 
ceased to exist. We shall touch very briefly upon yet some other 
sections of the Bill to distil from them the spirit of the "Government 
of Action", and here, too, we have to be selective in handling the raw 
materials of the pseudonymous institute. A great number of 
paragraphs presuppose new community and district regulations, a 
new administrative division of the monarchy etc., all creatures that 
conduct their hidden lives, as is well known, in the secret-pregnant 
womb of the Government of Action. Why then has the Government 
of Action issued the Bill on the reorganisation of the civic militia 
before the promised Bills on the community and district regulations 
etc.? 
In Section III we find two service lists: the list of the respectable 
people serving in the civic militia and the list of citizens who are 
supported from public funds (Paragraph 14 [and Paragraph 16]). 
The host of officials, of course, is not included among the people 
who are supported from public funds. It is generally known that in 
Prussia these officials constitute the productive class proper. The 
poor, however, like the slaves in ancient Rome, "are only to be 
called up under extraordinary circumstances". If because of their 
civil dependence the poor are as little qualified to protect 
"constitutional freedom" as the lazzaroni in Naples,174 do they 
deserve to occupy a subordinate position in this new institute of 
passive obedience? 
Apart from the poor, we find a far more important distinction 
between the solvent and insolvent people on the active list of the 
militia. 
But first another observation. Under Paragraph 53: 
"Throughout the country, the civic militia must wear the same simple uniform 
prescribed by the King. The uniform must not be of such a kind that it gives occasion 
for confusion with the army." 

=====第290页=====
260 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Of course! The clothing must be of such a kind that the army is 
distinct from the civic militia and the civic militia from the people, 
and that no confusion can occur on such occasions as hand-to-hand 
combat, shooting and similar war manoeuvres. The service uniform 
as such is, however, as indispensable as the service list and the service 
regulations. It is precisely the service uniform which is the livery of 
freedom. This livery causes a significant rise in the cost of equipping 
a civic militiaman and the increased cost of this equipment gives the 
welcome excuse for creating an infinite abyss between  bourgeois  and 
proletarian members of the civic militia. 
Listen to this: 
Paragraph 57: "Every member of the civic militia must pay out of his own  pocket  for 
uniform (in case one is required), service badges and weapons. The community, 
however, is obliged to provide these items at its expense in the quantities required for 
the equipment of soldiers on duty who cannot pay the  costs  from their own means." 
Paragraph 59: "The community retains the right of possession of the items of 
equipment that it has supplied and it can keep these in special  stores  when not in service 
use." 
Thus,  all those who cannot equip themselves militarily from top to 
toe, and that is the great majority of the Prussian population, the 
entire working class and a large part of the middle class, are all 
legally disarmed "except during the period of service", whereas the 
bourgeois  section of the civic militia remains at all times in possession 
of its weapons and uniforms. Since in the guise of the "community" 
the same bourgeoisie "can keep in special stores the items of 
equipment that it has supplied", it is not only in possession of its own 
weapons but, in addition, is in possession of the weapons of thé 
proletariat of the civic militia, and it "can" and "will" refuse to hand 
out these weapons even for "service use" if political collisions occur 
which are not to its liking. Thus the political privilege of capital has 
been restored in its most inconspicuous but most effective and 
decisive form. Capital has the privilege of possessing arms as 
opposed to those who own little, just as medieval feudal barons over 
against their serfs. 
In order that this privilege should operate in its full exclusiveness, 
Paragraph 56 states that 
"in the countryside and in towns of less than  5,000  inhabitants it suffices to arm 
civic militiamen with pikes or swords, and with this kind of armament only a service 
badge to be determined by the colonel need be worn in place of a uniform". 
In all towns of more than  5,000  inhabitants the uniform must 
enlarge the property qualification, which alone enables a man to bear 
arms,  and with it increase the numbers of the proletariat in the civic 

=====第291页=====
The Civic Militia Bill 261 
militia. Just as this proletariat, that is the largest part of the 
population, have uniforms and weapons only on loan, so they have 
the right to bear arms in general only on loan; their existence as 
servicemen is only on loan and—beati possidentes, blessed are the 
propertied! The moral uneasiness with which a borrowed garb 
envelops an individual, particularly in the case of soldiers where the 
borrowed uniform flits successively from one body to another, this 
moral uneasiness is, of course, the first requisite for Romans called 
upon "to protect constitutional freedom". By contrast, however, will 
not the proud self-esteem of the solvent civic militia grow, and what 
more can be desired? 
And even these stipulations, which render the right to bear arms 
illusory for the greater part of the population, are encased in 
still more novel and more restrictive stipulations, in the interests 
of the propertied section of the population, the privileged capi­
talists. 
For the community needs to have in stock merely enough items of 
equipment required by that part of the insolvent servicemen "who 
are on active service". Under Paragraph 15, the conditions for 
"active service" are as follows: 
"In all communities where the total number of men currently available for service 
exceeds the 20th part of the population, the representatives of the community have 
the right to limit the personnel on active service to that part of the population. If they 
make use of this authorisation, they must lay down a service roster in such a way that 
all men currently available for service take their turn in due course. At every turn, 
however, not more than a third may leave at any one time; and all age groups must be 
called up at the same time in proportion to the available number of civic militiamen 
contained in each group." 
And now one should try to calculate for what tiny fraction of the 
proletariat of the civic militia and the total population these items of 
equipment are really provided by the community? 
In yesterday's article we observed how the Government of Action is 
reorganising the constitutional institution of the civic militia along 
the lines of the old-Prussian, bureaucratic state. Only today we see it 
at the height of its mission and observe how it is forming this 
institution of the civic militia along the lines of the July revolution 
and Louis Philippe and in the spirit of the epoch which crowns 
capital and pays homage 
With drums and trumpets 
To its youthful splendour.3 
a Modified quotation from Heinrich Heine's poem "Berg-Idylle". In Die 
Harzreise. — Ed. 

=====第292页=====
262 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
A few words to the Hansemann-Kühlwetter-Milde Government. A 
few days ago a circular letter against the intrigues of the reaction was 
sent by Herr Kühlwetter to every Regierungspräsident. What has led to 
this phenomenon? 
The Government of Action intends to establish the rule of the 
bourgeoisie by simultaneously reaching a compromise with the old 
police and feudal state. While it is engaged in this dual and 
contradictory task, it sees that the rule of the bourgeoisie, which has 
still to be set up, and the existing Government itself are constantly 
outflanked by the absolutist and feudal reaction—and it is bound to 
succumb. The bourgeoisie cannot achieve domination without 
previously gaining the support of the people as a whole, and hence 
without acting more or less democratically. 
But attempting to combine the Restoration period with the July 
period, and causing the bourgeoisie, which is still grappling with 
absolutism, feudalism, the country squires, and the rule of the 
military and the bureaucracy, already at this stage to exclude the 
people, and to subjugate and bypass it, is tantamount to attempting 
to square the circle. This is a historical problem which will frustrate 
the efforts even of a Government of Action, even of the Hansemann-
Kühlwetter-Milde triumvirate. 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 54, July 24, 1848] 
Cologne, July 23. The section of the civic militia Bill which deals 
with the "election and appointment of superiors" is a genuine labyrinth of 
electoral methods. We want to play Ariadne and give the modern 
Theseus, the praiseworthy civic militia, the thread that will guide him 
through the labyrinth. The modern Theseus, however, will be as 
ungrateful as the ancient one and, having killed the Minotaur, will 
treacherously abandon his Ariadne, the press, upon the rock of 
Naxos. 
Let us number the different passages of the labyrinth. 
Passage One. Direct elections. 
Paragraph 42. "The leaders of the civic militia up to and including captains, are 
elected by the civic militiamen on active service." 
Side passage. "The civic militiamen on active service" constitute 
only a small part of the really "able-bodied" personnel. Compare 
Paragraph 15a and our article of the day before yesterday. 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung has "Paragraph 25", evidently a misprint.— Ed. 

=====第293页=====
The Civic Militia Bill 263 
Thus the "direct" elections, too, are only so-called direct elections. 
Passage Two. Indirect elections. 
Paragraph 48. "The battalion's major is elected with an absolute majority of 
votes by the captains, platoon leaders and corporals of the respective companies." 
Passage  Three. Combination of indirect  elections  with  royal  appointment. 
Paragraph 49. "The colonel is appointed by the King from a list of three 
candidates elected by the leaders of the respective battalions down to and including 
the platoon leaders." 
Passage Four. Combination of indirect  elections  with appointment by the 
commanders. 
Paragraph 50. "The respective commanders will appoint adjutants from among 
the platoon leaders, battalion clerks from among the corporals and battalion 
drum-majors from among the drummers." 
Passage Five. Direct appointment by bureaucratic means. 
Paragraph 50. "The sergeant and the clerk of a company are appointed by the 
captain, the sergeant-major and the clerk of a squadron by a cavalry captain and the 
corporal by the platoon leader." 
Thus if these electoral methods begin with adulterated direct 
elections, they end with the unadulterated cessation of all elections, 
namely with the discretion of the captains, cavalry captains and 
platoon leaders. Finis coronat opus.3 This labyrinth has its apex, its 
point. 
The crystals—ranging from the effulgent colonel to the insignifi­
cant corporal—which are precipitated in this complicated chemical 
process, settle for six years. 
Paragraph 51. "Elections and appointments of leaders are made for six years." 
It is hard to understand why after such precautionary measures 
the Government of Action needed to commit another gaffe by 
shouting in the face of the civic militia, in the "general regulations": 
You are to be transformed from a political into a purely police 
institution and you are to be reorganised as a nursery for old-Prussian 
drill. Why take away the illusion? 
The royal  appointment is so like a canonisation that in the section on 
"Civic Militia Courts" we find no courts for "colonels" but only courts 
for ranks up to major. How could a royal colonel possibly commit a 
crime? 
In contrast, the mere existence as a militiaman is to such an extent 
a profanation of the citizen, that a word from his superior officers, a 
The end crowns the work.— Ed. 

=====第294页=====
264 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
word from the infallible royal colonel, or even from the first chap 
that comes along who has been appointed sergeant by the captain or 
corporal by the platoon leader, is enough to rob the militiaman of his 
personal freedom for 24 hours and to have him arrested. 
Paragraph 81. "Every superior may reprimand his  subordinate  while on service; he 
can even order his immediate arrest and imprisonment for 24  hours  if the subordinate is 
guilty of drunkenness while on duty or  some other  gross violation of  service  regulations." 
The superior, of course, decides what constitutes some other gross 
violation of service regulations and the subordinate has to obey orders. 
Thus if the citizen at the very beginning of the Bill matures 
towards the "nature of his function", the "protection of constitution­
al freedom", by ceasing to be what according to Aristotle is the 
function of man—a "zoon politikori", a "political animal"3—he only 
completes his calling by surrendering his freedom as a citizen to the 
discretion of a colonel or a corporal. 
The "Government of Action" seems to subscribe to some peculiar 
oriental-mystical notions, to a sort of Moloch cult. To protect the 
"constitutional freedom" of Regierungspräsidenten, burgomasters, 
police superintendents, chiefs of police and police inspectors, 
officials of the public prosecution, presidents or directors of 
law-courts, examining magistrates, justices of the peace, village 
mayors, Ministers, clergymen, military personnel on active service, 
frontier, customs, tax, forestry and postal officials, superintendents 
and warders of all kinds of penal institutions, the executive security 
officers and of the people under 25 and over 50 years of age—all of 
them persons who according to Paragraphs 9, 10, and 11 do not 
belong to the civic militia—to protect the "constitutional freedom" 
of this élite of the nation, the rest of the nation must let its 
constitutional freedom and even personal freedom die a bloody 
sacrificial death upon the altar of the fatherland. Pends-toi,Figaro! Tu 
n'aurais pas inventé cela! h 
It is hardly necessary to mention that the section dealing with 
penalties has been worked out with voluptuous thoroughness. The 
entire institution, in accordance with "the nature of its function", is, 
of course, to be purely a penalty for the desire of the praiseworthy 
citizenry to have a Constitution and a civic militia. We merely observe 
that in addition to the legally determined criminal cases, the service 
regulations, the Magna Carta of the civic militia, devised by the  royal 
colonel  in consultation with the major and with the permission of the 
a Aristotle, Politica, I, 1, 9.— Ed. 
Hang yourself, Figaro, you would not have thought of that! (Modified quotation 
from Beaumarchais' La folle journée, ou le mariage de Figaro, Act V, Scene 8.)— Ed. 

=====第295页=====
The Civic Militia Bill 265 
apocryphal "district representation", give rise to a new specimen 
collection of penalties (see Paragraph 82 and the subsequent 
paragraphs). It goes without saying that fines can be substituted for 
imprisonment so that the difference between the solvent and insolvent 
members of the civic militia, i.e. the difference between the 
bourgeoisie and the proletariat of the civic militia invented by the 
"Government of Action", may enjoy penal sanction. 
The exempt judiciary, which the Government of Action had by and 
large to give up in the Constitution, is smuggled back again into the 
civic militia. All disciplinary offences of the men and corporals of the 
civic militia are within the competence of company courts 
consisting of two platoon leaders, two corporals and three civic 
militiamen (Paragraph 87). All disciplinary offences of "leaders of 
companies belonging to the battalion, from platoon leaders up to 
and including majors", are under the jurisdiction of battalion courts 
consisting of two captains, two platoon leaders and three corporals 
(Paragraph 88). For the major there is a specially exempt judiciary 
since the same Paragraph 88 prescribes that "if the investigation 
concerns a major, the battalion court will be joined by two majors 
serving as members of the court". Finally, a colonel, as has already 
been mentioned, is exempt from any court. 
The admirable Bill ends with the following paragraph: 
(Paragraph 123.) "The rules concerning the participation of the civic militia in 
the defence of the fatherland in case of war and its armament, equipment and 
provisioning to be carried out then are reserved for the law on the organisation of the 
army." 
In other words: the old army reserve continues to exist side by side with 
the reorganised civic militia. 
Does not the Government of Action deserve to be impeached just 
because of this Bill and the projected armistice with Denmark? 
Written on July 20-23, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung Nos. 51, 52 and 54,July 21, 22 and time 
24, 1848 

=====第296页=====
266 
THE ARMISTICE WITH DENMARK1 
Cologne, July 21. As our readers know, we have always regarded 
the Danish war with great equanimity. We have joined neither in the 
blatant bluster of the nationalists, nor in the well-worn tune of the 
sham enthusiasm for sea-girt Schleswig-Holstein. 3 We knew our 
country too well, we knew what it means to rely on Germany. 
Events have fully borne out our views. The unimpeded capture of 
Schleswig by the Danes, the recapture of the country and the march 
to Jutland, the retreat to the Schlei, the repeated capture of the 
duchy up to Königsau b—this utterly incomprehensible conduct of 
the war from first to last has shown the Schleswigers what sort of 
protection they can expect from the revolutionary, great, strong, 
united etc. Germany, from the supposedly sovereign nation of 
forty-five million. However, in order that they lose all desire to 
become German, and that the "Danish yoke" appear infinitely more 
desirable to them than "German liberty", Prussia, in the name of the 
German Confederation, 176 has negotiated the armistice of which we 
print today a word-for-word translation. 
Hitherto it has been the custom, when signing an armistice, for the 
two armies to maintain their positions, or at most a narrow neutral 
strip was interposed between them. Under this armistice, the first 
result of the "prowess of Prussian arms", the victorious Prussians 
withdraw over 20 miles, from Kolding to this side of Lauenburg, 
whereas the defeated Danes maintain their positions at Kolding and 
Engels paraphrases the first words of a song which was written by Matthäus 
Friedrich Chemnitz in 1844.—Ed. 
The Danish name is Kongeaa.—Ed. 

=====第297页=====
The Armistice with Denmark 267 
relinquish only Alsen.a  Furthermore, in the event of the armistice 
being called off, the Danes are to advance to the positions they held 
on June 24, in other words they are to occupy a six to seven miles 
wide stretch of North Schleswig without firing a shot—a stretch from 
which they were twice driven out—whereas the Germans are allowed 
to advance only to Apenrade b and its environs. Thus "the honour of 
German arms is preserved" and North Schleswig, exhausted because 
it was deluged with troops four times, is promised a possible fifth and 
sixth invasion. 
But that is not all. A part of Schleswig is to be occupied by Danish 
troops even during the armistice. Under Clause 8, Schleswig is to be 
occupied by regiments recruited in the duchy, i.e. partly by soldiers 
from Schleswig who took part in the movement, and partly by 
soldiers who at that time were stationed in Denmark and fought in 
the ranks of the Danish army against the Provisional Government. 
They are commanded by Danish officers and are in every respect 
Danish troops. That is how the Danish papers, too, size up the 
situation. 
The Faedreland of July 13 writes: 
"The presence in the duchy of loyal troops from Schleswig will undoubtedly 
substantially harden popular feeling which, now that the country has experienced the 
misfortunes of war, will forcefully turn against those who are the cause of these 
misfortunes." 
On top of that we have the movement in Schleswig-Holstein. The 
Danes call it a riot, and the Prussians  treat  it as a riot. The Provisional 
Government, which has been recognised by Prussia and the German 
Confederation, is mercilessly sacrificed; all laws, decrees etc., issued 
after Schleswig became independent, are abrogated; on the other 
hand, the repealed Danish laws have again come into force. In short, 
the reply concerning Wildenbruch  's famous Note, a reply which Herr 
Auerswald refused to give, c can be found here in Clause 7 of the 
proposed armistice. Everything that was revolutionary in the 
movement is ruthlessly destroyed, and the Government created by 
the revolution is to be replaced by a legitimate administration 
nominated by three legitimate monarchs. The troops of Holstein and 
Schleswig are again to be commanded by Danes and thrashed by Danes; 
the ships of Holstein and Schleswig are to remain "Dansk-Eiendom" d 
as before, despite the latest order of the Provisional Government. 
a The Danish name is Als.— Ed. 
The Danish name is Aabenraa.— Ed. 
c See this volume, p.  191.—  Ed. 
"Danish property."—Ed. 

=====第298页=====
268 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
The new Government which they intend to set up puts the 
finishing touch to all this. The Faedreland* declares: 
"Though in the limited electoral district from which the Danish-elected 
members of the new Government are to be chosen we shall probably not find the 
combination of energy, talent, intelligence and experience which Prussia will dispose 
of when making her selection", this is not decisive. "The members of the Government 
must of course be elected from among the population of the duchies, but no one 
prevents us giving them secretaries and assistants born and residing in  other  parts of  the 
country. In selecting these secretaries and administrative advisers one can be guided by 
considerations of fitness and talent without regard to local considerations, and it is 
likely that these men will exert a great influence on the spirit and trend of the 
administration. Indeed, it is to be hoped that even high-ranking Danish officials will 
accept such a post, though its official status may be inferior. Every true Dane will 
consider such a post an honour under the present circumstances." 
This semi-official paper thus promises the duchies that they will be 
swamped not only with Danish troops but also with Danish civil 
servants. A partly Danish Government will take up its residence in 
Rendsburg on the officially recognised territory of the German 
Confederation. 
These are the advantages which the armistice brings Schleswig. 
The advantages for Germany are just as great. The admission of 
Schleswig to the German Confederation is not mentioned at all. On 
the contrary, the decision of the Confederation is flatly repudiated by 
the composition of the new Government. The German Confedera­
tion chooses the members for Holstein, and the King of Denmark 
chooses those for Schleswig. Schleswig is therefore under Danish, and 
not German, jurisdiction. 
Germany would have rendered a real service in this Danish war if 
she had compelled Denmark to abolish the Sound tax, a form of old 
feudal robbery.177 The German seaports, hard hit by the blockade 
and the seizure of their ships, would have willingly borne the burden 
even longer if it led to the abolition of the Sound tax. The 
governments also made it known everywhere that the abolition of 
this tax must at any rate be brought about. And what came of all this 
boastfulness? Britain and Russia want the tax kept, and of course 
Germany obediently acquiesces. 
It goes without saying that in exchange for the return of the ships, 
the goods requisitioned in Jutland have to be refunded, on the 
principle that Germany is rich enough to pay for her glory. 
These are the advantages which the Hansemann Ministry offers to 
the German nation in this draft armistice. These are the fruits of a 
war waged for three months against a small nation of a million and a 
a No. 180, July 14, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第299页=====
The Armistice with Denmark 269 
half.  That is the result of all the boasting by our national papers, our 
formidable Dane-haters! 
It is said that the armistice will not be concluded. General Wrangel, 
encouraged by Beseler, has definitely refused to sign it, despite 
repeated requests by Count Pourtalès, who brought him Auerswald's 
order to sign it, and despite numerous reminders that it was his duty 
as a Prussian general to do so. Wrangel stated that he is above all 
subordinated to the German Central Authority, and the latter will 
not approve of the armistice unless the armies maintain their present 
positions and the Provisional Government remains in office until the 
peace is concluded. 
Thus the Prussian project will probably not be carried out, but it is 
nevertheless interesting as a demonstration of how Prussia, when she 
takes over the reins, defends Germany's honour and interests. 
Written by Engels on July 21, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 52, July 22, 1848 

=====第300页=====
270 
THE ARMISTICE "NEGOTIATIONS" 
The armistice has still neither been signed nor definitively 
rejected. Reports both from Wrangel's headquarters and from 
Copenhagen continually contradict one another. All that is certain is 
that Wrangel initially refused to sign, that Mr. Reedtz returned to 
Copenhagen with this refusal and that as a result fresh troops were 
embarked for Jutland from the 15th July onwards. The Börsen-Halle 
says a that on receiving the news of another three-day cease-fire the 
English and Swedish ambassadors,6 together with Mr. Reedtz, left 
Copenhagen for Kolding. They are said to be joining General 
Neumann, who has been sent there from Berlin, in an attempt to 
overcome Wrangel's opposition. 
All this news reaches us via Copenhagen, while from Berlin and 
from Wrangel's headquarters we hear nothing but empty rumours. 
Our present constitutional right of access to information is in this 
sense no different from the old mystery-mongering. We read of the 
things which concern us most closely in the newspapers of countries 
furthest away from us. 
According to a letter in the Faedreland the Jutes have reacted fairly 
peacefully to the German invasion. 
Written by Engels on or about July 23, Printed according to the newspaper 
1848 
Published in English for the first 
First published in the Neue Rheinische time 
Zeitung No. 54, July 24, 1848 
a "Kopenhagen, den 19. Juli", Börsen-Halle No. 11224, July 21, 1848.— Ed. 
Henry Wynn and Elias Lagerheim. — Ed. 

=====第301页=====
271 
THE CONCORDIA OF TURIN 
Cologne, July 23. We have recently mentioned the newspaper 
L'Alba which appears in Florence and which has held out its fraternal 
hand to us across the Alps.3  It was to be expected that another 
journal, La Concordia in Turin, a newspaper of opposite colours, 
should declare itself in an opposite, though by no means hostile, 
manner. In a former issue La Concordia expressed the opinion that 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung backs any group as long as it is 
"oppressed". b The paper was led to this not very sensible invention by 
our judgment of the events in Prague and our sympathy for the 
democratic forces against the reactionary Windischgrätz and Co. c 
Perhaps the Turin journal has become more enlightened in the 
meantime about the so-called Czech movement. 
Lately, however, La Concordiad felt induced to devote a more or 
less doctrinaire article to the Nuova Gazzetta Renana.e It has read in 
our newspaper the programme for the Workers' Congress178 which 
is to be convened in Berlin and the eight points which are to be 
discussed by the workers are disturbing it to a significant degree. 
After faithfully translating the whole, it begins a sort of criticism 
with the following words: 
"There is much that is true and just in these proposals, but the Concordia would 
betray its mission if it did not raise its voice against the errors of the socialists." 
a See this volume, p.  167.—Ed. 
b La Concordia No. 161, July 7, 1848.—Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 91-93 and 119-20.—Ed. 
d La Concordia No. 168, July 15, 1848.—Ed. 
e Neue Rheinische Zeitung. —Ed. 
11-3447 

=====第302页=====
272 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
We on our part protest against the "error" of the  Concordia  which 
consists in mistaking the programme issued by the respective 
commission for the Workers' Congress, and which we merely 
reported, for our own. We are nevertheless ready to enter upon a 
discussion on political economy with the Concordia as soon as its 
programme offers something more than a few well-known philan­
thropic phrases and picked-up free trade dogmas. 
Written on July 23, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 55, July 25, 1848 time 

=====第303页=====
273 
THE AGREEMENT DEBATES ON THE DISTRICT 
ESTATES 
(AGREEMENT SESSION OF JULY 18) 
Cologne, July 25. Among the many confused, purposeless and 
purely personal documents and negotiations that occur at the 
beginning of each session, we want to stress today two points. 
The first one is the declaration by ex-Minister Rodbertus, submitted 
in writing to the President and repeated from the rostrum: It is true 
that he had put his name down as a speaker against Jacoby's motion3 
but, for all that, had wanted to speak only against its first part, which 
disapproves of the Frankfurt decision, and at  the same time against the 
respective declaration of  the Ministry made on July 4. As is known, the 
debate was broken off before Herr Rodbertus had the opportunity 
to speak. 
The second point is a declaration by Herr Brodowski in the name of 
all Polish deputies made with regard to any possible declaration of 
the German-Polish delegates: He did not recognise the legality of the 
incorporation of a part of Posen into the German Confederation on 
the grounds of the treaties of 1815 and the declaration of the 
Provincial Estates, provoked by the King, against its admission into 
the Confederation. 179 
"I do not know of a subsequent legal  way because the nation has not yet  been consulted 
on it." 
Then follows the final debate on the address. As is known, the 
address was rejected amid shouts of the Left: "Twice repeated 
question of confidence!" and general laughter. 
Now it was the turn of the committee's report dealing with the 
motion of 94 deputies to rescind the authority of the District Estates 
to levy taxes. 
a See this volume, p.  232.—Ed. 
il 

=====第304页=====
274 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
We are going into this matter deliberately. It makes us recall once 
again a piece of genuine old-Prussian legislation, and the mounting 
reaction more and more holds up this legislation to us as a faultless 
model, while the Government of Action, not wanting to represent 
the Government of transition, becomes every day more of an 
unabashed eulogist for the Bodelschwingh Ministry. 
By a series of laws, all of which are of more recent date than 1840, 
the District Estates have been authorised to decide upon taxes with 
binding effect for the inhabitants of the districts. 
These District Estates are a marvellous example of old-Prussian 
"representation". All the large landowning peasants of the district 
send  three  deputies. As a rule, every town sends one;  but every  squire is 
a member of the District Estates by virtue of his birth. Not at all 
represented are the workers and part of the petty bourgeoisie in the 
towns, and the small proprietors and non-established inhabitants in 
the countryside, who together form the overwhelming majority. 
These non-represented classes are nevertheless taxed by the 
deputies, namely by the gentlemen who are "members of the District 
Estates by virtue of their birth"; how and for which purposes we shall 
see presently. 
These District Estates, who moreover are entitled to dispose quite 
independently of the district assets, are in decisions on taxation 
bound by the permission either of the Oberpräsident or of the King, 
and additionally, when they are divided and one estate votes in a 
different way, by the decision of the Minister of the Interior. One 
can see how cunningly the old Prussianism knew how to preserve the 
"vested rights" of the big landowners, but at the same time also the 
right of superintendence of the bureaucracy. 
The fact that the right of superintendence of the bureaucracy 
exists only in order to prevent any encroachment by the District 
Estates on the rights of the officialdom and not in order to protect 
the inhabitants of the district, particularly those who are not 
represented at all, from encroachments by the District Estates, has 
been expressly recognised by the report of the central commission. 
The report closes with the motion to rescind the laws which entitle 
the District Estates to levy taxes. 
Herr Bucher, who gave the report, speaks to the motion. Precisely 
those decisions of the District Estates which most oppressed and 
embittered the non-represented ones, had been singled out by the 
local governments for confirmation. 
"It is precisely a curse of the police state, which in principle has been abolished but 
which in fact unfortunately continues to exist to this day, that the higher the standing 
of an official or authority in this hierarchy of mandarins, the more they feel that they 

=====第305页=====
The Agreement Debates on the District Estates 275 
are able also to understand such detailed measures although they are that much 
further removed from local needs." 
The proposal was the more commendable since it was not 
constructive but merely destructive. 
"It cannot be denied that up to now the Assembly has not been fortunate in its 
attempts at productive activity ... it might be advisable, therefore, to devote ourselves 
for the time being more to destructive activity." 
The speaker suggests accordingly that especially the reactionary 
laws issued since 1815 should be abolished. 
This was too much. The reporter had not only denounced old 
Prussianism, bureaucracy and the District Estates, he had even cast 
an ironic side-glance at the products of the agreement debates so far. 
Here was a favourable opportunity for the Ministry. In any case, 
even out of consideration for the Court, it could not admit that only 
the laws issued by the present King3 would be rescinded. 
Herr Kühlwetter therefore rises. 
"The District Estates are constituted in such a way that their constitution will 
undoubtedly be changed because"—the whole business of estates altogether 
contradicts the principle of equality before the law? On the contrary! Merely "because 
now every squire is still a member of the District Estates by virtue of his birth, a town, 
however, no matter how many manorsh may contain, is entitled to send only one deputy 
to the District Estates and the rural communities are represented by only three 
deputies". 
Let us take a look at the hidden plans of the Government of 
Action. The estate system had to be abolished in the central national 
representation, that could not be avoided. In the smaller areas of 
representation, however, that is in the local districts (perhaps also in 
the provinces?), the attempt will be made to preserve the representation 
by estates  by doing away with only the most egregious advantages of 
the squirearchy over the burghers and peasants. That Herr 
Kühlwetter's explanation cannot be interpreted in any other way 
emerges from the fact that the report of the central commission 
directly refers, to the application of the principle of equality before 
the law in the district representation. Herr Kühl wetter, however, 
passes over this point in deepest silence. 
Herr Kühlwetter has no objection to the content of the motion. He 
is merely asking whether it is necessary to give validity to the motion 
by "way of legislation". 
"The danger that the District Estates may abuse their right to tax is surely not so 
great.... The Government's right of supervision is fry no means so illusory as has been 
presented; it has  always  been exercised conscientiously and in that way 'the lowest class 
of tax payers has been relieved from contributions as much as possible'." 
a Frederick William IV.— Ed. 

=====第306页=====
276 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Of course! Herr Kühiwetter was a bureaucrat under 
Bodelschwingh and even at the risk of compromising the entire 
Government of Action he has to defend the past heroic deeds of the 
Bodelschwingh bureaucracy. We notice that Herr Hansemann was 
absent when his colleague Kühlwetter made him fraternise so much 
with Herr Bodelschwingh. 
Herr Kühlwetter declares that he has already instructed all the 
local governments not to confirm any more taxation by the District 
Estates until further notice, and with that the purpose is surely 
achieved. 
Herr Jentzsch spoils the Minister's game by observing that it is the 
District Estates' custom to assess the turnpike tolls, which benefit 
the manorial estates most, in accordance with the principles of 
the graduated tax from which the estates of the aristocracy are entirely 
exempted. 
Herr Kühlwetter and Herr von Wangenheim, who is an interested 
party, attempt to defend the District Estates. In particular von 
Wangenheim, a Justice of the Court of Appeal, District Estate of 
Saatzig, delivers a long eulogy on this laudable institution. 
Deputy Moritz, however, again thwarts the effect. What good is 
Herr Kühlwetter's instruction? If the Ministry should one day have 
to resign, the local governments would disregard the instruction. If 
we have laws as bad as these, I cannot see why we should not rescind 
them. And as far as the denied abuses are concerned, 
"not only have the District Estates abused their authority to levy taxes by showing 
personal favouritism, by deciding upon expenditures which were not for the common 
good of the district, but they have even decided upon highway construction in the 
interest of certain individuals, of a privileged class.... The district town of Ruppin was 
to be connected to the railway line Hamburg-Berlin. Instead of letting the highway 
pass through the town of Wusterhausen, the local Government refused to let 
this highway run through this small, impoverished town—even though this town 
declared that it would pay the additional cost from its own funds—and on the con­
trary decided that the highway was to run through three estates of one and the same 
lord of the manor" U 
Herr Reichenbach calls attention to the fact that the Ministry's 
instruction has no effect whatsoever upon the district assets which 
are entirely at the disposal of the District Estates. 
The Minister replies with a few lame phrases. 
Herr Bucher declares that in his opinion the Minister is by no 
means entitled to issue instructions, which in effect rescind ex­
isting laws. Only by legislation could an improvement be brought 
about. 
Herr Kühlwetter stammers yet a few more incoherent words to 
defend  himself,  and then a vote is taken. 

=====第307页=====
The Agreement Debates on the District Estates 277 
The Assembly adopts the motion of the central commission 
whereby the laws authorising the District Estates to levy taxes and 
dispose of the district assets are rescinded, with the addendum: 
"decisions of the District Estates taken on the basis of these decrees notwith­
standing". 
It is obvious that the "acts" of the Government of Action consist of 
police-type attempts at reaction and parliamentary defeats. 
(To be continued)3 
Written by Engels on July 25, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 56, July 26, 1848 time 
a See Engels' article "The Agreement Debate about the Valdenaire Affair" 
(pp. 301-04 of this volume).—Ed. 

=====第308页=====
278 
THE BILL ON THE COMPULSORY LOAN 
AND ITS MOTIVATION 180 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 56, July 26, 1848] 
Cologne, July 25. A notorious rogue of London's blessed district of 
St. Giles appeared before the Assizes. He was accused of having 
relieved the chest of a notorious City miser of £2,000. 
"Gentlemen of the jury," began the accused, "I will not lay claim to your patience 
for very long. Since my defence will be of an economical nature, I shall use words 
economically. I have taken £2,000 from Mr. Cripps. Nothing is more certain than 
that. I have, however, only taken from a private person in order to give to the public. 
What happened to the £2,000? Did I perhaps keep them egoistically? Search my 
pockets. I will sell you my soul for a farthing if you are able to find one penny. You will 
find the £2,000 at the tailor's, the shopkeeper's,3 the restaurateur's etc. Thus what 
have I done? I have taken 'idle sums of money which' could be retrieved from the 
grave, in which avarice kept them, 'only by a compulsory loan' and 'put them into 
circulation'. I was an agent of circulation and circulation is the foremost requirement 
for national wealth. Gentlemen, you are Englishmen! You are economists! You will 
surely not condemn a benefactor of the nation!" 
The economist of St. Giles resides in Van Diemen's Landb and 
has the opportunity to think about the blind ingratitude of his fellow 
countrymen. 
He did not live in vain, however. His principles form the basis of 
Hansemann's compulsory loan. 
Explaining the motives for this measure, Herr Hansemann states that "the 
admissibility of the compulsory loan rests upon the well-founded supposition that a 
major portion of the available« cash lies idle in the possession of private individuals in 
small and large sums and can be put into circulation only by a compulsory loan". 
This word is in English in the German original.— Ed. 
Now Tasmania. From 1803 to 1854 a British penal colony.—Ed. 

=====第309页=====
The Bill on the Compulsory Loan and Its Motivation 279 
When you consume a capital, you bring it into circulation. If you do 
not bring it into circulation, the state will consume it in order to bring 
it into circulation. 
A cotton manufacturer employs 100 workers, for example. He 
pays to each of them 9 silver groschen daily. Thus every day 900 
silver groschen, i.e. 30 talers, migrate from his pocket into the 
pockets of the workers and from there into the pockets of the 
épiciers, 3 landlords, shoemakers, tailors etc. This migration of the 30 
talers is known as their circulation. From the moment when the 
manufacturer can sell his cotton material only at a loss or not at all, 
he ceases to produce and to employ his workers, and with the 
cessation of production the migration of the 30 talers, i.e. their 
circulation, ceases. We shall create circulation by force! exclaims 
Hansemann. Why does the manufacturer let his money lie  idle?  Why 
does he not let it circulate? When the weather is fine, many people 
circulate in the open air. Hansemann drives the people outside and 
forces them to circulate so as to create fine weather. What a great 
weather-maker! 
The ministerial and commercial crisis robs the capital of bourgeois 
society of its interest. The state helps society to its legs by taking away 
its capital as well. 
In his book on Circulationh  the Jew Pinto, the famous eighteenth-
century stock exchange speculator, recommends speculating in 
stocks. He states that although speculation does not produce 
circulation, it promotes circulation, that is the migration of wealth 
from one pocket into another. Hansemann is transforming the 
exchequer into a wheel of fortune upon which the property of the 
citizens circulates. Hansemann-Pinto! 
In his "preamble" for the "Bill on the Compulsory Loan", 
Hansemann is encountering one great difficulty. Why has the 
voluntary loan not produced the required sums? 
The "unreserved confidence" which the present Government 
enjoys is well known. Also well known is the rapturous patriotism of 
the big bourgeoisie whose main complaint is that a few agitators have 
the insolence not to share its confidence. The loyalty declarations 
from all the provinces are well known. But "for a' that and a' that",c 
Hansemann is compelled to transform the poetic voluntary loan into 
the prosaic compulsory loan! 
For example, in the district of Düsseldorf, aristocrats have 
a Grocers.—Ed. 
Isaac Pinto, Traité de la circulation et du crédit. —Ed. 
c Quoted from Ferdinand Freiligrath's translation ("Trotz alledem!") of Robert 
Burns' poem "For a' that and a'  that".—Ed. 

=====第310页=====
280 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
contributed 4,000 talers and officers 900 talers, and where does 
more confidence reign than among the aristocrats and officers of the 
district of Düsseldorf? We will not even mention the contributions of 
the princes of the Royal House. 
But let Hansemann explain this phenomenon to us. 
"Up to now voluntary contributions have come in slowly. This is probably to be 
ascribed  less  to a lack of  confidence  in our state of affairs than to the uncertainty about the 
real needs  of the state, since people seem to believe it permissible to wait and see if and to 
what extent the monetary  resources  of the nation might be drawn upon. On this circumstance 
rests the hope that everybody will contribute voluntarily according to his ability once 
the duty to contribute has been demonstrated to be an imperative necessity." 
The state, finding itself in dire need, appeals to patriotism. It 
politely asks patriotism to deposit 15 million talers on the altar of the 
fatherland, and moreover not as a gift but only as a voluntary loan. 
One possesses the greatest confidence in the state but turns a deaf 
ear towards its cry for help! Unfortunately one finds oneself in such 
a state of "uncertainty" about the "real needs of the state" that one 
decides after the greatest spiritual torment not to give the state 
anything for the time being. One has, indeed, the greatest confidence 
in the state authority, and the honourable state authority claims that 
the state needs 15 million talers. It is certainly due to confidence that 
one does not trust the assertions of the state authority and rather 
views its clamour for 15 million as a mere frivolity. 
There is a famous story about a stout-hearted Pennsylvanian who 
never lent a dollar to his friends. He had such confidence in their 
orderly mode of life, and he gave such credit to their business that to 
the day of his death he never gained the "certainty" that they were in 
"real need" of a dollar. He regarded their impetuous demands as 
rather a test of his confidence, and the confidence of this man was 
unshakeable. 
The Prussian state authority found the entire state inhabited by 
Pennsylvanians. 
Herr Hansemann, however, explains this strange economic 
phenomenon by yet another peculiar "circumstance". 
The people did not contribute voluntarily "because they believed 
it permissible to wait and see if and to what extent their monetary 
resources might be drawn upon". In other words: nobody paid 
voluntarily because everybody waited to see if and to what extent he 
would be forced to pay. What circumspect patriotism! What most 
canny confidence! It is upon this "circumstance", namely that 
behind the blue-eyed, sanguine voluntary loan there stands now the 
sinister, hypochondriacal compulsory loan, that Herr Hansemann 
"rests his  hope  that everybody will contribute voluntarily according to 

=====第311页=====
The Bill on the Compulsory Loan and Its Motivation 281 
his ability". By now even the most obdurate doubter must have lost 
his uncertainty and must have gained the conviction that the state 
authority is really serious about its need for money. The entire 
misfortune, as we have seen, lay just in this embarrassing uncertain­
ty. If you do not give, it will be taken from you, and the taking will 
cause both you and us inconvenience. We hope, therefore, that your 
confidence will lose some of its exaggerated character and will 
express itself in well-ringing talers instead of hollow-sounding 
phrases. Est-ce clair?* 
Much as Herr Hansemann is basing his "hopes" upon this 
"circumstance", he has nevertheless himself become infected by the 
brooding temperament of his Pennsylvanians and he feels induced to 
look around for yet stronger incentives to confidence. The confi­
dence indeed exists but it does not want to reveal  itself.  It needs 
incentives to drive it out of its latent state. 
"In order to create an even stronger motive" (than the prospect of the compulsory 
loan) "for voluntary participation, however, Paragraph 1 projects an interest rate of 
3 /3 per cent for the loan, and a date" (October 1) "is left open up to which voluntary 
loans are to be accepted at 5 per cent." 
Thus Herr Hansemann puts a premium of l 2/s per cent upon 
voluntary loans, and now, to be sure, patriotism will flow freely, 
coffers will jump open and the golden flood of confidence will 
stream into the exchequer. 
Herr Hansemann naturally finds it "just" to pay the big shots 1% 
per cent more than he is paying the little people who will part with 
their essentials only under duress. In addition they will have to bear 
the cost of the appeal as punishment for their less comfortable 
circumstances. 
Thus the biblical saying is realised. For whosoever hath, to him 
shall be given; but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away 
even that he hath.b 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 60, July 30, 1848] 
Cologne, July 29. Just as Peel once invented a "sliding scale" 181 for 
the duty on corn, Hansemann-Pinto has invented one for involun­
tary patriotism. 
"A progressive scale will be employed for the obligatory contributions," our 
Hansemann says in his preamble, "since the ability to supply money obviously rises in 
arithmetical progression with the amount of à person's wealth." 
a Is that clear?—Ed. 
b Matthew 13:12.—Ed. 

=====第312页=====
282 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
The ability to supply money rises with wealth. In other words: the 
more money one has at one's disposal the more money one has to 
dispose of. So far, it is undoubtedly correct. The fact, however, that 
the ability to supply money rises only in arithmetical progression even 
if the various amounts of wealth are in geometrical proportion is a 
discovery by Hansemann which is bound to earn him greater fame 
with posterity than Malthus gained by the statement that food supply 
grows only in arithmetical progression whereas population grows in 
geometrical progression. 3 
Thus,  for example, if different amounts of wealth are to each 
other as 
1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 
then, according to Herr Hansemann's discovery, the ability to supply 
money grows in the ratio of 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 
In spite of the apparent growth of the obligatory contribution, the 
ability to supply money, according to our economist, decreases to the 
same degree that wealth increases. 
In a short story by Cervantes0 we find the chief Spanish financier 
in a lunatic asylum. This man had discovered that the Spanish 
national debt would vanish as soon as 
"the Cortes approve a law that all vassals of His Majesty between the ages of 14 and 
60 are obliged to fast on bread and water for one day during each month, and that on 
a day freely to be chosen and decided. The monetary value of the fruits, vegetables, 
meat dishes, fish, wines, eggs and beans which would otherwise have been 
consumed on that day would be delivered to His Majesty, without holding back one 
penny on pain of punishment for perjury". 
Hansemann shortens the procedure. He calls upon all his 
Spaniards who possess an annual income of 400 talers to find one 
day in the year on which they can do without 20 talers. According 
to the sliding scale, he has asked the small fry to refrain from just 
about all consumption for 40 days. If they cannot find the 
20 talers between August and September, a bailiff will look 
for them in October in accordance with the words: seek and ye 
shall find. c 
Let us further examine the "preamble" which the Prussian Necker 
reveals to us. 
"Any income," he instructs us, "derived from industry in the widest sense of the 
word, that is irrespective of whether it is subject to a business tax, as is the case with 
[Th. R. Malthus,] An Essay on the Principle of Population, pp. 25-26.— Ed. 
Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares: Coloquio de los perros. —Ed. 
c Matthew 7:7; Luke  11:9.—Ed. 

=====第313页=====
The Bill on the Compulsory Loan and Its Motivation 283 
doctors, lawyers etc., can only be taken into consideration after the subtraction of the 
operating expenditures including any interest to be paid on debts, since the net income can 
only be found in this  way.  For the same  reason  the working capital must be disregarded if the 
loan contribution which is calculated from income  exceeds  that calculated  from the working 
capital." 
Nous marchons de surprise en surprise. 3 The income can only be taken 
into consideration after the subtraction of the working capital since the 
compulsory loan can and ought to be nothing but an extraordinary 
form of income tax. And the operating costs belong as little to the 
income of an industrialist as the stem and root of a tree belong to its 
fruits.  Hence for the  reason  that only the income is to be taxed and not 
the working capital, it is precisely the working capital that is taxed 
and not the income if this first method seems more profitable to the 
exchequer. Thus it is a matter of complete indifference to Herr 
Hansemann "in which way the net income is found". He is looking 
for "the way in which the greatest income is found" for the 
exchequer. 
Herr Hansemann who lays hands on the working capital itself can 
be compared to a savage who cuts down a tree in order to seize hold 
of its fruits. 
"Thus if" (Art. 9 of the Bill) "the loan contribution to be calculated from the 
working capital is greater than the tenfold amount of the income, the first method of 
estimation will be employed", that is one "will resort to" the "working capital"  itself. 
Hence the exchequer may base its demands upon wealth rather 
than income whenever it chooses. 
The people demands inspection of the mysterious Prussian 
exchequer. The Government of Action answers this tactless demand 
by reserving the right to make a thorough inspection of the ledgers 
of all merchants and an inventory of the wealth of everybody. The 
constitutional era in Prussia opens not with the control of the 
finances of the state by the people but rather by letting the state 
control the wealth of the people so as to open the door to the most 
brazen intervention of the bureaucracy into civil intercourse and 
private relationships. In Belgium, too, the state has had recourse to a 
compulsory loan, but there it modestly limited itself to tax records 
and mortgage deeds, i.e. to available public documents. The 
Government of Action on the other hand introduces the Spartanism 
of the Prussian army into the Prussian national economy. 
Hansemann, to be sure, attempts in his "preamble" to appease the 
citizen by all sorts of mild phrases and friendly persuasion. 
a We go from one surprise to another.—Ed. 

=====第314页=====
284 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
"The distribution of the loan," he whispers to him, "will be based 
upon self-assessment." All "recrimination" is to be avoided. 
"Not even a summary listing of the individual parts of one's property will be 
required.... The district commission set up to examine self-assessments will call for 
appropriate contributions by way of amicable exhortations, and only if this method 
should be unsuccessful will it estimate the amount. The citizen can appeal against this 
decision to a regional commission etc." 
Self-assessment! Not even a summary listing of the individual parts 
of one's property! Amicable exhortations! Appeal! 
Tell me, what more do you want?3 
Let us start at the end, with the appeal. 
Article 16 lays down: 
"The collection will be carried out at the fixed dates  irrespective  of any appeals made 
with the proviso of repayment if the appeal is found justified." 
Thus first comes the execution, the appeal notwithstanding, and 
afterwards the justification, the execution notwithstanding! 
There is more to come! 
"The costs" which are caused by the appeal "shall be borne by the appellant if his 
appeal is totally  or partially rejected and if need be will be collected by executive action" 
(Art. 19). 
Anybody who is familiar with the economic impossibility of an 
exact estimate of wealth will realise at first sight that an appeal 
can always be partially rejected and that the appellant will always 
be the loser. No matter what the nature of the appeal, a 
fine is its inseparable shadow. Let us have every respect for the 
appeal! 
Let us return from the appeal, the end, to the beginning, the 
self-assessment. 
Herr Hansemann does not appear to be afraid that his Spartans 
will assess themselves too heavily. 
Under Art. 13 
"voluntary declarations of the persons obliged to contribute are the foundation of 
the distribution of the loan". 
Herr Hansemann's architecture is such that one cannot deduce the 
further outline of his structure from its foundation. 
Or rather the "voluntary declaration" which, in the form of a 
"statement", is "to be filed with officials appointed by the Finance 
Modified quotation from Heinrich Heine, "Du hast Diamanten und Perlen". In 
Die Heimkehr. — Ed. 

=====第315页=====
The Bill on the Compulsory Loan and Its Motivation 285 
Minister or by the regional administration on his  behalf",  this 
foundation is now substantiated more thoroughly. Under Art. 14 
"one or more commissions will be formed to examine the filed declarations; their 
presidents and other members to the number of not less than five are  to be  appointed  by 
the Finance Minister or an authority acting on his  behalf'. 
Thus the appointment made by the Finance Minister or the 
authority acting on his behalf forms the foundation proper of the 
examination. 
If the self-assessment varies from the "estimate" made by the 
district or town commission appointed by the Finance Minister, the 
"self-assessor" is called upon to give an explanation (Art. 15). He may 
give an explanation or not, it all depends whether it "suffices" for the 
commission appointed by the Finance Minister. If it does not suffice, 
"it is the duty of the commission to determine the contribution by its own  assessment 
and to inform the contributories  thereof". 
First the contributory assesses himself and informs the official 
thereof.  Then the official makes an assessment and informs the 
contributory  thereof.  What has become of the "self-assessment"? 
The foundation has foundered. Whereas the self-assessment only 
gives rise to a serious "examination" of the contributory, the 
assessment by a stranger turns at once into execution. For Art. 16 
decrees: 
"The transactions of the district (town) commissions are to be filed with the 
regional administration which will forthwith compile the lists of the bond amounts and 
pass them on to the respective collectors for collection—if necessary by way of 
execution — under the regulations governing the collection of [...] taxes." 
We have already seen that all is not "roses" with the appeals. The 
appeals path hides still other thorns. 
Firstly: The regional commission which examines the appeals 
consists of deputies who are elected by the delegates etc. elected 
under the law of April 8, 1848. 
But the compulsory loan divides the entire state into two hostile 
camps, the camp of the obstructionists and the camp of the men of 
good will against whose rendered or proffered contributions no 
objections have been raised by the district commission. The deputies 
may only be elected from the camp of the men of good will (Art. 17). 
Secondly. "A commissioner appointed by the Finance Minister 
will preside; an official may be attached to him for his assistance" 
(Art. 18). 
Thirdly: "The regional commission is authorised to order special 
appraisal of  property  or incomes  and for this purpose is entitled to draw 

=====第316页=====
286 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
up inventories or order the inspection of commercial ledgers. If these 
measures do not suffice, the appellant may be required to swear an 
affidavit" [Art. 19]. 
Thus,  whoever refuses to accept without reservation the "assess­
ment" of the officials appointed by the Finance Minister, may, as a 
penalty, have to reveal all his financial affairs to two bureaucrats and 
15 competitors. Thorny path of appeal! Thus Hansemann only 
mocks his public when he says in his preamble: 
"The distribution of the loan is based upon self-assessment. In order to make sure 
that this is in no way offensive, not even a summary listing of the individual parts of one's 
property will be required." 
Not even the penalty for "perjury" of Cervantes' project designer 
is lacking in the project of the Minister of action. 
Instead of tormenting himself with his sham arguments, our 
Hansemann would have done better to join the character in the 
comedy who says: 
"How can you expect me to pay old debts and enter upon new ones unless you lend 
me money?" 
At this moment, however, when Prussia, attending to her 
particularist interests, is seeking to commit a treachery against 
Germany and to rebel against the Central Authority, it is the duty of 
every patriot to refuse to contribute a single penny voluntarily to the 
compulsory loan. Only by persistent deprivation of nourishment can 
Prussia be forced to surrender to Germany. 
Written on July 25 and 29, 1848 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung Nos. 56 and 60, July 26 and 30, 
1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares: Coloquio de los perros. — Ed. 

=====第317页=====
287 
ARMISTICE NEGOTIATIONS WITH DENMARK 
BROKEN OFF 
Cologne, July 27. We have just received letters from Copenhagen 
according to which the armistice negotiations have really been  broken  off. 
On July 21, the Swedish and British ambassadors,3 with the rest of 
the diplomats who had gone to the headquarters, returned to 
Copenhagen without having achieved their object. Although General 
Neumann brought General Wrangel a definite  order  from the King of 
Prussia6 to sign the armistice and although the armistice had already 
been ratified on the Prussian and Danish sides, Wrangel's refusal was 
as definite and instead he set new conditions which were firmly 
rejected by the Danes. It is said that he did not even grant the foreign 
diplomats an audience. The Danes were particularly opposed to 
Wrangel's stipulation that final consent was up to the Imperial Regent.c 
It is therefore solely thanks to General Wrangel's firm stand that 
Germany has this time been saved from one of the most ignominious 
treaties that history has ever known. 
Written by Engels on July 27, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 58, July 28, 1848 time 
Elias Lagerheim and Henry Wynn.— Ed. 
b Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
Archduke John of Austria.— Ed. 

=====第318页=====
288 
THE DISSOLUTION OF THE DEMOCRATIC 
ASSOCIATIONS IN BADEN 
Cologne, July 27. The reactionary police measures against the right 
of association follow each other in rapid succession. First it was the 
Democratic Association in Stuttgart that was abolished, then it was 
the turn of the Association in Heidelberg.3 Success made the 
gendemen of the reaction bold; now the Baden Government has 
banned all democratic associations in Baden. 
All this occurs at the same moment when the soi-disant National 
Assembly in Frankfurt is occupied with the task of securing for all 
time the right of association as one of the "fundamental rights of the 
German people". 
The primary condition for the right of free association must be 
that no association and no society can be dissolved or prohibited by 
the police, that such measures can only be taken after a court 
sentence has established the illegality of the association or of its 
actions and purposes and the originators of these actions have been 
punished. 
This method, of course, is much too protracted for the disci­
plinarian impatience of Herr Mathy. Just as it was too much trouble 
for him first to obtain  •& warrant of arrest or at least to have himself 
appointed as a special constable, before, in virtue of the policeman in 
his nature, he arrested Fielder 182 as a "traitor to his country", just so 
contemptible and irripractical the judicial and legal path appears to 
him now. 
The motives for this new police violence are most edifying. The 
associations had allegedly affiliated to an organisation of democratic 
a See this volume, pp. 248-49.—Ed. 

=====第319页=====
Dissolution of Democratic Associations in Baden 289 
associations for all of Germany which had originated at the Demo­
cratic Congress in Frankfurt.183 This Congress is alleged to have 
"set as its goal the establishment of a democratic republic" (as if that were 
prohibited!) "and what is meant by the means by which this goal is to be reached is 
shown by, among other things, sympathies for the rebels expressed in those 
resolutions" (since when are "sympathies" unlawful "means"?), "as well as by the fact 
that the Central Committee of these associations even refused to grant any further 
recognition to the German National Assembly and called for the formal separation of 
the minority for the purpose of forming a new Assembly by unlawful means".3 
There follow the resolutions of the Congress concerning the 
organisation of the democratic party. 
Thus,  according to Herr Mathy, the associations of Baden are to 
be held responsible for the resolutions of the Central Committee 
even if they do not  carry  them out. For if these associations, following 
the request of the Frankfurt Committee, had really issued an address 
to the Left in the National Assembly urging its withdrawal, Herr 
Mathy would not have failed to announce this. Whether or not the 
request concerned is illegal is for the courts and not for Herr Mathy 
to decide. And to declare illegal the organisation of the party into 
districts, congresses and central committees, one has really to be 
Herr Mathy! And are not the constitutional and reactionary 
associations 184 organising themselves according to this model? 
Well, of course! 
It "appears inadmissible and pernicious to undermine the basis of the constitution 
and thus to shake the entire state edifice by the force of the associations". 
The right of association, Herr Mathy, exists just so that one may 
"undermine" the constitution with impunity, provided, of course, 
one does it legally! And if the power of the associations is greater 
than that of the state, so much the worse for the state! v 
We are calling once more upon the National Assembly to indict 
Herr Mathy at once if it does not want to lose all prestige. 
Written by Engels on July 27, 1848 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 58, July 28, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a Quoted from the article "Karlsruhe, 23. Juli. Ernst der Regierung, die 
Aufhebung der demokratischen Vereine betreffend", Deutsche Zeitung No. 206, July 
26, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第320页=====
290 
THE BILL PROPOSING THE ABOLITION 
OF FEUDAL OBLIGATIONS185 
Cologne, July 29. If any Rhinelander should have forgotten what 
he owes to the "foreign rule", to the "yoke of the Corsican tyrant", 
he ought to read the Bill providing for the abolition without 
compensation of various obligations and dues. The Bill has been 
submitted by Herr Hansemann in this year of grace 1848 "for the 
consideration" of his agreers. 186 Seigniory, allodification rent, death 
dues,  heriot,3 protection money, legal dues and fines, signet money, 
tithes on live-stock, bees etc.— what a strange, what a barbaric ring 
these absurd terms have for our ears, which have been civilised by 
the French Revolution's destruction of feudalism and by the Code 
Napoleon. How incomprehensible to us is this farrago of medieval 
dues and taxes, this collection of musty junk from an antediluvian 
age. 
Nevertheless, put off thy shoes from off thy feet, German patriot, 
for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground. These 
barbarities are the last remnants of Christian-German glory, the last 
links of the historical chain which connects you with your illustrious 
ancestors all the way back to the forests of the Cherusci. The musty 
air, the feudal mire which we find here in their classic unadulterated 
form are the very own products of our fatherland, and every true 
German should exclaim with the poet: 
For oh, this is the wind of home 
on my cheeks and caressing my hand! 
And all this country highway dirt 
is the dirt of my fatherland! 
In the original Besthaupt and Kurmede are used, which are regional variants of the 
German expression for heriot.— Ed. 
Heinrich Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput VIII. The English 
translation is taken from Heinrich Heine, Germany. A Winter's Tale, L. B. Fischer, New 
York, 1944.— Ed. 

=====第321页=====
The Bill Proposing the Abolition of Feudal Obligations 291 
Reading the Bill, it seems at first glance that our Minister of 
Agriculture Herr Gierke, on the orders of Herr Hansemann, has 
brought off a terrifically "bold stroke", 3 has done away with the 
Middle Ages by a stroke of the pen, and of course quite gratuitously. 
But when one looks at the Bill's motivation, one discovers that it sets 
out straight away to prove that in fact no feudal obligations whatever 
ought to be abolished without compensation, that is to say, it 
starts with a bold assertion which directly contradicts the "bold 
stroke". 
The Minister's practical timidity now manoeuvres warily and 
prudently between these two bold postures. On the left "the general 
welfare" and the "demands of the spirit of our time"; on the right 
the "established rights of the lords of the manor"; in the middle the 
"praiseworthy idea of a freer development of rural relations" 
represented by Herr Gierke's shamefaced embarrassment — what a 
picture! 
In short, Herr Gierke fully recognises that feudal obligations in 
general ought to be abolished only against compensation. Thus the 
most onerous, the most widespread, the principal obligations are to 
continue or, seeing that the peasants have in fact already done away 
with them, they are to be reimposed. 
But, Herr Gierke observes, 
if, nevertheless, particular relations, whose intrinsic justification is insufficient or 
whose continued existence is incompatible with the demands of the spirit of our time 
and the general welfare, are abolished without compensation, then the persons affected 
by this should appreciate that they are making a few sacrifices not only for the good of 
all but also in their own well-understood interests, in order that relations between 
those who have claims and those who have duties shall be peaceful and friendly, 
thereby helping landed property generally to maintain the political status which befits 
it for the good of the whole". 
The revolution in the countryside consisted in the actual abolition 
of all feudal obligations. The Government of Action, which 
recognises the revolution, recognises it in the countryside by 
destroying it surreptitiously. It is quite impossible to restore the old 
status quo completely; the peasants would promptly kill their feudal 
lords — even Herr Gierke realises that. An impressive list of 
insignificant feudal obligations existing only in a few places are 
therefore abolished, but the principal feudal obligation, simply 
epitomised in the term compulsory labour, is reintroduced. 
a The expression ein kühner Griffe bold stroke) was first used by Karl Mathy and 
Heinrich von Gagern in the Frankfurt National Assembly in 1848 and quickly became 
popular.— Ed. 

=====第322页=====
292 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
As a result of all the rights that are to be abolished, the aristocracy 
will sacrifice less than 50,000 talers a year, but will thereby save 
several million. Indeed the Minister hopes that they will thus placate 
the peasants and even gain their votes at future parliamentary 
elections. This would really be a very good deal, provided Herr 
Gierke does not miscalculate. 
In this way the objections of the peasants would be removed, and 
so would those of the aristocrats, insofar as they correctly understand 
their position. There remains the Chamber, the scruples of the legal 
and radical pettifoggers. The distinction between obligations that 
are to be abolished and those that are to be retained—which is 
simply the distinction between practically worthless obligations 
and very valuable obligations—must be based as regards the 
Chamber on some semblance of legal and economic justifica­
tion. Herr Gierke must prove that the obligations to be abolished 
1. have an insufficient inner justification, 2. are incompatible with 
the general welfare, 3. are incompatible with the demands of the 
spirit of our time, and 4. that their abolition is fundamentally no 
infringement of property rights, no expropriation without com­
pensation. 
In order to prove the insufficient justification of these dues and 
services Herr Gierke delves into the darkest recesses of feudal law. 
He invokes the entire, "originally very slow development of the 
Germanic states over a period of a thousand years". But what use is 
that to Herr Gierke? The deeper he digs, the more he stirs up the 
stagnant mire of feudal law, the more does that feudal law prove that 
the obligations in question have, not an insufficient justification, 
but from the feudal point of view, a very solid justification. The 
hapless Minister merely causes general amusement when he tries his 
hardest to induce feudal law to make oracular pronouncements 
in the style of modern civil law, or to make the feudal lord of the 
twelfth century think and judge like a bourgeois of the nineteenth 
century. 
Herr Gierke fortunately has inherited Herr von Patow's principle 
that everything emanating from feudal sovereignty and serfdom is to 
be abolished without payment, but everything else is to be abolished 
only against payment of compensation. 8 But does Herr Gierke really 
think that special perspicacity is required in order to show that all 
and every obligation subject to repeal "emanates from feudal 
sovereignty"? 
It is hardly necessary to add that for the sake of consistency Herr 
a See this volume, pp. 117-18.— Ed. 

=====第323页=====
The Bill Proposing the Abolition of Feudal Obligations 293 
Gierke constantly insinuates modern legal concepts into feudal legal 
regulations, and in an extremity he always invokes them. But if Herr 
Gierke evaluates some of these obligations in terms of the modern 
ideas of law, then it is incomprehensible why the same should not be 
done with all obligations. In that case, however, compulsory labour 
service, faced with the freedom of the individual and of property, 
would certainly come off badly. 
Herr Gierke fares even worse when he advances the argument of 
public welfare and the demands of the spirit of our time in support 
of his differentiations. Surely it is self-evident that if these 
insignificant obligations impede the public welfare and are incom­
patible with the demands of the spirit of our time, then this applies in 
still greater measure to such obligations as labour service, the corvée, 
liege money 187 etc. Or does Herr Gierke consider that the right to 
pluck the peasants' geese (Clause 1, No. 14) is out of date, but the 
right to pluck the peasants  themselves  is not? 
Then follows the demonstration that the abolition of those 
particular obligations does not infringe any property rights. Of 
course, only spurious arguments can be adduced to prove such a 
glaring falsehood; it can indeed only be done by reckoning up these 
rights to show the squires how worthless they are for them, though 
this, obviously, can be proved only approximately. And so Herr 
Gierke sedulously reckons up all the 18 sections of Clause 1, and 
does not notice that, to the extent in which he succeeds in proving 
the given obligations to be worthless, he also succeeds in proving his 
proposed legislation to be  worthless.  Virtuous Herr Gierke! How it pains 
us to have to destroy his fond delusions and obliterate his 
Archimedean-feudalist diagrams. 
But there is another difficulty. Both in previous commutations of 
the obligations now to be abolished and in all other commutations, 
the peasants were flagrantly cheated in favour of the aristocracy by 
corrupt commissions. The peasants now demand the revision of all 
commutation agreements concluded under the previous Govern­
ment, and they are quite justified in doing so. 
But Herr Gierke will have nothing to do with this, since "formal 
right and law are opposed" to it; such an attitude is altogether 
opposed to any progress, since every new law nullifies some old 
formal right and law. 
"The consequences of this, it can confidently be predicted, will be that, in order to 
secure advantages to those under obligations by means that run counter to the eternal 
legal principles" (revolutions, too, run counter to the eternal legal principles), 
"incalculable damage must be done to a very large section of landed property in the 
state,  and hence (!) to the state  itself." 

=====第324页=====
294 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Herr Gierke now proves with staggering thoroughness that such a 
procedure 
"would call in question and undermine the entire legal framework of landed 
property and this together with numerous lawsuits and the great expenditure 
involved would cause great damage to landed property, which is the principal 
foundation of national welfare"; that it "would be an encroachment on the legal 
principles underlying the validity of contracts, an attack on the most indubitable 
contractual relations, the consequences of which would shake all confidence in the 
stability of civil law, thereby constituting a grave menace to the whole of commercial 
intercourse"!!! 
Herr Gierke thus sees in this an infringement of the rights of 
property, which would undermine all legal principles. Why is the 
abolition of the obligations under discussion without compensation 
not an infringement? These are not merely indubitable contractual 
relations, but claims that were invariably met and not contested since 
time immemorial, whereas the demand for revision concerns 
contracts that are by no means uncontested, since the bribery and 
swindling are notorious, and can be proved in many cases. 
It cannot be denied that, though the abolished obligations are 
quite insignificant, Herr Gierke, by abolishing them, secures 
"advantages to those under obligation by means that run counter to 
the eternal legal principles" and this is "directly opposed to formal 
right and law"; he "undermines the entire legal framework of 
landed property" and attacks the very foundation of the "most 
indubitable" rights. 
Really, Herr Gierke, was it worth while to go to all this trouble 
and commit such a grievous sin in order to achieve such paltry 
results? 
Herr Gierke does indeed attack property—that is quite indisput­
able—but it is feudal property he attacks, not modern, bourgeois 
property. By destroying feudal property he strengthens bourgeois 
property which arises on the ruins of feudal property. The only 
reason he does not want the commutation agreements revised is 
because by means of these agreements feudal property relations 
were converted into bourgeois ones, and consequently he cannot 
revise them without at the same time formally infringing bourgeois 
property. Bourgeois property is, of course, as sacred and inviolable 
as feudal property is vulnerable and — depending on the require­
ments and courage of the Ministers — violable. 
What in brief is the significance of this lengthy law? 
It is the most striking proof that the German revolution of 1848 is 
merely a parody of the French revolution of 1789. 
On August 4, 1789, three weeks after the storming of the Bastille, 

=====第325页=====
The Bill Proposing the Abolition of Feudal Obligations 295 
the French people, in a single day, got the better of the feudal 
obligations.18 
On July 11, 1848, four months after the March barricades, the 
feudal obligations got the better of the German people. Teste Gierke 
cum Hansemanno* 
The French bourgeoisie of 1789 never left its allies, the peasants, 
in the lurch. It knew that the abolition of feudalism in the 
countryside and the creation of a free, landowning peasant class was 
the basis of its rule. 
The German bourgeoisie of 1848 unhesitatingly betrays the 
peasants, who are its natural allies, flesh of its own flesh, and without 
whom it cannot stand up to the aristocracy. 
The perpetuation of feudal rights and their endorsement in the 
form of the (illusory) commutations — such is the result of the 
German revolution of 1848. That is much ado about nothing. 
Written by Marx on July 29, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 60, July 30, 1848 
a Testified by Gierke and Hansemann. —Ed. 

=====第326页=====
296 
THE KÖLNISCHE ZEITUNG ON THE STATE 
OF AFFAIRS IN ENGLAND 189 
Cologne, July 31. 
"Where is it possible in England to discover any trace of hatred against the class 
which in France is called the  bourgeoisie?  This hatred was at one time directed against the 
aristocracy, which by means of its corn monopoly imposed a heavy and unjust tax on 
industry. The bourgeois in England enjoys no privileges, he depends on his own 
diligence; in France under Louis Philippe he depended on monopolies, on 
privileges." 
This great, this scholarly, this veracious proposition can be found 
in Herr Wolfers' leading article in the always well-informed Kölnische 
Zeitung. 
It is indeed strange. England has the most numerous, the most 
concentrated, the most classic proletariat, a proletariat which every 
five or six years is decimated by the crushing misery of a commercial 
crisis,  by hunger and typhus; a proletariat which for half its life is 
redundant to industry and unemployed. One man in every ten in 
England is a pauper, and one pauper in every three is an inmate in 
one of the Poor Law Bastilles. ^ The annual cost of poor-relief in 
England almost equals the entire expenditure of the Prussian state. 
Poverty and pauperism have been openly declared in England to be 
necessary elements of the present industrial system and the national 
wealth. Yet, despite this, where in England is there any trace of 
hatred against the bourgeoisie? 
There is no other country in the world where, with the huge 
growth of the proletariat, the contradiction between proletariat and 
"Köln, 28. Juli. Die europäische Revolution und die Handelsfreiheit", Kölnische 
Zeitung No. 211, July 29,  1848.—Erf. 

=====第327页=====
The Kölnische Zeitung  on the State of Affairs in England 297 
bourgeoisie has reached such a high level as in England; no other 
country presents such glaring contrasts between extreme poverty 
and immense wealth — yet where is there any trace of hatred against 
the bourgeoisie? 
Obviously, the associations of workers, set up secretly before 1825 
and openly after 1825,191 associations not for just one day against a 
single manufacturer, but permanent associations directed against 
entire groups of manufacturers, workers' associations of entire 
industries, entire towns, finally associations uniting large numbers of 
workers throughout England, all these associations and their 
numerous fights against the manufacturers, the strikes, which led to 
acts of violence, revengeful destructions, arson, armed attacks and 
assassinations — all these actions just prove the love of the proletariat 
for the bourgeoisie. 
The entire struggle of the workers against the manufacturers over 
the last eighty years, a struggle which, beginning with machine 
wrecking, has developed through associations, through isolated 
attacks on the person and property of the manufacturers and on the 
few workers who were loyal to them, through bigger and smaller 
rebellions, through the insurrections of 1839 and 1842,192  has 
become the most advanced class struggle the world has seen. The 
class war of the Chartists, the organised party of the proletariat, 
against the organised political power of the bourgeoisie, has not 
yet led to those terrible bloody clashes which took place during 
the June uprising in Paris, but it is waged by a far larger number 
of people with much greater tenacity and on a much larger 
territory—this social civil war is of course regarded by the Köl­
nische Zeitung and its Wolfers as nothing but a long demonstra­
tion of the love of the English proletariat for its bourgeois em­
ployers. 
Not so long ago it was fashionable to present England as the classic 
land of social contradictions and struggles, and to declare that 
France, compared with England's so-called unnatural situation, 
was a happy land with her Citizen King, her bourgeois parliamentary 
warriors and her upright workers, who always fought so bravely for 
the bourgeoisie. It was not so long ago that the Kölnische Zeitung kept 
harping on this well-worn tune and saw in the English class struggles 
a reason for warning Germany against protectionism and the 
"unnatural" hothouse industry to which it gives rise. But the June 
days have changed everything. The horrors of the June battles have 
scared the Kölnische Zeitung, and the millions of Chartists in London, 
Manchester and Glasgow vanish into thin air in face of the forty 
thousand Paris insurgents. 

=====第328页=====
298 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
France has become the classic country as regards hatred of the 
bourgeoisie and, according to the present assertions of the Kölnische 
Zeitung, this has been the case since 1830. How strange. For the last 
ten years English agitators, received with acclamation by the entire 
proletariat, have untiringly preached fervent hatred of the 
bourgeoisie at meetings and in pamphlets and journals, whereas the 
French working-class and socialist literature has always advocated 
reconciliation with the bourgeoisie on the grounds that the class 
antagonisms in France were far less developed than in England. The 
men at whose very name the Kölnische Zeitung makes the triple sign 
of the cross, men like Louis Blanc, Cabet, Caussidière and 
Ledru-Rollin, have, for many years before and after the February 
revolution, preached peace with the bourgeoisie, and they generally 
did it de la meilleure foi du monde* Let the Kölnische Zeitung look 
through any of the writings of these people, or through the Réforme, 
the Populaire, or even the working-class journals published during 
the last few years like the Union, the Ruche populaire and the 
Fraternité —though it should be sufficient to mention two works 
which everybody knows, Louis Blanc's entire Histoire de dix ans, 
especially the last part, and his Histoire de la révolution française in two 
volumes. 
But the Kölnische Zeitung is not content with merely asserting as a 
fact that no hatred exists in England against "the class which in 
France is called the bourgeoisie" (in England too, our well-informed 
colleague, cf. the Northern Star for the last two years) — it also 
explains why this must be so. 
Peel saved the English bourgeoisie from this hatred by repealing 
the monopolies and establishing Free Trade. 
"The bourgeois in England enjoys no privileges, no monopolies; in France he 
depended on monopolies.... It was Peel's measures that saved England from the most 
appalling upheaval." 
By doing away with the monopoly of the  aristocracy,  Peel saved the 
bourgeoisie from the threatening hatred of the proletariat, according 
to the amazing logic of the Kölnische Zeitung. 
"The English people, we say: the English  people  day by day increasingly realise that 
only from Free Trade can they expect a solution of the vital problems bearing on all 
their present afflictions and apprehensions, a solution which was recently attempted 
amid streams of blood.... We must not forget that the first notions of Free Trade came 
from the English people." 
The English people! But the "English people" have been fighting 
the Free Traders since 1839 at all their meetings and in the press, 
In good faith.— Ed. 

=====第329页=====
The Kölnische Zeitung on the State of Affairs in England 299 
and compelled them, when the Anti-Corn Law League193 was at the 
height of its fame, to hold their meetings in  secret  and to admit only 
persons who had a ticket. The people with bitter irony compared the 
practice of the Free Traders3 with their fine words, and fully 
identified the bourgeois with the Free Trader. Sometimes the 
English people were even forced temporarily to seek the support of 
the aristocracy, the monopolists, against the bourgeoisie, e.g. in their 
fight for the ten-hour day.194  And we are asked to believe that the 
people who were so well able to drive the Free Traders off the 
rostrum at public meetings, that it was these "English people" who 
originally conceived the ideas of Free Trade! The Kölnische Zeitung, 
in its artless simplicity, not only repeats mechanically the illusions of 
the big capitalists of Manchester and Leeds, but lends a gullible ear to 
their deliberate lies. 
"The bourgeois in England enjoys no privileges, no monopolies." 
But in France things are different: 
"The worker for a long time regarded the bourgeois as the monopolist who 
imposed a tax of 60 per cent on the poor farmer for the iron of his plough, who made 
extortionate profits on his coal, who exposed the vine-growers throughout France to 
death from starvation, who added 20, 40, 50 per cent to the price of everything he sold 
them...." 
The only "monopoly" which the worthy Kölnische Zeitung knows is 
the customs monopoly, i.e. the monopoly which only  appears  to affect 
the workers, but actually falls on the bourgeoisie, on all industrialists, 
who do not profit from tariff-protection. The Kölnische Zeitung 
knows only a local, legally created monopoly, the monopoly which 
was attacked by the Free Traders from Adam Smith to Cobden. 
But the monopoly of capital, which comes into being without the aid 
of legislation and often exists despite it, this monopoly is not 
recognised by the gentlemen of the Kölnische Zeitung. Yet it is this 
monopoly which directly and ruthlessly weighs upon the workers 
and causes the struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. 
Precisely this monopoly is the specifically modern monopoly, which 
produces the modern class contradictions, and the solution of just 
these contradictions is the specific task of the nineteenth century. 
But this monopoly of capital becomes more powerful, more 
comprehensive, and more threatening in proportion as the other small 
and localised monopolies disappear. 
The freer competition becomes as a result of the abolition of all 
"monopolies", the more rapidly is capital concentrated in the hands 
Here and below these two words are given in English in the German 
original.— Ed, 

=====第330页=====
300 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
of the industrial barons, the more rapidly does the petty bourgeoisie 
become ruined and the faster does the industry of England, the 
country of capital's monopoly, subjugate the neighbouring coun­
tries.  If the "monopolies" of the French, German and Italian 
bourgeoisie were abolished, Germany, France and Italy would be 
reduced to proletarians compared with the all-absorbing English 
bourgeoisie. The pressure which the individual English bourgeois 
exerts on the individual English proletarian would then be matched 
by the pressure exerted by the English bourgeoisie as a whole on 
Germany, France and Italy, and it is especially the petty bourgeoisie 
of these countries which would suffer. 
These are such commonplace ideas that today they can no longer 
be expounded without causing offence — to anyone but the learned 
gentlemen of the Kölnische Zeitung. 
These profound thinkers see in Free Trade the only means by 
which France can be saved from a devastating war between the 
workers and the bourgeois. 
To reduce the bourgeoisie of a country to the level of the 
proletariat is indeed a means of solving class contradictions which is 
worthy of the Kölnische Zeitung. 
Written by Engels on July 31, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 62, August 1, 1848 

=====第331页=====
301 
THE AGREEMENT DEBATE 
ABOUT THE VALDENAIRE AFFAIR 
Cologne, August 1. Once again we have to catch up with a couple of 
agreement sessions. 
During the session of July 18 the motion calling for the 
summoning of Deputy Valdenaire was discussed.3 The central 
section called for its adoption. Three Rhenish jurists spoke against it. 
First there was Herr Simons of Elberfeld, a former Public 
Prosecutor. Herr Simons was apparently under the impression that 
he was still in the Assizes or in the police court. He demeaned himself 
like a Public Prosecutor by making a formal plea against Herr 
Valdenaire and for the judicature. He said: The matter has been 
placed before the indictment board and will be quickly decided 
there. Valdenaire will either be freed or referred to the Assizes. If 
the latter should occur 
"it would be exceedingly desirable that the whole case is not then pulled apart so 
that judgment is not delayed". 
As far as Herr Simons is concerned, the interests of the judicature, 
i.e. the convenience of the indictment board, the Public Prosecutor 
and the Court of Assizes, carry much more weight than the interest 
of freedom and the immunity of the people's representatives. 
Herr Simons then throws suspicion first upon Valdenaire's 
defence witnesses and afterwards upon Valdenaire  himself.  He 
declares that the Assembly "would not be deprived of any talent" by 
a See this volume, pp. 94-95.—Ed. 

=====第332页=====
302 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
his absence. He then proceeds to pronounce him unfit to sit in the 
Assembly as long as he is not completely cleared of every suspicion 
of having plotted against the Government or rebelled against the 
armed forces. As far as talent is concerned, one could, according to 
Herr Simons' logic, arrest nine-tenths of the praiseworthy Assembly 
just as well as Herr Valdenaire and still not deprive it of any talent 
whatever. As far as the second argument is concerned, it does indeed 
redound to Herr Simons' honour that he has never hatched any 
"plots"  against absolutism nor been guilty of "rebellion against the 
public authority" on the March barricades. 
After Valdenaire's substitute, Herr  Gräff,  had irrefutably proved 
that neither was there the slightest suspicion against Valdenaire nor 
had the action in question been unlawful (since it consisted in having 
helped the legally constituted civic militia, which was occupying the 
barricades of Trier with the approval of  the Municipal Council in the 
execution of its functions), Herr Bauerband rises to support the 
Public Prosecutor's office. 
Herr Bauerband also has a very weighty scruple: 
"Would not the summoning of Valdenaire prejudice the future judgment of the 
jury?" 
Profoundly thoughtful doubts which are made still more insoluble 
by the simple remark of Herr Borchardt: Whether the non-
summoning of Valdenaire would not likewise prejudice the jury? 
The dilemma is really so profound that a thinker of even greater 
mental force than Herr Bauerband might spend years trying in vain 
to resolve it. There is perhaps only one man in the entire Assembly 
who has enough strength to solve the riddle: Deputy Baumstark? 
Herr Bauerband continues to plead for a while in an extremely 
verbose and confused manner. Herr Borchardt answers him briefly. 
After him, Herr Stupp gets up in order to say also so much against 
Valdenaire that he "had in every respect nothing (!) to add" to the 
speeches of Simons and Bauerband. All this is, of course, enough 
reason for him to continue speaking until he is interrupted by shouts 
calling for the closure of the debate. Herr Reichensperger II and 
Herr Wencelius speak briefly in favour of Valdenaire and, as we 
know, the Assembly decides to summon him. Herr Valdenaire has 
played a trick on the Assembly by not obeying the summons. 
Herr Borchardt puts the following motion: In order to prevent the 
impending executions of the death penalty before the Assembly has 
given its decision on Herr Lisiecki's motion which advocates the 
The name, literally translated, means as strong as a tree, i.e. very strong.— Ed. 

=====第333页=====
The Agreement Debate about the Valdenaire Affair 303 
abolition of capital punishment, a decision should be made on this 
motion within a week. 
Herr Ritz is of the opinion that such a precipitous procedure 
would not be parliamentary. 
Herr Brill: If we shall in the near future, as I certainly hope, 
abolish the death penalty it would certainly be very unparliamentary 
to decapitate somebody in the meantime. 
The President would like to terminate the discussion but the 
popular Herr Baumstark has already mounted the rostrum. Casting 
fiery glances and his face flushed with noble indignation, he 
exclaims: 
"Gentlemen, permit me to say a serious wordl The subject here in question is not of 
the kind that should be treated lightly from this rostrum by referring to decapitation 
as an unparliamentary matter!" (The Right, which looks upon decapitation as the 
height of parliamentarism, bursts into tempestuous shouts of bravo.) "It is a subject of 
the greatest, most serious significance" (it is well known that Herr Baumstark says this 
of every topic he discusses). "Other parliaments ... the greatest men of legislation and 
science" (i.e. "all political philosophers, from Plato down to Dahlmann") "have 
occupied themselves with this problem for 200 to 300 years" (each of them?) "and if 
you want us to be blamed for having passed over such an important question with such 
levity...." (Bravo!) "Nothing but my conscience impels me ... but the question is too 
serious ... surely, one more week will not make any difference!" 
Because the subject is of the greatest, most serious significance the 
serious words of the noble Deputy Baumstark become the rashest 
frivolity. Is there, indeed, greater frivolity than Herr Baumstark's 
apparent intention to discuss the abolition of capital punishment for 
the next 200 to 300 years and in the meantime to let decapitations 
continue at a smart pace? "Surely, one more week will not make any 
difference" and the heads which will roll during this time will not 
make any difference either! 
Incidentally, the Prime Minister3 declares that it is not intended to 
carry out death sentences for the time being. 
After Herr Schulze from Delitzsch has expressed a few ingenious 
scruples concerning rules of procedure, Borchardt's motion is 
rejected. On the other hand, an amendment by Herr Nethe, which 
recommends greater dispatch to the central commission, is adopted. 
Deputy Hildenhagen proposes the following motion: Until the 
relevant Bill has been submitted, the President should terminate 
every session with the following solemn pronouncement: 
"We,  however, are of the opinion that the Ministry should work most zealously on 
the submission of the new municipal laws." 
a Rudolf von Auerswald.— Ed. 
IL>-.'U47 

=====第334页=====
304 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
This edifying proposal was unfortunately not designed for our 
bourgeois times. 
We are not Romans, we smoke tobacco. 
The attempt to carve from the raw material of President Grabow 
the classical figure of an Appius Claudius and to apply the solemn 
Ceterum censeo to the municipal legislation failed under "huge 
mirth". 
After Deputy Bredt of Barmen has asked the Minister of Trade 
three fairly mildly-worded questions on the unification of all 
Germany into a customs union and into a maritime league with 
navigation duties, and finally on provisional protective tariffs, and 
after he has received similarly mild, but also rather unsatisfactory 
answers to his questions from Herr Milde, Herr Gladbach is the last 
speaker of the session. Herr Schütze of Lissa c had intended to move 
that he be called to order because of his vigorous language during 
the debate over the disarming of the volunteers.*1  He decided, 
however, to withdraw his motion. Herr Gladbach, however, quite 
unceremoniously challenged the brave Schütze and the entire Right 
and to the great annoyance of the hidebound Prussians related the 
amusing anecdote of a Prussian lieutenant who, having fallen asleep 
on his horse, rode into the midst of the volunteers. These troops 
greeted the officer with the song "Sleep, Baby, Sleep" and for this 
offence they were to be court-martialled! Herr Schütze stammered a 
few words which were as indignant as incoherent and the session was 
terminated. 
Written by Engels on August 1, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 63, August 2, 1848 time 
a Heinrich Heine, "Zur Beruhigung". In Zeitgedichte. —Ed. 
" Ceterum  censeo,  Carthaginem esse delendam" (As for the rest, Carthage must be 
destroyed)—the words with which Cato the Elder usually concluded every speech in 
the Senate (from 157 B. C. onwards).—Ed. 
c The Polish name is Leszno.—Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 180-81 and 191-93.—Ed. 

=====第335页=====
305 
THE MILAN BULLETIN 
In yesterday's issue of this newspaper we published the victory 
bulletin of the Provisional Government in Milan and then went on to 
mention the conflicting victory bulletins from Bolzano in the 
Augsburg newspaper3 and from Trieste.6 
We held the first of these to be the more credible because the 
information contained in the bulletin that reached us direct from 
Milan was simultaneously confirmed by reports from two different 
cities in Switzerland—Zurich and Basle — which have numerous 
commercial and close geographical links with Milan. But in 
evaluating the information we had to give special weight to the fact 
that the Austrian reports of victory were dated earlier and spoke of 
the battle on July 23, whereas the Milan bulletin dealt with the events 
of the 24th and the early hours of the 25th.195 Because of this 
combination of circumstances we did not doubt that the Italian 
victory had actually taken place. The Austrians, moreover, had 
already previously published reports of victories, for example of a 
victory at Curtatone196 which later turned out to have been an 
Austrian defeat, and furthermore it was none other than the 
Augsburg paper that had acclaimed this alleged victory.0 A 
comparison of the reports of both sides shows that the Italians really 
did win a victory, but that this victory was wrenched from them by 
the advance of fresh Austrian troops. If anything could have led us 
i.e. the Allgemeine Zeitung. —Ed. 
"Mailand, 25. Juli", "Mailand, 26. Juli", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 62, August 
1, 1848.— Ed. 
c The Allgemeine Zeitung No. 155 (special supplement), June 3, 1848, p. 4, and 
No. 156, June 4. 1848, pp. 2486-2487.— Ed. 
12* 

=====第336页=====
306 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
astray, it would have been that ambitious but totally incompetent 
individual Charles Albert, about whom we have already repeatedly 
expressed our opinion. Despite all the bad qualities of this "sword of 
Italy", the possibility still existed that at least one of his generals, 
favoured by such uncommonly advantageous positions, might have 
possessed the military skill to claim the victory for the Italian colours. 
Reality shows that this has not happened. And therewith Charles 
Albert's fate is sealed. Even his present throne, not to mention the 
visionary one of the whole of Italy, must shortly collapse. As victor, 
he could have looked forward to gratifying his ambition for a while; 
vanquished, he will very soon be tossed to one side as a useless tool by 
the Italians themselves. After many bloody sacrifices, Italy will surely 
triumph and show that it has no need of that wretched individual the 
King of Sardinia to achieve its freedom and national independence. 
Written by Engels on August 1, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 62, August 2, 1848 time 

=====第337页=====
307 
THE RUSSIAN NOTE 
Cologne, August 1. Russian diplomacy has invaded Germany for 
the time being not with an army, but with a Note in the form of a 
circular to all Russian Embassies. This Note found its first lodgings in 
the official organ of the German Imperial Administration at 
Frankfurt3  and it was soon also well received at other official and 
unofficial newspapers. The more extraordinary it is that Mr. 
Nesselrode, the Russian Foreign Minister, should indulge in this sort 
of public statecraft, the more important it is to subject this action to a 
closer inspection. 
During the happy period preceding 1848, German censorship saw 
to it that no word could be printed which might incur the displeasure 
of the Russian Government, not even under the heading of Greece 
or Turkey. 
Since the evil March days, however, this convenient expedient is 
unfortunately no longer available. Nesselrode therefore becomes a 
journalist. 
According to him it is the "German press, whose hatred for Russia 
seemed for a moment suspended", which with respect to the Russian 
"security measures" along the frontier had seen fit to make the 
"most unfounded assumptions and commentaries". After this 
restrained introduction there follow stronger words which read: 
"The German press is daily spreading the most absurd rumours and the most 
malicious calumnies against us." 
a "Die russische Note", Frankfurter Oberpostamts-Zeitung No. 210 (second supple­
ment),  July 28, 1848.—Ed. 

=====第338页=====
308 Articles from the- Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Soon, however, there is talk of "raving declamations", "madmen" 
and "perfidious malevolence". 
At the next press trial, a German Public Prosecutor may well use 
the Russian Note in his evidence as an authenticated document. 
And why is the German, especially the "democratic" press to be 
attacked, and if possible, to be destroyed? Because it misjudges the 
Russian Emperor's "benevolent as well as unselfish sentiments" and 
his "openly peaceful intentions"! 
"Has Germany ever had to complain about us?" asks Nesselrode on behalf of his 
ruler. a "During the entire time when the Continent had to endure the oppressive rule 
of a conqueror, Russia shed her blood to help Germany preserve her integrity and 
independence. The Russian territory had long been liberated when Russia still 
continued to follow her German allies to all the battlefields of Europe, and to assist 
them." 
In spite of her numerous and well-paid agents, Russia is labouring 
under the gravest delusion if she thinks that in the year 1848 she can 
arouse sympathies by evoking the memory of the so-called wars of 
liberation. And are we to believe that Russia shed her blood for us 
Germans? 
Apart from the fact that before 1812 Russia "supported" 
Germany's "integrity and independence" by an open alliance and 
secret treaties with Napoleon, she was later sufficiendy indem­
nified for her so-called aid by robbery and pillage. Her aid was for 
the princes who were allied to her, her assistance, in spite of the 
Proclamation of Kalisch,198 for the representatives of absolutism, "by 
the grace of God", against a ruler who had emerged from the 
revolution. The Holy Alliance and its unholy works, the bandit 
congresses of Carlsbad, Laibach, Verona etc.,199 the Russian-German 
persecutions of every enlightened word, as a matter of fact all politics 
since 1815 which were guided by Russia ought indeed to have 
impressed upon our memories a profound sense of gratitude. The 
House of Romanov, along with its diplomats, may rest assured; we 
will never forget this debt. As for Russia's aid during the years 1814 
and 1815, we would sooner be susceptible to any other feeling than 
that of gratitude for that aid paid for with English subsidies. 
The reasons are obvious for discerning minds. If Napoleon had 
remained victor in Germany, he would have removed at least three 
dozen beloved "fathers of their people" with his well-known 
energetic formula. French legislation and administration would have 
created a solid base for German unity and spared us 33 years of 
humiliation and the tyranny of the Federal Diet which is, of course, 
Nicholas I.— Ed. 

=====第339页=====
The Russian Note 309 
highly praised by Mr. Nesselrode. A few Napoleonic decrees would 
have completely destroyed the entire medieval chaos: the compul­
sory labour services and tithes, exemptions and privileges, the entire 
feudal and patriarchal systems which still torment us from end to 
end of our fatherlands. The rest of Germany would long since have 
reached the level which the left bank of the Rhine reached soon after 
the first French revolution; we would have neither Uckermark 
grandees nor a Pomeranian Vendée 200 and we would no longer have 
to inhale the stuffy air of the "historical" and "Christian-Germanic" 
swamps. 
Russia, however, is magnanimous. Even if no gratitude is 
expressed, the Emperor retains as much as ever his old "benevolent 
as well as unselfish sentiments" towards us. Yes, "in spite of insults 
and challenges the attempt to change our" (Russia's) "sentiments 
has not been successful". 
These sentiments manifest themselves for the time being in a 
"passive and watchful method", a method in which Russia has 
undeniably achieved great virtuosity. She knows how to wait until 
the appropriate moment seems to have arrived. Notwithstanding the 
colossal troop movements which have taken place in Russia since 
March, Mr. Nesselrode is so naive as to try to make us believe that the 
Russian troops "remained immobile within their cantonments". The 
Russian Government remains animated by sentiments of "peace and 
reconciliation" in spite of the classical: "Gentlemen, saddle your 
horses!", 3 in spite of the confidential outpouring of heart and bile 
against the German people by Abramowicz, Chief of Police in 
Warsaw, and in spite of or rather because of the threatening and 
successful Notes from Petersburg. Russia perseveres in her "openly 
peaceful and defensive attitude". In the Nesselrode circular, Russia 
is portrayed as patience personified and as a pious, much-maligned 
and insulted innocence. 
We want to enumerate some of Germany's crimes against Russia 
which are listed in the Note: 1. "hostile mood", and 2. "fever of 
change in the whole of Germany". Such a "hostile" mood towards so 
much benevolence on the part of the Tsar! How grievous this must 
be for the paternal heart of our dear brother-in-law. And to top it all, 
this execrable disease called "fever of change"! This is actually the 
first, albeit in this case the second, dreadfulness. From time to time 
Russia bestows another kind of disease upon us: the cholera. Be that 
as it may! Not only is this "fever of change" contagious but it often 
Nicholas I is reported to have addressed these words to his officers after being 
informed that the February 1848 revolution had taken place in France.— Ed. 

=====第340页=====
310 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
reaches such a virulent intensification that highly-placed personages 
are easily compelled to make hasty departures for England!3 Was the 
"German fever of change" perhaps one of the reasons for 
dissuading Russia from an invasion in March and April? The third 
crime: The Preparliament of Frankfurt201 has represented war 
against Russia as a necessity of the time. The same has happened in 
associations and newspapers and is all the more unpardonable since 
according to the clauses of the Holy Alliance and the later treaties 
between Russia, Austria and Prussia, we Germans are only supposed 
to shed our blood in the interest of the princes and not in our own 
interest. 4. There has been talk in Germany of reconstituting old 
Poland within her true borders of 1772.202  The knout over you and 
then off to Siberia! But no, when Nesselrode wrote his circular, he 
had not yet heard of the Frankfurt Parliament's vote on the question 
of incorporating Posen. Parliament has atoned for our sins and a 
mild, forgiving smile now howers upon the lips of the Tsar. The 5th 
crime of Germany: "Her regrettable war against a Nordic monar­
chy." In view of the success of the menacing Note from Russia, the 
rapid retreat of the German army ordered by Potsdam and the 
declaration issued by the Prussian Ambassador in Copenhagen on 
the motives and purposes of the war, 203 Germany deserved a milder 
punishment for her impertinence than would have been admissible 
without these circumstances. 6. "Open advocacy of a defensive and 
offensive alliance between Germany and France." Lastly, 7. "The 
reception given to the Polish refugees, their free trips on the railways 
and the insurrection in the Posen region." 
If the diplomats and similar persons had not received the gift of 
language "so as to conceal their thoughts"b  both Nesselrode and 
brother-in-law Nicholas would have embraced us with shouts of joy 
and thanked us ardently for having lured so many Poles from 
France, England, Belgium etc. to the Posen region and for having 
made it easy for them to be transported there only to have them 
mowed down by grape-shot and shrapnel, branded with lunar 
caustic, slaughtered, sent off with shorn heads etc., and, on the other 
hand, to exterminate them in Cracow by a treacherous bombard­
ment, if possible completely. 
And Russia, faced with these seven mortal sins of Germany, has 
nevertheless remained on the defensive and not taken the offensive? 
Yes, that's how it is, and it is for this reason that the Russian diplomat 
An allusion to the flight of the Prince of Prussia to England during the March 
revolution.— Ed. 
Words attributed to Talleyrand.— Ed. 

=====第341页=====
The Russian Note 311 
is asking the world to admire the love of peace and the moderation of 
his Emperor. 
The Russian Emperor's rule of procedure "from which he has so 
far not deviated for one moment", according to Mr. Nesselrode, 
"is not to interfere in any way in the internal affairs of countries which want to 
change their organisation; on the contrary, to allow these nations complete freedom to 
effect the political and social experiments which they want to undertake without let or 
hindrance on his part, and not to attack any power which has not attacked him. On the 
other hand, he is determined to repel any encroachment upon his own internal 
security and to make sure that if the territorial balance of power is anywhere 
destroyed or altered, that will not be done at the expense of our own legitimate 
interests." 
The Russian Note forgets to add the illustrative examples. After 
the July revolution the Emperor assembled an army along the 
western frontier so as, allied with his faithful followers in Germany, 
to give practical proof to the French how he would allow the nations 
"complete freedom to effect their political and social experiments". 
The fact that he was disturbed in his rule of procedure was not his 
fault but that of the Polish revolution of 1830 4  which gave his plans 
a different direction. Soon thereafter, we saw the same procedure 
with respect to Spain and Portugal. The evidence is his open and 
secret support of Don Carlos and Dom Miguel. When at the end of 
1842 the King of Prussia wanted to issue a sort of constitution 
according to the estates principle, on the most comfortable 
"historical" basis, which had played such an admirable role with 
respect to the Patents of 1847, 20 it was, of course, Nicholas who 
would not tolerate it and thus cheated us "Christian Germans" out of 
the joy of having these Patents for several years. He did all this, as 
Nesselrode says, because Russia never interferes in the internal 
organisation of a country. We hardly need to mention Cracow. 206 Let 
us merely recall the most recent sample of the imperial "rule of 
procedure": the Wallachians overthrow the old Government and 
replace it provisionally by a new one. They want to transform the 
entire old system and create an organisation patterned after those of 
civilised nations. "So as now to let them effect their political and 
social experiments in complete freedom" a Russian army corps 
invades the country.207 
After that anybody can guess the nature of the application of this 
"rule of procedure" to Germany. But the Russian Note makes our 
own deduction unnecessary. It reads: 
"So long as the Confederation, no matter what new forms it may assume, leaves the 
neighbouring states untouched, and does not seek to expand its territorial limits by 
force or try to assert its lawful authority beyond the limits set by the treaties, the 
Emperor will also respect its internal independence." 

=====第342页=====
312 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
The second passage which refers to the same subject reads still 
more clearly: 
"If Germany should actually succeed in solving her organisational problem 
without detriment to her internal calm, and without the new forms impressed on her 
nationality being of a kind which endanger the tranquillity of other states, we shall 
sincerely congratulate ourselves on that for the same reasons which made us hope for 
her strength and unity under her previous political forms." 
But the following passage sounds most clear and removes any 
possible doubt; here the circular speaks of Russia's incessant efforts 
to recommend and preserve harmony and unity in Germany: 
"Of course,  we are not referring to that material unity of which a  democracy  addicted to a 
levelling and aggrandising  process  is dreaming today, and which, if it could realise its 
ambitious theories as it interprets them, would inevitably sooner or later plunge 
Germany into a state of war with all adjacent states, but rather to the moral unity, that 
sincere conformity of views and intentions in all political questions which the German 
Confederation had to negotiate in external affairs. 
"Our policy had only one aim: to preserve this unity and to strengthen the bonds 
which link the German governments with each other. 
"That which we wanted in those days, we still desire today." 
As one can see from the preceding passage, the Russian 
Government most willingly allows us moral unity, only no material 
unity, no replacement of the present Federal Diet by a central 
authority, not the mere semblance of central authority, but a genuine 
and seriously effective central authority based on popular sovereign­
ty. What magnanimity! 
"That which we wanted in those days" (before February 1848), 
"we still desire today." 
That is the only phrase of the Russian Note which nobody will call 
in question. But we should like to tell Mr. Nesselrode that desire and 
fulfilment are still two separate things. 
The Germans now know exactly where they stand as far as Russia 
is concerned. As long as the old system, painted over with new, 
modern colours, persists, or if one obediently moves back again to 
the Russian and "historical" track after having strayed from it in a 
"moment of intoxication and exultation", Russia will remain "openly 
peaceful". 
The internal conditions of Russia, the raging cholera, the partial 
insurrections in individual districts, the revolution plotted in 
Petersburg which was, however, prevented just in time, the 
conspiracy inside the citadel of Warsaw, the volcanic soil of the 
Kingdom of Poland,208 all these are at any rate circumstances which 
have contributed to the Tsar's benevolent as well as "unselfish 
sentiments" towards Germany. 

=====第343页=====
The Russian Note 313 
But of much greater influence upon the "passive and watchful 
method" of the Russian Government was undoubtedly the course of 
events in Germany proper up to the present. 
Could Nicholas in person have taken better care of his affairs and 
carried out his intentions sooner than has up to now been done in 
Berlin-Potsdam, in Innsbruck, in Vienna and Prague, in Frankfurt 
and in Hanover and in almost every other cosy corner of our 
fatherland, now again filled with Russian moral unity? Have not 
(lunar caustic) Pfuel, Colomb and the shrapnel general 3 in Posen and 
Windischgrätz in Prague worked so well as to enrapture the Tsar's 
heart? Did not Windischgrätz receive a brilliant letter of commen­
dation from Nicholas via Potsdam from the hands of young 
Mr. Meyendorf? And do the gentlemen Hansemann-Milde-
Schreckenstein in Berlin and the Radowitzes, Schmerlings and 
Lichnowskis in Frankfurt leave anything to be desired as far as 
Russia is concerned? Must not the Bieder- and Basserdom h in the 
Frankfurt Parliament form a soothing balm for many a pain of the 
most recent past? In such circumstances Russian diplomacy did not 
need any armies to invade Germany. It is perfecdy right to be 
content with the "passive and watchful method", and the just 
discussed Note! 
Written on August 1, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 64, August 3, 1848 
a Alexander Adolf von Hirschfeld. —Ed. 
b An allusion to the deputies Biedermann and Bassermann; the German word 
Biederkeit means "respectability".—Ed. 

=====第344页=====
314 
MISCELLANEOUS2 
Very shortly a Bill on defamation along entirely new lines will be 
laid before the Chamber. Our criticism of the article of the Code 
Napoléon in connection with Hecker's suit against the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung was evidently only too well founded. 3 
Written by Marx on August 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 64, August 3, 1848 time 
a See this volume, pp. 208-11.—JErf. 

=====第345页=====
315 
BAKUNIN2 
In number 36, of this paper, we communicated a rumour 
circulating in Paris, according to which George Sand was stated to be 
possessed of papers which placed the Russian refugee, Bakunin, in 
the position of an agent of the Emperor Nicholas.3  We gave publicity 
to this statement, because it was communicated to us simultaneously 
by two correspondents wholly unconnected with each other. By so 
doing, we only accomplished the duty of the public press, which has 
severely to watch public characters. And, at the same time we gave to 
Mr. Bakunin an opportunity of silencing suspicions thrown upon 
him in certain Paris circles. We reprinted also from the Allgemeine 
Oder Zeitung Mr. Bakunin's declaration, and his letter addressed to 
George Sand, without waiting for his request. 6 We publish now a 
literal translation of a letter addressed to the Editor of the New 
Rhenish Gazette, by George Sand, which perfectly settles this affair.c 
To the editor 
Sir, 
Under the date line Paris, July 3, you have published the following article (there 
follows a translation of the relevant item) in your newspaper. The facts conveyed by 
your correspondent are entirely false and do not have even the slightest semblance of 
truth. I have never had the smallest scrap of evidence in support of the imputations 
you seek to make against Mr. Bakunin, who was banished from France by the 
dethroned King. I have therefore never had any warrant for the slightest doubt 
about the sincerity of Mr. Bakunin's character and the honesty of his views. 
Yours etc. 
George Sand 
a "Bakunin", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 36, July 6, 1848.—Ed. 
"Bakunin. Erklärung", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 46 (supplement), July 16, 
1848.—Ed. 
c This passage is given in Marx's own translation as printed in The Morning 
Advertiser, September 2, 1853.—Ed. 
Louis Philippe.—Ed. 

=====第346页=====
316 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
P.S. I appeal to your honour and your conscience to publish this letter immediately 
in your newspaper. 
La Châtre (Dept. Indre), July 20, 1848 
Written by Marx on August 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 64, August 3, 1848 time 

=====第347页=====
317 
THE HANSEMANN GOVERNMENT 
AND THE OLD-PRUSSIAN CRIMINAL BILL 
Cologne, August 3. We have already often said that the Hansemann 
Government extols the Bodelschwingh Ministry in every possible 
way. 3 After the recognition of the revolution follows the recognition 
of the old-Prussian state of affairs. That's the way of the world.b 
That Herr Hansemann, however, would achieve such virtuosity 
that he even praises  those  deeds of such gentlemen as Bodelschwingh, 
Savigny and consorts which he used to combat with the greatest 
vehemence in his days as Rhenish deputy to the Provincial Diet, that 
is a triumph with which the Potsdam camarilla had certainly not 
counted. And yet! Please read the following article of the latest 
Preussische Staats-Anzeige/ :: 
Berlin, August 1. The most recent issue of the journal of the Ministry of Justice 
reported in its "unofficial part" statistical observations about the death penalty as well 
as a survey of death sentences passed and confirmed between the years 1826 and 1843 
(inclusive) with the exception of sentences passed in the so-called demagogical 
investigations. This work was undertaken with the utilisation of documents of the 
Ministry of Justice and, because of the importance of the issue, should claim the 
special attention of the reader in this respect. According to the survey, in the 
aforementioned period of time: 
1. In the Rhine Province 189 death sentences were passed, 6 confirmed 
2. In the other provinces 237 " " " " 94 " 
altogether 426 death sentences were passed, 100 confirmed, 
of which, however, four were not carried out because of flight or death of the 
criminals. 
If the Bill on the new Penal Code of 1847 had been in force during that period 
there would have been: 
1. In the Rhine Province only 53 death sentences passed, 5 confirmed 
2. In the other provinces 
only 134 " " " 76 
altogether 187 death sentences passed, 81 confirmed, 
provided that the same principles were applied to the confirmation as heretofore. 
Thus,  the death penalty would not have been imposed on 237 criminals who were 
a See this volume, p.  274.—Ed. 
Modified quotation from Goethe's Faust, Erster Teil, "Garten".— Ed. 
c "Berlin, 1. August",  Preussischex  Staats-Anzeiger No. 90, August 2, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第348页=====
318 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
sentenced to death under the existing laws. Nor would the death penalty have been 
carried out on 19 executed criminals. 
According to the survey, there were annually on the average: 
1. In the Rhine Province 109/is death sentences passed and /is confirmed 
2. In the other provinces 13 " " " "  5 4/ig " 
If, however, the Bill had been in force at the time, there would have been annually 
on the average: 
1. In the Rhine Pro­
vince only 217/i8 death sentences passed and /is confirmed 
2. In the other pro­
vinces only 7 /is " " " " 4 /is 
And now admire the mildness, the excellence and the glory of the 
Royal Prussian Criminal Bill of 1847! Perhaps as much as one entire 
death sentence less would have been carried out in the Rhine 
Province in 18 years! What advantages! 
But the innumerable defendants who would have been deprived 
of a jury and sentenced and jailed by royal justices, the disgraceful 
corporal punishments which here on the Rhine would have been 
carried out with old-Prussian rods, here, where we freed ourselves 
of the rod forty years ago; the dirty proceedings consequent upon 
the crimes against morals, unknown to the Code, which would have 
been conjured up again by the depraved haemorrhoidal imagination 
of the knights of the Prussian Law; the most inexorable confusion of 
juridical concepts, and finally the innumerable political trials 
consequent upon the despotic and insidious regulations of that 
contemptible patchwork, in a word, the Prussianising of the entire 
Rhine Province; do the Rhenish renegades in Berlin really believe 
that we would forget all this on the account of one fallen head? 
It is clear: Herr Hansemann, through his agent in the judicial 
branch, Herr Märker, wants to carry through that which was beyond 
Bodelschwingh. He really wants now to bring into force the 
thoroughly hated old-Prussian criminal Bill. 
At the same time we learn that the jury system will only be 
introduced in Berlin, and even there only on an experimental basis. 
Thus:  not the introduction of Rhenish law to the old-Prussians but 
the introduction of old-Prussian law to the Rhinelanders is the great 
result, the tremendous "achievement" of the March revolution! Rien 
que ça.3 
Written on August 3, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neu« Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 65, August 4, 1848 time 
Nothing but that.— Ed. 

=====第349页=====
319 
THE KÖLNISCHE ZEITUNG 
ON THE COMPULSORY LOAN 
Cologne, August 3. Number 215 of the Kölnische Zeitung carries the 
following appeal to Rhenish patriotism: 
"As we have just been reliably informed, up to today, about 210,000 talers in 
contributions to the voluntary loan, partly in cash and partly by subscription, have 
been received here in the city of Cologne. It is to be expected that persons who up to 
now have not contributed to this government loan will recognise and fulfil their duty 
as citizens within the next ten days, the more so since their own advantage is bound to 
counsel them to lend their money at 5 per cent interest  before  August 10—rather than 
at 3 /$ per cent after that date. It is particularly necessary that the rural inhabitants, 
who up to now have not yet contributed to the loan in the right proportion, should not 
miss this deadline. Otherwise compulsion would have to be used  where  patriotism and  correct 
insight are lacking." 
A total of l2/3 per cent premium has been placed upon the 
patriotism of the taxpayers and yet "for a' that and a' that"3 
patriotism persists in its latent condition!  C'est  inconcevable. 13 A 
difference of l 2/3 per cent! Can patriotism resist this ringing 
argument of l2/3 per cent? 
It is our duty to explain this wonderful phenomenon to our 
beloved fellow newspaper. 
By what means does the Prussian state want to pay not 5, but only 
3V3 per cent? By new taxes. And if the usual taxes are not enough, as 
is to be expected, by a new compulsory loan. And by what means 
compulsory loan No. II? By compulsory loan No. III. And by what 
means compulsory loan No. III? By bankruptcy. Thus patriotism 
a Quoted from Ferdinand Freiligrath's translation ("Trotz alledem!") of Robert 
Burns' poem "For a' that and a'  that".—Ed. 
This is incomprehensible.—Ed. 

=====第350页=====
320 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
commands that the road which the Prussian Government has 
entered upon must be barricaded in every possible way, not by talers 
but by protests. 
Prussia, moreover, is already enjoying an extra debt of 10 million 
talers for the Hunnish war in Posen. Thus a voluntary loan of fifteen 
million talers would only be a bill of indemnity for the intrigues of 
the secret cabinet in Potsdam 211 which, against the orders of the weak 
cabinet at Berlin, conducted this war in the interests of the Russians 
and the reaction. The junker counter-revolution condescends 
sufficiently to appeal to the purse of the townsmen and peasants who 
afterwards must pay for its heroic deeds. And the hard-hearted 
"rural inhabitants" resist such condescension? The "Government of 
Action", moreover, demands money for the constabulary  business  and 
you do not possess the "correct insight" into the blessings of the 
constabulary which has been brought from England to Prussia? The 
"Government of Action" wants to gag you and you refuse to give it 
the money for the gags? What a strange lack of insight! 
The Government of Action needs money to make the particular 
interests of the Uckermark prevail against German unity. And the 
rural inhabitants of the administrative district of Cologne are 
deluded enough not to want to bear the costs for the defence of 
Uckermark-Pomeranian nationality in spite of the premium of l 2/3 
per cent? What has become of patriotism? 
Finally, our patriotic fellow newspaper which threatens "execution" 
forgets in its ardour that the compulsory loan has not yet been voted 
by the Agreement Assembly3  and the ministerial Bills have the same 
force of law as editorials of the Kölnische Zeitung. 
Written on August 3, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 65, August 4, 1848 time 
The Prussian National Assembly.— Ed. 

=====第351页=====
321 
PROUDHON'S SPEECH AGAINST THIERS 
Paris, August 3. The day before yesterday we were able to render 
Proudhon's speech only piecemeal.212 We will now enter upon a 
thorough discussion of it.a M. Proudhon starts with the explanation 
that the February revolution was nothing but the emergence of 
socialism which attempted to assert itself in all the following events 
and phases of this revolution. 
"You want to finish with socialism. Oh well, just watch. I will lend you a helping 
hand. The success of socialism does not by any means depend upon a single man; the 
present battle is by no means a battle between myself and M. Thiers, but between 
labour and privilege." 
M. Proudhon demonstrates instead that M. Thiers has only 
attacked and slandered his private life. 
"If we proceed on that level, I would suggest to M. Thiers: let us both go to 
confession! You confess your sins, and I will confess mine!" 
The point at issue was the revolution. The financial committee 
regarded the revolution as a fortuitous event, as a surprise, whereas 
he, Proudhon, had taken it seriously. In the year 93 property had 
paid its debt to the republic by paying a third of taxes. The 
revolution of 48 must remain in a "proportional relationship". In 
the year 93 the foes had been despotism and foreign countries. In 
the year 48, pauperism was the foe. "What is this droit au travail", this 
right to work? 
a "Paris, 31. Juli...—National-Versammlung", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 64, 
August 3, 1848, pp.  3-4.—Ed. 

=====第352页=====
322 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
"If the demand for labour were greater than the supply there would be no need 
for any promises on the part of the state. This, however, is not the  case.  Consumption 
is very low. The stores are full of goods and the poor are naked! And yet which 
country has a greater propensity to consume than France? If instead of 10 million, we 
were given 100, i.e. 75 francs per head and per day, we certainly would know how to 
consume it." (Hilarity in the Chamber.) 
The rate of interest is supposed to be the basic cause of the 
people's ruin. The creation of a national bank of two milliards which 
would lend its money without interest and grant the free use of the 
land and of houses would bring immense advantages. (Vigorous 
interruptions.) 
"If we stick to this (laughter), if the fetishism of money were supplanted by the 
realism of gratification (renewed laughter), then there would exist the guarantee of 
labour. Let the duties on the instruments of labour be abolished and you are saved. 
Those who maintain the opposite, may they be called Girondists or Montagnards, are 
no socialists and no republicans (Oh! Oh!).... Either property will smash the republic 
or the republic will smash property." (Calls of: enough!) 
M. Proudhon now becomes enmeshed in a lengthy discourse about 
the significance of interest and how the rate of interest could be 
reduced to zero. M. Proudhon stands on weak grounds as long as he 
maintains this economic point of view even though he creates an 
immense scandal in this bourgeois Chamber. But whenever, excited 
by just this scandal, he adopts the proletarian point of view, the 
Chamber seems to go into nervous convulsions. 
"Gentlemen, my ideas are different from yours. I represent a different point of 
view from yours! The liquidation of the old society began on February 24 with the 
fight between the bourgeoisie and the working class. This liquidation will be 
accomplished either by violent or by peaceful means. All will depend upon the 
discernment of the bourgeoisie and its greater or lesser resistance." 
M. Proudhon now proceeds to elaborate his idea of "the abolition 
of property". He does not intend to abolish property all at once but 
only gradually. It is for this reason that he had stated in his journal3 
that rent of land was a voluntary gift of the earth which the state must 
gradually abolish. 
"I have thus on the one hand explained the meaning of the February revolution to 
the bourgeoisie; I have given notice to property so that it may hold itself ready for 
liquidation and so that the property owners may be held responsible for their refusal." 
A thunderous roar arises from several sides: responsible in what 
way? 
Le Représentant du Peuple. Journal quotidien des travailleurs. — Ed. 

=====第353页=====
Proudhon's Speech against Thiers 323 
"By that I mean if the property owners will not liquidate voluntarily, we will carry 
through this liquidation." 
Several voices: Who are we? 
Other voices: Send him to the lunatic asylum at Charenton. 
(Tremendous excitement; a proper storm accompanied by thunder 
and the roaring of wind.) 
"If I say we, I identify myself with the proletariat and you with the bourgeoisie." 
M. Proudhon then enters upon the specification of his tax system 
and he becomes once again "scientific". This "science" which has 
always been Proudhon's weakness becomes his strength in this 
narrow-minded Chamber by giving him the boldness to combat 
with his pure, genuine "science" the defiled financial science of 
M. Thiers. M. Thiers has proved his practical financial discernment. 
During his administration, the state treasury decreased while his 
personal fortune increased. 
When the Chamber paid little attention to Proudhon's further 
arguments, he declared bluntly that he would continue speaking for 
at least 3/4 of an hour. When the majority of the Chamber was 
thereupon getting ready to leave he proceeded once again to direct 
attacks upon property. 
"By the February revolution alone you have abolished property!" 
One could almost say that terror kept the people glued to their 
seats every time that Proudhon said anything against property. 
"By recognising in the Constitution the right to work, you have proclaimed the 
recognition of the abolition of property." 
Larochejaquelein asks whether one has the right to steal. Other 
deputies do not want to let M. Proudhon continue. 
"You cannot destroy the consequences of the faits accomplis" (accomplished facts). 
"If debtors and tenants are still paying, they are doing so of their own free will." 
(Tremendous uproar. The President calls the speaker to order: Everybody is obliged 
to pay his debts.) 
"I am not saying that the liabilities have been repealed but those who are trying to 
defend them here are destroying the revolution.... 
"What are we, representatives? Nothing. Nothing at all. The power which gave us 
power lacked principle and basis. Our entire authority is force, despotism and the 
might of the stronger. (New eruption of the storm.) Universal suffrage is an accident 
and in order that it may gain significance, it must be preceded by organisation. We are 
not ruled by law or justice. We are ruled by force, necessity, providence.... April 16th, 
May 15th, June 23rd, 24th and 25th are facts, nothing more than facts, which are 
legitimised by history. We can do today whatever we want to. We are the stronger 
ones.  Let us not speak therefore of rebels. Rebels are those who have no other right 
than that of superior might but will not recognise this right for others. I know that my 

=====第354页=====
324 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
motion will not be accepted. But you are in a position where you can only escape death 
by accepting my motion. It is a question of credits and labour. Confidence will never 
return, nay, it is impossible for it to return...." (Horrible!) "For all that you might say 
that you are trying to create a respectable, moderate republic, capital does not dare to 
show itself under a republic which has to hold demonstrations in favour of the 
workers. While capital is thus waiting for us so as to liquidate us, we are waiting for 
capital so as to liquidate it. February 24 has proclaimed the right to work. If you 
eliminate this right from the Constitution, you proclaim the right to insurrection. 
"Place yourselves for ever under the protection of bayonets, prolong the state of 
siege for ever: capital will still be afraid and socialism will keep its eyes on it." 
The readers of the Kölnische Zeitung know M. Proudhon of yore. 
M. Proudhon, who, according to the reasoning of the agenda, has 
attacked morality, religion, family and property, was not so long ago 
still the acclaimed hero of the Kölnische Zeitung. Proudhon's 
"so-called social-economic system" was thoroughly glorified in 
articles from correspondents in Paris, in feuilletons and in lengthy 
treatises. All social reforms were to proceed from Proudhon's 
determination of value. The story of how the Kölnische Zeitung made 
this dangerous acquaintance does not belong here. But how strange! 
The very newspaper which in those days looked upon Proudhon as a 
saviour, now cannot find enough invective to label him and his 
"lying party" as corrupters of society. Is M. Proudhon no longer 
M. Proudhon? 
What we were attacking in M. Proudhon's theory was the "utopian 
science" by which he wanted to settle the antagonism between capital 
and labour, between proletariat and bourgeoisie.3 We shall come 
back to this point. His whole system of banking and his entire 
exchange of products is nothing but a petty-bourgeois illusion. Now, 
when to realise this pale illusion he is compelled to speak as a 
democrat in the face of the whole bourgeois Chamber and is 
expressing this antagonism in harsh terms, the Chamber cries of 
offence against morality and property. 
Written on August 3, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 66, August 5, 1848 time 
a See Karl Marx, The Poverty of  Philosophy.  Answer to the "Philosophy of Poverty" by 
M. Proudhon.—Ed. 

=====第355页=====
325 
DR. GOTTSCHALK 
Cologne, August 4. Dr. Gottschalk had his three first interrogations 
published in the Zeitung des Arbeiter-Vereines zu Köln. As a punish­
ment, the warders he has had up to now have been removed and a 
new gaoler appointed in the person of warder Schröder. 3 
"The latter was not willing to take over his duties without an exact inventory," 
writes the local workers' paper, "and so Dr. Gottschalk and his cell were searched 
again, customs-style. Although nothing suspicious was found, a much closer watch 
than before is being kept on him." 
Public proceedings in the Rhine Province are a sheer illusion as 
long as they are supplemented by "Spanish Inquisition  proceedings"  ,213 
In order to appreciate Gottschalk's arrest, one should read the 
Gervinus Zeitung? The forceful intervention of the Public Prosecutor, 
it says, has restored confidence once more. On the other hand, the 
approaching festivities 0 are diverting the attention of the frivolous 
citizens of Cologne from all thought of politics. And these same 
citizens of Cologne, to whom the Government has handed over 
Gottschalk and the Cathedral festivities, these same ungrateful 
citizens, the Gervinus Zeitung exclaims, forget all these good deeds of 
the Prussian Government as soon as it stammers the first word about 
a compulsory loan! 
"Die Beiden Verhöre des Herren Dr. Gottschalk" and "Der dritte Verhör des 
Dr. Gottschalk" (Zeitung des Arbeiter-Vereines zu Köln Nos. 16 and 18, July 20 and 27, 
1848).— Ed. 
b "Köln", ibid., No. 20, August 3, 1848.— Ed. 
Deutsche Zeitung. — Ed. 
Celebration of the 600th anniversary of the Cologne Cathedral in August 
1848.—  Ed. 

=====第356页=====
326 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
The arrest of Gottschalk and Anneke, the press trials, and so on, 
have restored confidence. In the city, confidence is the basis of public 
credit. Therefore lend the Prussian Government money, a great deal 
of money, and it will lock up even more people, stage even more 
press trials, manufacture even more confidence. More arrests, more 
press trials, more reaction from the Government. But in honest 
exchange—mark this well—more money, more and more money 
from the citizens! 
We advise the Prussian Government in its financial difficulties to 
take refuge in a measure tried and tested under Louis XIV and 
Louis XV. Let it sell Lettres de cachet! Lettres de cachet! Lettres de 
cachet! 214 as a means of restoring confidence and filling up the 
Prussian treasury! 
Written on August 4, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 66, August 5, 1848 time 

=====第357页=====
327 
DEBATE ABOUT THE EXISTING REDEMPTION 
LEGISLATION 
Cologne, August 4. The Berlin Assembly from time to time 
unearthes all sorts of old-Prussian dirt and just now when the 
black-white knighthood becomes daily more insolent, such revela­
tions come in very handy. 
The session of July 21st dealt again with the feudal obligations. 
Following a deputy's motion, the central section proposed that the 
pending negotiations or court hearings on redemptions and the 
division of common property be suspended either by the authorities 
or on application by one of the interested parties. 
Deputy Dierschke examined the mode of redemption existing up to 
now. He explained, to begin with, how the method of redemption 
itself already takes advantage of the peasant: 
"Compensation for corvée" (compulsory labour), 3 "for instance, has been fixed in 
a very partial manner. It has not been taken into account that the wages for corvée, 
which in former centuries were stipulated at 1 or 2 silver groschen, corresponded to 
the then prevailing prices of natural produce and the conditions of the times, and that 
they represented, therefore, an appropriate equivalent for work done, so that neither 
the lords of the manor nor the serfs should have a preponderant advantage. A free 
labourer, however, must now be paid 5 to 6 instead of 2 silver groschen per day. If 
now one of the interested partners of a service relationship requests redemption he 
will have to pay, after first converting corvée days into substitute days, a differential 
amount of at least 3 silver groschen per day, which will amount to a yearly rent (based 
upon 50 days) of 4 to 5 talers. The poor peasant cannot afford such payments since he 
often possesses barely a quarter of a morgen of land and cannot find sufficient 
opportunity for work elsewhere." 
Dierschke used the word Robotdienste (corvée). Engels has inserted Frondienste 
(compulsory labour) in brackets.— Ed. 
An old German land measure, varying in different localities between 0.25 and 
1.23 hectares.—Ed. 

=====第358页=====
328 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
This passage of Herr Dierschke's speech leads to all sorts of 
observations about the famous enlightened legislation of  1807-11, 215 
none of which made it appear in a very favourable light. 
First of all, it is evident from this that the compulsory labour 
services (especially those in Silesia of which Herr Dierschke is 
speaking) are certainly not a rent or fee which is paid in kind, they 
are not a compensation for the use of the land; despite Herr Patow 
and Herr Gierke they are nothing but an "outcome of seigniory and 
serfdom" and hence ought to be abolished without compensation 
according to the very own principles of these great statesmen. 
Wherein consisted the obligation of the peasant? In placing 
himself at the disposal of the lord of the manor during certain days 
of the year or for certain specified duties. But certainly not 
gratuitously. He received a wage for this which originally completely 
equalled the daily wage of free labour. Thus the advantage of the 
landlord consisted not in the gratuitous or merely cheaper labour of 
the peasant but in the fact that he had labourers at his disposal for 
the usual wage whenever he needed them without being obliged to 
employ them when he did not need them. The advantage to the 
landlord did not consist in the monetary value of the service in kind 
but rather in its  compulsory  nature. It did not consist in the economic 
disadvantage but rather in the constraint of the peasant. And this 
obligation is not supposed to be an "outcome of seigniory and 
serfdom"! 
If Patow, Gierke and Co. want to be consistent, there is no doubt 
that in accordance with their original character, these labour services 
must be abolished without compensation. 
But what is the situation if we take their present nature into 
account? 
For centuries the compulsory services remained the same and so 
did the wages for these services. But the price of food increased and 
so did the wages for free labour. The compulsory service, which at 
the beginning brought equal economic advantage to both parties and 
often even resulted in well-paid work during the peasant's idle days, 
gradually became, to use the language of Herr Gierke, an "actual 
charge on his land" and a direct monetary gain for the gracious 
landlord. To the certainty that he will always have a sufficient 
number of labourers at his disposal, he could now add a hefty cut 
which he made in the wages of these workers. By means of a 
consistent, century-old trickery the peasants were cheated of a 
steadily growing part of their wage so that they finally received only a 
third or a quarter of it. Let us assume that a farmstead is obliged to 
supply only one worker for only 50 days a year and that the daily 

=====第359页=====
Debate about the Existing Redemption Legislation 329 
wage has increased on the average by only 2 silver groschen for the 
past 300 years. Then the gracious landlord will have earned a full 
1,000 talers off this one worker. The interest on 500 talers over 300 
years at 5 per cent will be 7,500 talers. Altogether he will have made 
8,500  talers off one worker, and that according to an estimate which 
does not take into account half the actual position! 
What deduction can be made from all this? A rent ought to be paid 
not by the peasant to the gracious lord but by the gracious lord to the 
peasant, that is not by the farmstead to the manor, but by the manor 
to the farmstead. 
The Prussian liberals of 1848, however, do not judge like this. On 
the contrary, the Prussian judicial conscience declares that it is not 
the nobleman who must indemnify the peasant but the peasant who 
must pay compensation to the nobleman for the difference between 
statute wages and free wages. It is exactly  because  the peasant has 
been cheated out of the wage difference for so long by his gracious 
lord that he has now to indemnify his gracious lord for the cheating. 
For whosoever hath, to him shall be given; but whosoever hath not, 
from him shall be taken away even that he hath.a 
The difference in wages is therefore calculated and the annual 
amount is regarded as rent of land. It flows in this form into the 
pockets of the gracious lords. If the peasant wants to redeem it, it will 
be capitalised at 4 per cent (not even at 5 per cent) and this capital, 
which is 25 times the amount of the rent, will have to be paid off. It is 
obvious that the peasant is being dealt with in a thoroughly 
businesslike fashion. Our foregoing estimate of the aristocracy's 
profits was thus entirely justified. 
The upshot is that peasants often have to pay from 4 to 5 talers 
rent for a quarter of a morgen of bad land whereas one morgen of 
good land free from corvée can be had for three talers rent per 
annum! 
The redemption can also be achieved by surrendering a piece of 
land of the same value as the capital sum that is outstanding. Only 
the more prosperous peasants, of course, can do this. In that case, 
the lord of the manor gets a piece of land as premium for the skill 
and persistence with which he and his ancestors have defrauded the 
peasants. 
That is the theory of redemption. It corroborates entirely what has 
taken place in all other countries where feudalism has gradually 
been abolished, in particular in England and Scotland: the 
transformation- of feudal into bourgeois property and of seigniory 
a Matthew 13:12.— Ed. 

=====第360页=====
330 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
into capital means in every case a new crass defrauding of the 
bondsman to the advantage of the feudal lord. The bondsman must 
purchase his freedom every time and he must buy it dearly. The 
bourgeois state acts according to the principle: only death is 
gratuitous. 
The theory of redemption, however, proves even more. 
As Deputy Dane observes, the inevitable result of these enormous 
demands upon the peasants is that they fall into the hands of 
usurers. Usury is the inevitable companion of a class of free small 
peasants as has been demonstrated in France, the Palatinate and the 
Rhine Province. The Prussian science of redemption managed to let 
the small peasantry of the old provinces partake of the joys of being 
squeezed by usurers even before they were freed. The Prussian 
Government, in general, has always had a knack for subjecting the 
oppressed classes to the pressure of feudal and of modern bourgeois 
conditions at the same time, thus making the yoke twice as heavy. 
One has to add to this another matter, to which Deputy Dane also 
calls attention: the tremendous costs which mount in proportion to 
the negligence and inaptness of the commissioner who is paid by the 
term. 
"The town of Lichtenau in Westphalia paid 17,000 talers for 12,000 morgen and 
this has not yet covered the  costs  (!!)." 
Even more telling proof is provided by the practice of redemption. 
The land commissioners, continues Herr Dierschke, i.e. the officials 
who prepare the redemption, 
"appear in three capacities. First, they appear as examining officials. In this capacity 
they interrogate the parties, determine the factual basis of the redemption and 
calculate the amount of compensation. They often carry out their task in a very 
one-sided manner and often do not take into account the existing legal conditions for 
in part they lack legal knowledge. Furthermore, they appear in part as experts and 
witnesses  by themselves autonomically appraising the value of the redeemable objects. 
In the end they give their testimony which almost amounts to a decision since the 
general commission must as a rule rely on their opinions which are derived from local 
conditions. 
"Finally there is the fact that the land commissioners do not enjoy the confidence 
of the rural population because they often put the parties at a disadvantage by letting 
them wait for hours while they eat with  relish  at the  table  of the landlord" (who is himself a 
party) "whereby they particularly arouse the mistrust of the parties against 
themselves. When after a waiting period of three hours, the threshing gardeners216 
are finally admitted, the land commissioners often roar at them and brusquely reject 
their rejoinders. Here I can speak from my own experience because I assisted the 
interested party of peasants in my capacity as attorney-at-law in cases involving 
redemptions. The dictatorial power of the land commissioners must therefore be 
removed. The combination of the threefold capacity as examining magistrate, witness 
and judge in one and the same person cannot be justified either." 

=====第361页=====
Debate about the Existing Redemption Legislation 331 
Deputy Moritz defends the land commissioners. Herr Dierschke 
answers: I can state that there are very many among them who 
disregard the interests of the peasants. I myself have even called for 
the investigation of some of them and I can give proof of this if 
demanded. 
Minister Gierke, of course, appears again as defender of the 
old-Prussian system and the institutions which have emerged from it. 
The land commissioners must, of course, also be praised again: 
"I must leave it to the judgment of the Assembly, however, to decide whether it is 
just to use this rostrum to make accusations which lack all proof and are entirely 
unsubstantiated] " 
And Herr Dierschke is offering proofs! 
Since, however, his Excellency Gierke seems to be of the opinion 
that notorious facts can be knocked down by ministerial assertions, 
we shall shortly submit a few "proofs" which will show that Herr 
Dierschke, far from exaggerating, has not by a long way condemned . 
the conduct of the land commissioners sufficiently strongly. 
So much for the debate. The amendments submitted were so 
numerous that the report accompanied by them had to be referred 
back to the central section. Thus the definitive decision of the 
Assembly has yet to be made. 
Among these amendments, there is one by Herr Moritz which calls 
attention to a further edifying measure of the old Government. He 
proposes the cessation of all negotiations concerning mill dues. 
For when in the year 1810 it was decided to abolish the feudal 
prerogatives and banalities,217 a commission was appointed simul­
taneously to compensate the millers for the fact that they were now 
exposed to free competition. This was already a paradoxical 
decision. Were the guild masters compensated for the abolition of 
their privileges? But there are special circumstances in this case. The 
mills paid extraordinary dues for the enjoyment of feudal preroga­
tives and banalities. Instead of simply abolishing these, they were 
given a compensation and the dues were continued. The form is 
paradoxical but there remains at least a semblance of justice in this 
case. 
It so happens, however, that in the provinces added since 1815, 
the mill dues have been kept, the feudal prerogatives and banalities 
have been abolished and yet no compensation has been given. This is 
old-Prussian equality before the law. The industrial law, to be sure, 
abolishes all business taxes but under the trade regulations of 1845 
and the law on compensation all mill dues are in case of doubt to be 
regarded not as business taxes but as land taxes. Innumerable law 

=====第362页=====
332 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
cases have resulted from this jumble and these violations of the law. 
The law-courts have contradicted each other in their sentences and 
even the Supreme Court has pronounced the most contradictory 
judgments. Just what was formerly regarded by the ex-legislative 
power as "land tax" emerges from a case cited by Herr Moritz: a mill 
in Saxony to which belongs, except for the mill buildings, only the 
water power but not the land, is burdened with a "land tax" of four 
wispels*  of grain! 
Indeed, say what you like, Prussia has always been the most wisely, 
most justly and best administered state! 
Written by Engels on August 4, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 67, August 6, 1848 time 
Prior to 1872 a grain measure in Germany; in Prussia it was equal to 1,319 litres 
(approximately 36 bushels).— Ed. 

=====第363页=====
333 
THE "MODEL STATE" OF BELGIUM 
Cologne, August 6. Let us once again cast a glance upon Belgium, 
our constitutional "model state", the monarchical El Dorado with the 
broadest democratic basis, the university of the Berlin statesmen and 
the pride of the Kölnische Zeitung. 
Let us look, to begin with, at the economic conditions of which the 
much-praised political constitution only forms the gilded frame. 
The Belgian Moniteur —Belgium has her Moniteur —carries the 
following piece of news about Leopold's greatest vassal: pauperism.* 
In the 
province of Luxembourg 1 inhabitant out of 69 receives support 
" " Namur 1 " " "17 " 
Antwerp 1 " " "16 
Liege 1 " " " 7 
" " Limburg 1 " " " 7 " " 
" " Hainaut 1 " " " 6 " " 
" " Eastern 
Flanders 1 " " " 5 
Brabant 1 " " " 4 
Western 
Flanders 1 " " " 3 
This growth of pauperism will necessarily be followed by a further 
increase in pauperism. All individuals who maintain an independent 
existence lose their civil equilibrium as a result of the assistance tax 
with which these poor fellow citizens burden them and they too 
plunge into the abyss of public charity. Pauperism creates pauperism 
a "Emigration aux Etats-Unis de l'Amérique du Nord", Le Moniteur  belge  No. 212, 
July 30, 1848, p. 2074.— Ed. 

=====第364页=====
334 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
at an increasing rate. To the same extent, however, that pauperism 
increases, crime increases and the life source of the nation  itself,  the 
youth,  is demoralised. 
The years 1845, 1846 and 1847 offer sad documents on that 
score .a 
The number of young boys and girls under 18 years of age who 
were in judicial confinement: 
1845 1846 1847 
Boys 2,146 4,607 7,283 
Girls 429 1,279 2,069 
Sum: 2,575  5,886  9,352 
Sum total: 17,813 
Thus starting with 1845 there is an approximately annual 
doubling of the number of juvenile delinquents under 18 years of 
age. According to this ratio, Belgium would have 74,816 juvenile 
delinquents in the year 1850 and 2,393,312 in the year 1855, i.e. 
more than the number of young people under 18 years of age she 
has and more than half her population. By 1856 all Belgium would 
be in gaol, the unborn children included. Could the monarchy hope 
for a broader democratic basis? Equality prevails in gaol. 
Both types of Morison pill have been tried in vain on the national 
economy: on the one hand free trade and on the other hand 
protective tariffs. Pauperism in Flanders was born under the system 
of free trade, it grew and became stronger under the protective 
tariffs against foreign linen goods and linen yarn. 
Thus while pauperism and crime grow among the proletariat, the 
bourgeoisie's sources of income are drying up as the recently 
published comparative tabulation of the Belgian foreign trade 
during the first six months of the years 1846, 1847 and 1848 proves. 
With the exception of arms and nail factories, which have been 
exceptionally favoured by circumstances, the cloth factories which 
maintain their ancient renown and the zinc production which 
compared to overall production is insignificant, the whole of Belgian 
industry is in a condition of decay or stagnation. 
With a few exceptions, there is a considerable decrease in the  export 
of the products of the Belgian mines and metalworks. 
a The data on juvenile delinquency are taken from: Edouard Ducpétiaux, Mémoire 
sur l'organisation des  écoles  de réforme, pp.  4-5.— Ed. 

=====第365页=====
The "Model State" of Belgium 335 
We quote a few examples3: 
First six months First six months 
1847 1848 
Coal (in metric 
tons) 869,000 549,000 
Pig iron 56,000 35,000 
Cast iron  wares  463 172 
Iron,  rails 3,489 13 
Wrought iron wares.... 556 434 
Nails 3,210 3,618 
Total: 932,718 588,237 
Thus the total decrease of these three types of articles for the first 
six months of 1848 amounts to 344,481 tons which is somewhat more 
than Vs-
We come to the linen industry. 
First six months First six months First six months 
1846 1847 1848 
Linen yarn [in kilo­
grams] ....  1,017,000  623,000 306,000 
Linen fabric . . .  1,483,000 1,230,000  681,000 
Total: 2,500,000  1,853,000  987,000 
The decrease of the first six months of 1847 compared with those 
of 1846 amounted to 657,000 kilograms, the decrease in 1848 
compared with that in 1846 amounts to  1,613,000  kilograms or 64 
per cent. 
The export of books, crystal ware and window glass has decreased 
enormously. So has the export of raw and dressed flax, tow, tree 
bark and manufactured tobacco. 
The spreading pauperism, the unprecedented hold that crime has 
over young people, and the systematic deterioration of Belgian 
industry form the material basis of the following constitutional 
gaieties: The pro-government journal Indépendance numbers over 
4,000 subscribers as it never grows tired of proclaiming. The aged 
Mellinet, the only general who saved Belgian honour, is confined to 
quarters and in a few days will appear before the Assizes in 
Antwerp. b The lawyer Rolin from Ghent, who conspires against 
a The figures are quoted from "Exportations.—Marchandises belges", Le 
Moniteur belge No. 213, July 31, 1848, pp. 2085-2087.— Ed. 
See this volume, pp. 404-06.— Ed. 
i:<-:»447 

=====第366页=====
336 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Leopold in the interest of the Orange family and conspires against 
his later allies, the Belgian liberals, in the interest of Leopold of 
Coburg, this Rolin, the double apostate, has obtained the portfolio of 
Public Works. The ex-pedlar Cha-a-azal, Fransquillon* Baron and 
Minister of War, swings his large sabre and saves the European 
equilibrium. The Observateur has augmented the programme of the 
September Day Celebrations 218 by a new amusement: a procession, 
an Ommeganck General, in honour of the Doudou of Mons, the 
Houplala of Antwerp and the Mannequin Pisse of Brussels. The 
Observateur, the journal of the great Verhaegen, is perfectly in earnest. 
Finally, what compensates for Belgium's suffering is the fact that it 
has risen to become the university of Berlin's Montesquieus—of a 
Stupp, a Grimm, a Hansemann and a Baumstark —and that it enjoys 
the admiration of the Kölnische Zeitung. Oh happy Belgium! 
Written by Marx on August 6, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 68, August 7, 1848 time 
A Belgian name for an admirer of everything French.— Ed. 

=====第367页=====
337 
THE FRANKFURT ASSEMBLY DEBATES 
THE POLISH QUESTION219 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 70, August 9, 1848] 
Cologne, August 7. The Frankfurt Assembly, whose debates even 
during the most excited moments were conducted in a truly German 
spirit of geniality, at last pulled itself together when the Posen 
question came up. On this question, the ground for which had been 
prepared by Prussian shrapnel and the docile resolutions of the 
Federal Diet, the Assembly had to pass a clear-cut resolution. No 
middle course was possible; it had either to save Germany's honour 
or to blot it once again. The Assembly acted as we had expected; it 
sanctioned the seven partitions of Poland, and shifted the disgrace of 
1772,  1794 and 1815 from the shoulders of the German princes toits 
own shoulders. 220 
The Frankfurt Assembly, moreover, declared that the seven 
partitions of Poland were benefactions wasted on the Poles. Had not 
the forcible intrusion of the Jewish-German race lifted Poland to a 
level of culture and a stage of science which that country had 
previously never dreamed of? Deluded, ungrateful Poles! If your 
country had not been partitioned you would have had to ask this 
favour yourselves of the Frankfurt Assembly. 
Pastor Bonavita Blank of the Paradise monastery near  Schaff­
hausen trained magpies and starlings to fly in and out. He had cut 
away the lower part of their bill so that they were unable to get their 
own food and could only receive it from his hands. The philistines 
who from a distance saw the birds alight on the Reverend's shoulders 
and seem to be friendly with him, admired his great culture and 
learning. His biographer says that the birds loved their benefactor* 
a [F. G. Benkert.] Joseph Bonavita Blank's ... kurze Lebens-Beschreibung. — Ed. 

=====第368页=====
338 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Yet the fettered, maimed, branded Poles refuse to love their 
Prussian benefactors! 
We could not give a better description of the benefactions which 
Prussia bestowed on the Poles than that provided by the report which 
the learned historiographer Herr Stenzel submitted on behalf of the 
Committee for International Law, a report which forms the basis of 
the debate. 
The report, entirely in the style of the conventional diplomatic 
documents, first recounts how the Grand Duchy of Posen was set up 
in 1815 by "incorporation" and "merging". Then follow the 
promises which at the same time Frederick William III made to the 
inhabitants of Posen, i.e. the safeguarding of their nationality, 
language and religion, the appointment of a native governor, and 
participation in the famous Prussian Constitution. 22 
The extent to which these promises were kept is well known. The 
freedom of communication between the three fragments of Poland, 
to which the Congress of Vienna could the more easily agree the less 
feasible it was, was of course never put into effect. 
The make-up of the population is then examined. Herr Stenzel 
calculates that 790,000 Poles, 420,000 Germans and about 80,000 
Jews lived in the Grand Duchy in 1843, making a total of almost 
1,300,000. 
Herr Stenzel's statement is challenged by the Poles, notably by 
Archbishop Przyluski, 3 according to whom there are considerably 
more than 800,000 Poles, and, if one deducts the Jews, officials and 
soldiers, hardly 250,000 Germans, living in Posen. 
Let us, however, accept Herr Stenzel's figures. For our purposes it 
is quite sufficient. To avoid all further discussion, let us concede that 
there are 420,000 Germans living in Posen. Who are these Germans, 
who by the inclusion of the Jews have been brought up to half a 
million? 
The Slavs are a predominantly agricultural people with little 
aptitude for urban trades in the form in which up to now they were 
feasible in the Slav countries. The first crude stage of commerce, 
when it was still mere hawking, was left to Jewish pedlars. With the 
growth of culture and population the need for urban trades and 
urban concentration made itself felt, and Germans moved into the 
Slav countries. The Germans, who after all had their heyday in the 
philistinism [Kleinbürgerei] of the imperial cities of the Middle Ages, 
in the sluggish inland trade conducted in caravan style, in a restricted 
a Leon Przyluski, ["Die Korrespondenz des Erzbischofs von Posen, Przyluski, mit 
dem Berliner Kabinett",] Neue Rheinische Zeitung  Nos.  5, 7, 10, 14, 38 and 39, June 5 
7, 10 and 14, and July 8 and 9, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第369页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 339 
maritime trade, and in the handicraft workshops of the fourteenth 
and fifteenth centuries organised on guild lines—the Germans 
demonstrated their vocation as the philistines of world history by the 
very fact that they still to this day form the core of the petty 
bourgeoisie throughout Eastern and Northern Europe and even in 
America. Many, often most of the craftsmen, shopkeepers and small 
middlemen in Petersburg, Moscow, Warsaw and Cracow, in 
Stockholm and Copenhagen, in Pest, Odessa and Jassy, in New York 
and Philadelphia are Germans or of German extraction. All these 
cities have districts where only German is spoken, and some of them, 
for example Pest, are almost entirely German. 
This German immigration, particularly into the Slav countries, 
went on almost uninterruptedly since the twelfth and thirteenth 
centuries. Moreover, from time to time since the Reformation, as a 
result of the persecution of various sects large groups of Germans 
were forced to migrate to Poland, where they received a friendly 
welcome. In other Slav countries, such as Bohemia and Moravia, the 
Slav population was decimated by German wars of conquest, whereas 
the German population increased as a result of invasion. 
The position is clearest in Poland. The German philistines living 
there for centuries never regarded themselves as politically belong­
ing to Germany any more than did the Germans in North America; 
just as the "French colony" in Berlin and the 15,000 Frenchmen in 
Montevideo do not regard themselves as belonging to France. As far 
as that was possible during the days of decentralisation in the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, they became Poles, German-
speaking Poles, who had long since renounced all ties with the 
mother country. 
But the Germans brought to Poland culture, education and 
science, commerce and trades.—True, they brought retail trade and 
guild crafts; by their consumption and the limited intercourse which 
they established they stimulated production to some extent. Up to 
1772 Poland as a whole was not particularly well known for her high 
standard of education and science, and the same applies to Austrian 
and Russian Poland since then; of the Prussian part we shall speak 
later. On the other hand, the Germans in Poland prevented the 
formation of Polish towns with a Polish bourgeoisie. By their distinct 
language, their separateness from the Polish population, their 
numerous different privileges and urban judicial systems, they 
impeded centralisation, that most potent of political means by which 
a country achieves rapid development. Almost every town had its 
own law; indeed towns with a mixed population had, and often still 
have,  different laws for Germans, Poles and Jews. The German Poles 

=====第370页=====
340 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
remained at the lowest stage of industrial development; they did not 
accumulate large capitals; they were neither able to establish 
large-scale industry nor control any extensive system of commerce. 
The Englishman Cockerill had to come to Warsaw for industry to 
strike root in Poland. The entire activity of the German Poles was 
restricted to retail trade, the handicrafts and at most the corn trade 
and manufacture (weaving etc.) on the smallest scale. In considering 
the merits of the German Poles it should not be forgotten also that 
they imported German philistinism and German petty-bourgeois 
narrow-mindedness into Poland, and that they combined the worst 
qualities of both nations without acquiring their good ones. 
Herr Stenzel seeks to enlist the sympathy of the Germans for the 
German Poles: 
"When the kings ... especially in the seventeenth century, became increasingly 
powerless and were no longer able to protect the native Polish peasants against the 
severest oppression by the nobles, the German villages and towns, too, declined, and 
many of them became the property of the nobility. Only the larger royal cities kept 
some of their old liberties" (read: privileges). 
Does Herr Stenzel perhaps demand that the Poles should have 
protected the "Germans" (i.e. German Poles, who are moreover also 
"natives") better than themselves? Surely it is obvious that foreigners 
who immigrate into any country must expect to share the good and 
bad with the indigenous inhabitants. 
Let us pass now to the blessings for which the Poles are indebted to 
the Prussian Government in particular. 
Frederick II seized the Netze district 3 in 1772, and in the following 
year the Bromberg canal was built, which made inland navigation 
between the Oder and Weichsel b possible. 
"The region, which for centuries was an object of dispute between Poland and 
Pomerania, and which was largely desolate as a result of countless devastations and 
because of vast swamps, was now brought under cultivation and populated by 
numerous colonists." 
Thus,  the first partition of Poland was no robbery. Frederick II 
merely seized an area which "for centuries was an object of dispute". 
But since when has there no longer existed an independent 
Pomerania which could have disputed this region? For how many 
centuries were in fact the rights of Poland to this region no longer 
challenged? And in general, what meaning has this rusted and rotten 
After the name of the River Netze (the Polish name is Notée). — Ed. 
The Polish name is Vistula.—Ed. 

=====第371页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates  the  Polish Question  341 
theory of "disputes" and "claims", which, in the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries, served the purpose of covering up the naked 
commercial interests and the policy of rounding off one's lands? 
What meaning can it have in 1848 when the bottom has been 
knocked out of all "historical justice" and "injustice"? 
Incidentally, Herr Stenzel ought to bear in mind that according to 
this junk-heap doctrine the Rhine borders between France and 
Germany have been "an object of dispute for millennia", and that 
Poland could assert her claims to suzerainty over the province of 
Prussia and even over Pomerania. 
In short, the Netze district became part of Prussia and hence 
ceased to be "an object of dispute". Frederick II had it colonised by 
Germans, and so the "Netze  brethren",  who received such praise in 
connection with the Posen affair, came into being. The state-
promoted Germanisation began in 1773. 
"According to all reliable information, all the Jews in the Grand Duchy are Germans 
and want  to be  Germans.... The religious toleration which used  to prevail  in Poland 
and the  possession  of certain qualities which were lacking  in the Poles, enabled  the 
Jews in the course  of centuries to develop activities which penetrated deep into Polish 
life" (namely into Polish purses). "As  a rule they have  a thorough command  of both 
languages, although they, and their children from the earliest years, speak German  at 
home." 
The unexpected sympathy and recognition which Polish Jews have 
lately received in Germany has found official expression in this 
passage. Maligned wherever the influence of the Leipzig fair extends 
as the very incarnation of haggling, avarice and sordidness, they 
have suddenly become German brethren; with tears of joy the 
honest German presses them to his bosom, and Herr Stenzel lays 
claim to them on behalf of the German nation as Germans who  want 
to remain Germans. 
Indeed, why should not Polish Jews be genuine Germans? Do not 
"they, and their children from the earliest years, speak German at 
home"? And what German at that! 
Incidentally, we would point out to Herr Stenzel that he might just 
as well lay claim to the whole of Europe, one half of America, and 
even part of Asia. German, as everyone knows, is the universal lan­
guage of the Jews. In New York and Constantinople, in St. Peters­
burg and Paris "the Jews, and their children from the earliest years, 
speak German at home", and some of them even a more 
classical German than the Posen Jews, the "kindred" allies of the 
"Netze brethren." 
The report goes on to present the national relations in terms that 
are as vague as possible and as favourable as possible to the alleged 
half a million Germans consisting of German Poles, "Netze 

=====第372页=====
342 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
brethren", and Jews. It says that German peasants own more land 
than the Polish peasants (we shall see how this has come to pass), and 
that since the first partition of Poland enmity between Poles and 
Germans, especially Prussians, reached its highest degree. 
"By the introduction of its exceptionally rigidly regulated political and administra­
tive orders" (what excellent style!) "and their strict enforcement, Prussia in particular 
seriously disturbed the old customs and traditional institutions of the Poles." 
Not only the Poles but also the other Prussians, and especially we 
from the Rhine, can tell a tale about the "rigidly regulated" and 
"strictly enforced" measures of the worthy Prussian bureaucracy, 
measures which "disturbed" not only the old customs and traditional 
institutions, but also the entire social life, industrial and agricultural 
production, commerce, mining, in short all social relations without 
exception. It is, however, not to the bureaucracy of 1807-48 that 
Herr Stenzel refers here but to that of 1772-1806, to the officials of 
the most genuine, dyed-in-the-wool Prussianism, whose baseness, 
corruptibility, cupidity and brutality were clearly evident in the 
treacherous acts of 1806. 222 These officials are supposed to have 
protected the Polish peasants against the nobles and received in 
return nothing but ingratitude; of course the officials ought to have 
understood "that nothing, not even the good things granted or 
imposed, can compensate for the loss of national sovereignty". 
We too know the way in which quite recently the Prussian officials 
used "to grant or impose everything". What Rhinelander, who had 
dealings with recently imported old-Prussian officials, did not have 
an opportunity to admire their inimitable, impertinent obtrusive-
ness,  their impudent meddlesomeness, their overriding insolence 
and combination of narrow-mindedness and infallibility. True, 
among us, in most cases, these old-Prussian gentry soon lost some of 
their roughness for they had at their disposal no "Netze brethren", 
no secret inquisition, no Prussian law and no floggings which last 
deficiency even brought some of them to an early grave. We do 
not have to be told what havoc they wrought in Poland, where they 
could indulge in floggings and secret inquisitions to their heart's 
content. 
In short, the arbitrary Prussian rule won such popularity that 
"already after the battle of Jena, the hatred of the Poles found vent 
in a general uprising and the ejection of the Prussian officials". This, 
for the time being, put an end to the bureaucratic rule. 
But in 1815 it returned in a somewhat modified form. The "best", 
"reformed", "educated", "incorruptible" officialdom tried its hand 
at dealing with these refractory Poles. 

=====第373页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates  the  Polish Question  343 
"The founding  of the  Grand Duchy  of Posen,  too, was not  conducive  to the 
establishment  of cordial relations, since  ... at  that time the King  of Prussia could not 
possibly agree  to have any single province set up as an entirely independent unit, thus 
turning  his  state,  as it  were, into  a federal state." 
Thus according to Herr Stenzel, the King of Prussia could "not 
possibly agree" to keep his own promises and the treaties of 
Vienna! 223 
"When,  in 1830, the sympathies which the Polish nobility showed  for  the Warsaw 
uprising caused anxiety,  and  after systematic efforts were subsequently made  by 
means  of various arrangements (!)—notably by buying  up the Polish landed estates, 
dividing them  and  handing them over  to the  Germans—gradually  to eliminate  the 
Polish nobility altogether,  the  latter's resentment against Prussia increased." 
"By means of various arrangements"! By prohibiting Poles from 
buying land brought under the hammer, and similar measures, 
which Herr Stenzel covers with the cloak of charity. 
What would Rhinelanders say if among us, too, the Prussian 
Government were to prohibit Rhinelanders from buying land put up 
for sale by order of the court. Sufficient pretexts could easily be 
found, namely: in order to amalgamate the population of the old 
and new provinces; in order that the natives of the old provinces 
could share in the blessings of parcellation and of the Rhenish laws; 
in order that Rhinelanders be induced to emigrate to the old 
provinces and implant their industries there as well, and so on. 
There are enough reasons to bestow Prussian "colonists" on us too. 
How would we look upon people who bought our land for next to 
nothing while competition was excluded, and who did it moreover 
with the support of the Government; people who were thrust upon 
us for the express purpose of accustoming us to the intoxicating 
motto "With God for King and Fatherland"a? 
After all we are Germans, we speak the same language as the 
people in the old provinces. Yet in Posen those colonists were sent 
methodically, with relentless persistence, to the domains, the forests 
and the divided estates of the Polish nobility in order to oust the 
native Poles and their language from their own country and to set up 
a truly Prussian province, which would surpass even Pomerania in 
black-and-white fanaticism. 
In order that the Prussian peasants in Poland should not be left 
without their natural masters, they were sent the flower of Prussian 
knighthood, men like Tresckow and Liittichau, who also bought 
landed estates for next to nothing, and with the aid of government 
These words are taken from the decree  on the establishment  of an army reserve 
issued  by Frederick William  III on  March  17,  1813.—  Ed. 

=====第374页=====
344 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
loans.  In fact, after the Polish uprising of 1846, a joint-stock 
company was formed in Berlin, which enjoyed the gracious 
protection of the highest personages in the land, and whose purpose 
was to buy up Polish estates for German knights. The poor 
starvelings from among the Brandenburg and Pomeranian aristocra­
cy foresaw that trials instituted against the Poles would ruin 
numerous big Polish landowners, whose estates would shortly be sold 
off dirt-cheap. This was a real godsend for many a debt-ridden Don 
Ranudo from the Uckermark. A fine estate for next to nothing, 
Polish peasants who could be thrashed, and what is more, a good 
service rendered to King and Fatherland—what brilliant prospects! 
Thus arose the third German immigration into Poland, Prussian 
peasants and Prussian noblemen settled throughout Posen with the 
declared intention, supported by the Government, not of Germanis­
ing, but of Pomeranising Posen. The German Poles had the excuse of 
having contributed in some measure to the promotion of commerce, 
the "Netze brethren" could boast that they had reclaimed a few bogs, 
but this last Prussian invasion had no excuse whatever. Even 
parcellation was not consistently carried through, the Prussian 
aristocrats following hard on the heels of the Prussian peasants. 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 73, August 12, 1848] 
Cologne, August 11. In the first article we have examined the 
"historical foundation" of Stenzel's report insofar as he deals with 
the situation in Posen before the revolution. Today we proceed to 
Herr Stenzel's history of the revolution and counter-revolution in 
Posen. 
"The German people, who at all times is filled with compassion for all the 
unfortunate" (so long as this compassion costs nothing), "always deeply felt how 
greatly its princes wronged the Poles." 
Indeed, "deeply felt" within the calm German heart, where the 
feelings are so "deeply" embedded that they never manifest 
themselves in action. Indeed, there was "compassion", expressed by 
a few alms in 1831 and by dinners and balls in aid of the Poles, so 
long as it was a matter of dancing and drinking champagne for the 
benefit of the Poles, and of singing "Poland is not yet lost!"a But 
when were the Germans prone to do something really decisive, to 
make a real sacrifice! 
The words are from the Polish national anthem.— Ed. 

=====第375页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 345 
"The Germans honestly and fraternally proffered their hand to expiate the 
wrongs their princes had perpetrated." 
Indeed, if it were possible to "expiate" anything with sentimental 
phrases and dull tub-thumping, then the Germans would emerge as. 
the purest people in the annals of history. 
"Just at the moment, however, when the Poles shook hands" (that is, took the 
fraternally proffered hand) "the interests and aims of the two nations already 
diverged. The Poles' only thought was for the restoration of their old state at least 
within the boundaries that existed before the first partition of 1772." 
Surely, only the unreasoning, confused, haphazard enthusiasm, 
which from time immemorial has been a principal adornment of the 
German national character, could have caused the Germans to be 
surprised by the Polish demands. The Germans wanted to "expiate" 
the injustice the Poles had suffered. What started this injustice? To 
say nothing of earlier treacheries, it certainly started with the first 
partition of Poland in 1772. How could this be "expiated"? Of 
course, only by restoration of the status quo existing  before  1772, or at 
least by the Germans returning to the Poles what they had robbed 
them of since 1772. But this was against the interests of the 
Germans? Well, if we speak of interests, then it can no longer be a 
question of sentimentalities like "expiation" etc.; here the language 
of cold, unfeeling practice should be used, and we should be spared 
rhetorical flourishes and expressions of magnanimity. 
Moreover, firstly, the Poles did not at all "only think" of the 
restoration of the Poland of 1772. In any case what the Poles did 
"think" is hardly our concern. For the time being they demanded only 
the reorganisation of the whole of Posen and mentioned other 
eventualities only in case of a German-Polish war against Russia. 
Secondly, "the interests and aims of the two nations diverged" 
only insofar as the "interests and aims" of revolutionary Germany in 
the field of international relations remained exactly the same as 
those of the old, absolutist Germany. If Germany's "interest and 
aim" is an alliance with Russia, or at least peace with Russia at any 
price, then of course everything in Poland must remain as it was 
hitherto. We shall see later, however, to what extent the  real  interests 
of Germany are identical with those of Poland. 
Then follows a lengthy, confused and muddled passage, in which 
Herr Stenzel expatiates on the fact that the German Poles were right 
when they wanted to do justice to Poland, but at the same time to 
remain Prussians and Germans. Of course it is of no concern to Herr 
Stenzel that the "when" excludes the "but" and the "but" the 
"when". 

=====第376页=====
346 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Next comes an equally lengthy and confused historical account, in 
which Herr Stenzel goes into detail in an attempt to prove that, 
owing to the "diverging interests and aims of the two nations" and 
the ensuing mutual enmity which was steadily growing, a bloody 
clash was unavoidable. The Germans adhered to the "national" 
interests, the Poles merely to the "territorial" interests. In other 
words, the Germans demanded that the Grand Duchy should be 
divided according to nationalities, the Poles wanted the whole of 
their old territory. 
This is again not true. The Poles asked for reorganisation but at 
the same time stated that they were quite willing to relinquish the 
frontier districts with a mixed population where the majority are 
Germans and want to join Germany. The inhabitants, however, 
should not be declared German or Polish by the Prussian officials at 
will, but according to their own wishes. 
Herr Stenzel goes on to assert that Willisen's mission was of course 
bound to fail because of the (alleged, but nowhere existing) 
resistance of the Poles to the cession of the predominantly German 
districts. Herr Stenzel was able to examine the statements of Willisen 
about the Poles and those of the Poles about Willisen. These  published 
statements prove the opposite. But this happens if "one is a man 
who",  as Herr Stenzel says, "has studied history for many years and 
deems it his duty never to utter an untruth and never to conceal what 
is true". 
With the same truthfulness which never conceals what is true, 
Herr Stenzel easily passes over the cannibalism perpetrated in Posen, 
the base and perfidious violation of the Convention of Jaros-
lawiec, 225 the massacres of Trzemeszno, Miloslaw and Wreschen,3 the 
destructive fury of a brutal soldiery worthy of the Thirty Years' 
War,226 and does not say a word about it. 
Now Herr Stenzel comes to the four partitions of Poland recently 
effected by the Prussian Government. First the Netze district and 
four other districts were torn away (April 14); to this were added 
certain parts of other districts. This territory with a total population 
of 593,390 was incorporated in the German Confederation on April 
22. Then the city and fortress of Posen together with the remainder 
of the left bank of the Warta were also included, making an 
additional 273,500 persons and bringing the combined population 
of these lands to  double  the number of Germans living in the whole of 
Posen even according to Prussian estimates. This was effected by an 
Order in Council on April 26, b and already on May 2 they were 
The Polish name is Wrzesnia.— Ed. 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung has "April 29", evidently a misprint.— Ed. 

=====第377页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 347 
admitted to the German Confederation. Now Herr Stenzel pleads 
with the Assembly that it is absolutely essential for Posen to remain in 
German hands, that Posen is an important, powerful fortress, with a 
population of over 20,000 Germans (most of them Polish Jews) who 
own two-thirds of all the landed property etc. That Posen is situated 
in the midst of a purely Polish territory, that it was forcibly 
Germanised, and that Polish Jews are not Germans, does not make 
the slightest difference to men who "never utter an untruth and 
never suppress what is true", to historians of Herr Stenzel's 
calibre. 
In short, Posen, for military reasons, should not be relinquished. 
As though it were not possible to raze the fortress, which, according 
to Willisen, is one of the greatest strategic blunders, and to fortify 
Breslau 3 instead. But ten million (incidentally this is again not 
true—barely five million) have beert invested, and it is of course 
more advantageous to retain this precious work of art and 20 to 30 
square miles of Polish land into the bargain. 
With the "city and fortress" of Posen in one's hands, it will be all 
the easier to seize still more. 
"But to keep the fortress it will be necessary to secure its approaches from Glogau, 
Küstrin and Thorn as well as a fortified area facing the east" (it need be only 1,000 
to 2,000 paces wide, like that of Maestricht facing Belgium and Limburg). "This," 
continues Herr Stenzel with a smile of satisfaction, "will at the same time ensure 
undisturbed possession of the Bromberg canal; but numerous areas with a 
predominantly Polish population will have to be incorporated into the German 
Confederation." 
It was for all these reasons that lunar caustic Pfuel, the well-known 
philanthropist, carried through two new partitions of Poland, thus 
meeting all the desires of Herr Stenzel and incorporating three-
fourths of the Grand Duchy into Germany. Herr Stenzel is the more 
grateful for this procedure, since the revival of Louis XIV's 
chambers of reunion 227 with augmented powers must evidently have 
demonstrated to this historian that the Germans have learned to 
apply the lessons of history. 
According to Herr Stenzel, the Poles ought to find consolation in 
the fact that their share of the land is more fertile than the 
incorporated territory, that there is considerably less landed 
property in their part than in that of the Germans and that "no 
unbiassed person will deny that the lot of the Polish peasant under a 
German Government will be far more tolerable than that of the 
a The Polish name is Wroclaw.—Ed. 
The Polish names are Glogöw, Kostrzyn and Torun.—Ed. 

=====第378页=====
348 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
German peasant under a Polish Government"! History provides 
some curious examples of this. 
Finally, Herr Stenzel tells the Poles that even the small part left to 
them will enable them, by practising all the civic virtues, 
"to befittingly prepare themselves for the moment, which at present is still 
shrouded in the mists of the future, and which, quite pardonably, they are 
trying—perhaps too impatiently—to precipitate. One of their most judicious fellow 
citizens exclaimed, very pertinently. 'There is a crown which is also worthy of your 
ambition, it is the civic  crownV  A German would perhaps add: It does not shine, but it is 
solid!" 
"It is solid!" But even more "solid" are the real reasons for the last 
four partitions of Poland by the Prussian Government. 
You worthy German—do you believe that the partitions were 
undertaken in order to deliver your German brothers from Polish 
rule;  to ensure that the fortress of Posen serves as a bulwark 
protecting you from any attack; to safeguard the roads of Küstrin, 
Glogau and Bromberg, a and the Netze canal? What a delusion! 
You have been shamefully deceived. The sole reason for the 
recent partitions of Poland was to replenish the Prussian treasury. 
The earlier partitions of Poland b up to 1815 were annexations of 
territory by force of arms; the partitions of 1848 are robbery. 
And now, worthy German, see how you have been deceived! 
After the third partition of Poland the estates of the Polish 
starosten0 and those of the Catholic clergy were confiscated by 
Frederick William II in favour of the state. As the Declaration of 
Appropriation issued on Julyd  28, 1796, says, the estates of the 
church in particular constituted "a very  considerable  part of landed 
property as a whole". The new domains were either managed on the 
King's account or leased, and they were so extensive that 34 
crown-land offices and 21 forestry divisions had to be set up for their 
administration. Each of these crown-land offices was responsible for 
a large number of villages; for example, altogether 636 villages came 
under the ten offices of the Bromberg district, and 127 were 
administered by the Mogilno crown-land office. 
In 1796, moreover, Frederick William II confiscated the estates 
and woodlands of the convent at Owinsk and sold them to the 
merchant von Tresckow (forefather of the brave Prussian troop 
leader in the last heroic ware). These estates comprised 24 villages 
The Polish name is Bydgoszcz.— Ed. 
b In 1795.— Ed. 
Starosten —formerly a nobleman in Poland who held a fief of the Crown.— Ed. 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung has "March".— Ed. 
An ironic allusion to the war against Denmark over Schleswig-Holstein. —Ed. 

=====第379页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 349 
with flour mills and 20,000 morgen 3 of forest land, worth at least 
1,000,000  talers. 
Furthermore, the crown-land offices of Krotoschin, Rozdrazewo, 
Orpiszewo and Adelnau,b  worth at least two million talers, were in 
1819 made over to the Prince of Thurn und Taxis to compensate 
him for the post-office privileges in several provinces which had 
become part of Prussia. 
Frederick William II took over all these estates on the pretext that 
he could administer them better. Nevertheless, these estates, the 
property of the Polish nation, were given away, ceded or sold, and 
the proceeds flowed into the Prussian treasury. 
The crown lands in Gnesen, Skorzencin and Trzemeszno were 
broken up and sold. 
Thus 27 crown-land offices and forestry divisions, to a value of 
twenty million talers at the very least, still remain in the hands of the 
Prussian Government. We are prepared to prove, map in hand, that 
all these domains and forests—with very few exceptions, if any at 
all—are located in the incorporated part of Posen. To prevent this 
rich treasure from reverting to the Polish nation it had to be 
absorbed into the German Confederation, and since it could not go 
to the German Confederation, the German Confederation had to 
come to it, and three-fourths of Posen were incorporated. 
That is the true reason for the four famous partitions of Poland 
within two months. Neither the protests of this or that nationality nor 
alleged strategic reasons were decisive—the frontier was determined 
solely by the position of the domains, and the rapacity of the Prussian 
Government. 
While German citizens were shedding bitter tears over the 
invented sufferings of their poor brothers in Posen, while they were 
waxing enthusiastic about the safety of the Eastern Marches of 
Germany, and while they allowed themselves to be infuriated against 
the Poles by false reports about Polish barbarities, the Prussian 
Government acted on the quiet, and feathered its nest. This German 
enthusiasm without rhyme or reason merely served to disguise the 
dirtiest deed in modern history. 
That, worthy German, is how you are treated by your responsible 
Ministers! 
Actually however you ought to have known this beforehand. 
Whenever Herr Hansemann has a hand in something, it is never 
a An old German land measure, varying in different localities between 0.25 and 
1.23 hectares.—Ed. 
The Polish name is Odolanôw. — Ed. 

=====第380页=====
350 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
a matter of German nationality, military necessity or suchlike 
empty phrases, but always a matter of cash payment and of net 
profit. 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 81, August 20, 1848] 
Cologne, August 19. We have examined in detail Herr Stenzel's 
report, which forms the basis of the debate. We have shown that he 
falsifies both the earlier and the more recent history of Poland and of 
the Germans in Poland, that he confuses the whole issue, and that 
Stenzel the historian is not only guilty of deliberate falsification but 
also of gross ignorance. 
Before dealing with the debate itself we must take another look at 
the Polish question. 
The problem of Posen taken by itself is quite meaningless and 
insoluble. It is a fragment of the Polish problem and can only be 
solved in connection with and as a part of it. Only when Poland exists 
again will it be possible to determine the borders between Germany 
and Poland. 
But can and will Poland exist again? This was denied during the 
debate. 
A French historian has said: Il y a  des peuples nécessaires —there are 
necessary nations. The Polish nation is undoubtedly one of the 
necessary nations of the nineteenth century. 
But for no one is Poland's national existence more necessary than 
for us Germans. 
What is the main support of the reactionary forces in Europe since 
1815,  and to some extent even since the first French revolution? It is 
the Russian-Prussian-Austrian Holy Alliance. And what holds the 
Holy Alliance together? The partition of  Poland,  from which all the 
three allies have profited. 
The tearing asunder of Poland by the three powers is the tie which 
links them together; the robbery they jointly committed makes them 
support one another. 
From the moment the first robbery of Polish territory was 
committed Germany became dependent on Russia. Russia ordered 
Prussia and Austria to remain absolute monarchies, and Prussia and 
Austria had to obey. The efforts to gain control—efforts which were 
in any case feeble and timid, especially on the part of the Prussian 
bourgeoisie—failed entirely because of the impossibility of breaking 
away from Russia, and because of the support which Russia offered 
the feudalist-absolutist class in Prussia. 
Moreover, as soon as the allies attempted to introduce the first 

=====第381页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 351 
oppressive measures the Poles not only rose to fight for their 
independence, but simultaneously came out in revolutionary action 
against their own internal social conditions. 
The partition of Poland was effected through a pact between the 
big feudal aristocracy of Poland and the three partitioning powers. It 
was not an advance, as the ex-poet Herr Jordan maintains, it was the 
last means the big aristocracy had to protect itself against a 
revolution, it was thoroughly reactionary. 
Already the first partition led quite naturally to an alliance of the 
other classes, i.e. the nobles, the townspeople and to some extent the 
peasants, both against the oppressors of Poland and against the big 
Polish aristocracy. The Constitution of  1791228  shows that already 
then the Poles clearly understood that their independence in foreign 
affairs was inseparable from the overthrow of the aristocracy and 
from the agrarian reform within the country. 
The big agrarian countries between the Baltic and the Black seas 
can free themselves from patriarchal feudal barbarism only by an 
agrarian revolution, which turns the peasants who are serfs or liable 
to compulsory labour into free landowners, a revolution which 
would be similar to the French revolution of 1789 in the 
countryside. It is to the credit of the Polish nation that it was the first 
of all its agricultural neighbours to proclaim this. The first attempted 
reform was the Constitution of 1791; during the uprising of 1830 
Lelewel declared an agrarian revolution to be the only means of 
saving the country, but the Diet recognised this too late; during the 
insurrections of 1846 and 1848 the agrarian revolution was openly 
proclaimed. 
From the day of their subjugation the Poles came out with 
revolutionary demands, thereby committing their oppressors still 
more strongly to a counter-revolutionary course. They compelled 
their oppressors to maintain the patriarchal feudal structure not only 
in Poland but in all their other countries as well. The struggle for the 
independence of Poland, particularly since the Cracow uprising of 
1846,  is at the same time a struggle of agrarian democracy—the only 
form of democracy possible in Eastern Europe—against patriarchal 
feudal absolutism. 
So long, therefore, as we help to subjugate Poland, so long as we 
keep part of Poland fettered to Germany, we shall remain fettered to 
Russia and to the Russian policy, and shall be unable to eradicate 
patriarchal feudal absolutism in Germany. The creation of a 
democratic Poland is a primary condition for the creation of a 
democratic Germany. 
But the restoration of Poland and the settlement of her frontiers 

=====第382页=====
352 Articles from the Neue  Rheinische  Zeitung 
with Germany is not only necessary, it is the most easily solvable of 
all the political problems which have arisen in Eastern Europe since 
the revolution. The struggle for independence of the diverse 
nationalities jumbled together south of the Carpathians is much 
more complicated and will lead to far more bloodshed, confusion 
and civil wars than the Polish struggle for independence and the 
establishment of the border line between Germany and Poland. 
Needless to say, it is not a question of restoring a bogus Poland, but 
of restoring the state upon a viable foundation. Poland must have at 
least the dimensions of 1772, she must comprise not only the 
territories but also the estuaries of her big rivers and at least a large 
seaboard on the Baltic. 
The Germans could have secured all this for Poland and at the 
same time protected their own interests and their honour, if after the 
revolution they had had the courage, for their own sake, arms in 
hand, to demand that Russia relinquish Poland. Owing to the 
commingling of Germans and Poles in the border regions and 
especially along the coast, it goes without saying that both parties 
would have had to make some concessions to one another, some 
Germans becoming Polish and some Poles German, and this would 
have created no difficulties. 
After the indecisive German revolution, however, the courage for 
so resolute an action was lacking. It is all very well to make florid 
speeches about the liberation of Poland and to welcome passing Poles 
at railway stations, offering them the most ardent sympathies of the 
German people (to whom had these sympathies not been offered?); 
but to start a war with Russia, to endanger the European balance of 
power and, to cap all, hand over some scraps of the annexed ter­
ritory — only one who does not know the Germans could expect that. 
And what would a war with Russia have meant? A war with Russia 
would have meant a complete, open and effective break with the 
whole of our disgraceful past, the real liberation and unification of 
Germany, and the establishment of democracy on the ruins of 
feudalism and on the wreckage of the short-lived bourgeois dream of 
power. War with Russia would have been the only possible way of 
vindicating our honour and our interests with regard to our Slav 
neighbours, and especially the Poles. 
But we were philistines and have remained philistines. We made 
several dozen small and big revolutions, at which we ourselves took 
fright even before they were accomplished. We talked big, but 
carried nothing through. The revolution narrowed our mental 
horizon instead of broadening it. All problems were approached 
from the standpoint of the most timid, most narrow-minded, most 

=====第383页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates  the  Polish Question  353 
illiberal philistinism, to the detriment, of course, of our real interests. 
From the standpoint of this petty philistinism, the great question of 
Poland's liberation was therefore reduced to the paltry slogan calling 
for reorganisation of a part of the Province of Posen, while our 
enthusiasm for the Poles turned into shrapnel and lunar caustic. 
War with Russia, we repeat, was the only possible means of 
upholding Germany's honour and Germany's interests. We shrank 
from it and the inevitable happened—the reactionary soldiery, 
beaten in Berlin, raised their head again in Posen; under the pretext 
of saving Germany's honour and national integrity they raised the 
banner of counter-revolution and crushed our allies, the revolu­
tionary Poles—and for a moment the hoodwinked Germans 
exultantly applauded their victorious enemies. The new partition of 
Poland was accomplished, and only the sanction of the German 
National Assembly was still missing. 
The Frankfurt Assembly still had a chance to mend matters: it 
should have excluded the whole of Posen from the German 
Confederation and left the border question open until it could be 
discussed with a restored Poland  d'égal  à égal. 
But that would be asking too much of our professors, lawyers and 
pastors who sit in the Frankfurt National Assembly. The temptation 
was too great. These peaceful burghers, who had never fired a rifle, 
were, by simply rising or remaining seated, to conquer for Germany 
a country of 500 square miles and to incorporate 800,000 "Netze 
brethren", German Poles, Jews and Poles, even though this was to be 
done at the expense of the honour and of the real, lasting interests of 
Germany—what a temptation! They succumbed to it, they endorsed 
the partition of Poland. 
What the motives were, we shall see tomorrow. 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 82, August 22, 1848] 
Cologne,  August 21. We shall leave aside the preliminary question 
as to whether the deputies from Posen should take part in the 
discussion and voting and proceed at once to the debate on the main 
question. 
Herr Stenzel, the reporter, opened the debate with an appall­
ingly confused and verbose speech. He poses as a historian and 
a conscientious man, he speaks of fortresses and field-works, of 
heaven and hell, of sympathies and German hearts. He goes back to 
the eleventh century to prove that the Polish nobility has always 
oppressed the peasants. He uses a few meagre facts from Polish 
history as an excuse for an unending stream of the most insipid 

=====第384页=====
354 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
commonplaces about nobility, peasants, towns, benefactions of the 
absolute monarchy etc. He defends the partition of Poland in a 
clumsy and self-conscious manner; he explains the provisions of the 
Constitution of May 3, 1791, in such a completely muddled way that 
those members not already familiar with it now know even less about 
it. He is just about to turn to the Grand Duchy of Warsaw when he is 
interrupted by the exclamation: "This is too much!" and by the 
President. 
Thrown into complete confusion, the great historian continues 
with the following touching words: 
"I shall be  brief.  The question is—what are we to do? This question is quite 
natural" (!literally). "The nobility wants to restore the Empire. It asserts that it is 
democratic. I do not doubt that this is meant in honesty. However, gentlemen, it is 
quite natural (!) for certain estates to cherish great illusions. I believe completely in 
their sincerity, but when princes and counts must join the people, I do not know how 
the merging is to come about" (why should that concern Herr Stenzel!). "In Poland it 
is impossible" etc. 
Herr Stenzel speaks as if in Poland there were no difference at all 
between nobility and aristocracy. Lelewel's Histoire de  Pologne,  which 
he himself quotes, Mieroslawski's Débat entre la révolution et la 
contrer évolution en  Pologne  and a great many other recent publications 
could disabuse the "man who has studied history for many years". 
Most of the "princes and counts" mentioned by Herr Stenzel are 
precisely those against whom Polish democracy is fighting. 
Therefore, Herr Stenzel thinks, the nobility with its illusions 
should be dropped and a Poland for the peasants set up (by 
incorporating one Polish district after another into Germany). 
"You should, on the contrary, hold out your hands to the poor peasants so that 
these can rise up and perhaps (!) succeed in establishing a free Poland, and not only in 
establishing it but also in maintaining it. That, gentlemen, is the main thing!" 
Elated with victory, the historian leaves the rostrum accompanied 
by exultant shouts of "Bravo!", "Excellent!" from the national 
twaddlers of the Centre groups.229 To describe the new partition of 
Poland as a blessing for the Polish peasants, this astonishingly absurd 
turn of events was of course bound to bring tears of emotion to the 
eyes of the genial and philanthropic mass in the Centre of the 
Assembly! 
Next comes Herr  Goeden  from Krotoszyn, a German Pole of the first 
water. He is followed by Herr Senff from Inowroclaw, a fine example 
of a "Netze brother", devoid of guile. He put his name down as a 
speaker against the motion tabled by the committee but spoke for the 
motion and, as a result of this trick, a speaker against the motion lost 
his turn. 

=====第385页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 355 
The way the "Netze brethren" behave here is the most ludicrous 
comedy one can imagine and shows once again what a genuine 
Prussian is capable of. We all know that the profit-hungry Jewish-
Prussian small fry from Posen, who fought against the Poles, acted in 
close unity with the bureaucracy, the royal Prussian officers and the 
Brandenburg and Pomeranian squirearchy, in short with all who 
were reactionary and old-Prussian. The betrayal of Poland was the 
first insurrection of the counter-revolution, and no one was more 
counter-revolutionary than the "Netze brethren". 
Now let us here in Frankfurt take a look at these rabidly 
Prussophile schoolmasters and officials with their "God for King and 
Fatherland",3  who call their counter-revolutionary betrayal of Polish 
democracy a revolution, a real and genuine revolution in the name 
of the sovereign "Netze brotherhood", who trample historical rights 
under foot and over the allegedly dead Poland exclaim: "Right is on 
the side of the  living!  "b 
But that's how the Prussian behaves: on the Spree by "the grace of 
God", on the Warta the sovereign people; on the Spree mob riots, on 
the Warta the revolution; on the Spree "historical right which does 
not have no date",0 on the Warta the right of the living facts which 
date from yesterday—but for all that his faithful Prussian heart is 
devoid of guile, is honest and upright! 
Let us hear Herr Goeden. 
"This is the second time that we are having to defend a cause which is so important 
and so momentous for our country that, had it not of itself turned out (!) to be entirely 
right as far as we are concerned, it would have  been necessary to  make it  so (! !). Our right is 
rooted not so much in the past as in the fast beating pulse" (and especially in beatings 
with the butt-end) "of the present." 
"As a result of the" (Prussian) "occupation, the Polish peasants and townspeople 
found themselves in a state of security and well-being which they had never known 
previously." (Especially not since the time of the Polish-Prussian wars and the 
partitions of Poland.) 
"The infringement of justice implied in the partition of Poland is completely 
expiated by the humane attitude of your" (the German) "people" (and in particular 
by the floggings ordered by Prussian officials), "by its diligent work" (on Polish land 
which has been stolen and given away), "and in April of this year also by its bloodV 
The blood of Herr Goeden from Krotoszyn! 
"The revolution is our right and we are here on the strength of it!" 
"The proof that we have been legally incorporated into Germany does not consist 
of parchment documents, turned yellow with age; we have not been acquired through 
These words are taken from the decree on the establishment of an army reserve 
issued by Frederick William III on March 17, 1813.—Ed. 
Modified quotation from Schiller's "An die Freunde". —Ed. 
c This ungrammatical phrase occurred in a speech of the Right-wing Deputy 
Lichnowski (see this volume, p.  369).—Ed. 

=====第386页=====
356 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
marriage, inheritance, purchase or exchange; we are Germans, and belong to our 
fatherland because a sovereign will which is rational and just impels us, a will which is 
based on our geographical position, our language and customs, our numbers.(!), our 
property, but above all on our German way of thinking and our love of our 
fatherland." 
"Our rights are so secure and rest so firmly in the modern  concept  of the world,  that 
one does not even need a German heart to be compelled to recognise this!" 
Long live the "sovereign will" of the Prussian-Jewish "Netze 
brotherhood", a will which rests in the "modern concept of the 
world", relies on the shrapnel "revolution" and is rooted in the 
"fast beating pulse" of the present, with its martial law! Long 
live the German nationalism of the bureaucrats' salaries in Posen, of 
the plunder of church and state property and of loans à la Flottwell! 
The oratorical knight of superior rights is followed by the 
impertinent "Netze brother". Even Stenzel's motion is still too polite 
towards the Poles for Herr Senff of Inowroclaw; he therefore 
proposes a somewhat ruder wording. With the same impudence with 
which he used this pretext to put his name down as a speaker against 
the motion, he now declares that to debar the Posen deputies from 
voting was a disgraceful injustice. 
"I believe that the deputies from Posen are especially  competent to take part in the 
voting, for it is the most important rights of those who have sent us here which are at 
issue." 
Herr Senff then talks about Poland's history since the first 
partition, elaborating it with a series of deliberate falsifications and 
gross lies so that, in comparison, Herr Stenzel is a pitiable dabbler. 
Everything that is tolerable in Posen owes its inception to the 
Prussian Government and the "Netze brethren". 
"The Grand Duchy of Warsaw was set up. The Prussian officials were replaced by 
Polish officials and, in 1814, hardly a trace remained of the benefits these provinces 
derived from Prussian rule." 
Herr Senff is quite right. "No trace remained" of serfdom or of 
the cash contributions that Polish districts had to pay to Prussian 
educational institutions, e.g. the University of Halle, or of the 
extortions and brutalities perpetrated by Prussian officials who did 
not speak Polish. But Poland was not yet lost 3 for, thanks to Russia, 
Prussia began to thrive once more and Posen was again incorporated 
into Prussia. 
"From that time on, the Prussian Government renewed its efforts to improve 
conditions in the Province of Posen." 
The words are from the Polish national anthem.—Ed. 

=====第387页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 357 
Those who want to know more about this should read Flottwell's 
memorandum of  1841.a  Up to 1830, the Government did nothing at 
all. Flottwell found only four miles of highway in the whole Grand 
Duchy! Shall we enumerate Flottwell's benefactions? Herr Flottwell, 
a cunning bureaucrat, sought to bribe the Poles by building roads, 
opening up rivers, draining marshes etc.; but he bribed them not 
with the money of the Prussian Government, but with their own money. 
All those improvements were, in the main, carried through with the 
aid of private and district resources and, though the Government 
occasionally contributed some money, this was only a small fraction 
of the amount it extracted from the province as taxes and revenues 
from the Polish state and church domains. The Poles, moreover, are 
indebted to Herr Flottwell not only for the continuing suspension 
(since 1826) of district council elections, but especially for the 
gradual expropriation of Polish landowners as a result of the 
Government buying up the auctioned estates of noblemen and 
reselling them only to loyal Germans (Order in Council of 1833). 
The last benefaction of FlottwelFs administration was the improve­
ment of the educational system. But this too was a measure designed 
to further Prussianisation. Prussian teachers were to Prussianise the 
young noblemen and future Catholic priests in the secondary 
schools, and the peasants in the primary schools. In an unguarded 
outburst, Herr Wallach, the Regierungspräsident of the Bromberg 
administrative district, has divulged the purpose of these educational 
establishments. He writes to Herr Beurmann, the Oberpräsident, that 
the Polish language is one of the chief  obstacles  to the dissemination of 
education and well-being among the rural population. This is indeed 
quite true if the teacher does not speak Polish. 
Incidentally, it was again the Poles themselves who paid for these 
schools. For, first of all, the majority, including the most important 
institutes, which did not, however, directly serve the goal of 
Prussianisation, were founded and endowed by private contributions 
or by the Provincial Estates and, secondly, even the schools designed 
to Prussianise the population were maintained out of the revenues of 
monasteries secularised on March 31, 1833, and only 21,000 talers a 
year, for ten years, were granted by the treasury. 
Herr Flottwell admits, moreover, that all reforms were initiated by 
the Poles. The fact that the greatest benefactions of the Prussian 
Government consisted in the collection of large revenues and taxes 
a "Denkschrift des Oberpräsidenten Herrn Flottwell, ueber die Verwaltung des 
Gros-Herzogthum Posen, vom Dezember 1830 bis zum Beginn des Jahres 
1841."— Erf. 

=====第388页=====
358 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
and in enlisting young men into the Prussian military service, is 
passed over in silence by Herr Flottwell, just as it is by Herr 
Senf f. 
In short, all the benefactions of the Prussian Government simply 
amount to the provision of posts for Prussian non-commissioned 
officers in Posen, be it as drill-master, schoolmaster, policeman or 
tax-collector. 
We cannot discuss in detail the other unfounded accusations which 
Herr Senff levels against the Poles, nor his false statistical data. It is 
sufficient to say that the purpose of Herr Senff's speeches is simply 
to make the Assembly detest the Poles. 
Herr Robert Blum follows. As usual, he delivers what is called a 
profound oration, i.e. an oration which contains more opinion than 
reason and more rhetoric than opinion, and which, incidentally, as a 
piece of rhetoric—as we have to admit—produces no greater effect 
than the "modern concept of the world" of Herr Goeden from 
Krotoszyn. Poland is the rampart against Nordic barbarism ... if the 
Poles have vices it is the fault of their oppressors ... old Gagern 
declares that the partition of Poland is the nightmare that weighs on 
our time ... the Poles warmly love their fatherland and, in this 
respect, we might take a leaf out of their book ... danger is imminent 
from Russia ... if the red republic were victorious in Paris and desired 
to liberate the Poles by force of arms, what then, gentlemen?... Let us 
not be prejudiced etc., etc. 
We are sorry for Herr Blum, but when all these fine observations 
are divested of their rhetorical flourishes, nothing remains but the 
most vapid political hot air, be it political hot air on a grand scale and 
in high style—as we gladly admit. Even when Herr Blum asserts 
that, to be consistent, the National Assembly must act in Schleswig, 
Bohemia, the Italian Tyrol, the Russian Baltic provinces and Alsace 
according to the same principle as in Posen, the argument is justified 
only with regard to the stupid lies about nationality and the 
convenient inconsistency of the majority. When, again, he asserts 
that, if Germany wants to behave decently, she can conduct 
negotiations on Posen only with an already existing Poland, we shall 
not deny this, but merely observe that this argument—the only 
weighty one of his speech—had been advanced hundreds of times 
before by the Poles themselves and in a much more convincing way, 
whereas Herr Blum, with great "restraint and indulgent modera­
tion", shoots it quite ineffectively, like a blunt rhetorical arrow, at the 
callous breast of the majority. 
Herr Blum is right when he says that shrapnel is no argument, but 
he is wrong—and he knows it—when he tries impartially to take a 

=====第389页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 359 
"moderate" superior standpoint. Herr Blum may not clearly 
understand the Polish question, but that is his own fault. He is in a 
sorry plight however, first, when he hopes to prevail upon the 
majority to demand even a report from the Central Authority, and 
secondly, when he imagines he will gain anything by virtue of a 
report furnished by the Ministers of this Central Authority, who, on 
August 6, submitted so disgracefully to the Prussian desire for 
sovereignty. 280 To sit with the "extreme Left" one must first of all 
entirely discard indulgent moderation and refrain from attempts to 
secure anything, however small, from the majority. 
Whenever the Polish question is debated, almost the entire Left 
indulges, as usual, in declamation or even in extravagant rhapsody, 
without discussing the facts and the actual content of the question. 
Yet, with regard to this question in particular, there is ample material 
available and the facts are extremely convincing. But this requires 
that one really studies the problem, and one can of course save 
oneself the trouble, since, having passed through the purgatory of 
the election, one is no longer accountable to anybody. 
We shall return to the few exceptions to this rule in the course of 
the debate. Tomorrow we shall say a few words to Herr Wilhelm 
Jordan, who is no exception, but who this time, in the literal sense 
and for definite reasons, follows the multitude. 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 86, August 26, 1848] 
Cologne, August 25. At last, thank God, we leave the low sandy 
plain of vapid political hot air and enter the more elevated Alpine 
regions of great debate. At last we mount the cloud-covered peak 
where eagles nest, where man finds himself face to face with the gods 
and looks down disdainfully on the diminutive rabble that far, far 
below grapples with the few arguments at the disposal of the 
ordinary human intellect. At last, after the skirmishes of a Blum with 
a Stenzel, a Goeden, a Senff of Inowroclaw, the great battle begins, 
during which Ariostian heroes scatter the splintered arrows of their 
mind all over the battlefield. 
The ranks of the combatants open reverentially and Herr Wilhelm 
Jordan of Berlin advances with drawn sword. 
Who is Herr Wilhelm Jordan of Berlin? 
In the heyday of German men of letters, Herr Wilhelm Jordan of 
Berlin was one such in Königsberg. Semi-legal meetings were held in 

=====第390页=====
360 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
the Böttchershöfchen. Herr Wilhelm Jordan went to one, read a 
poem of his— "Der Schiffer und sein Gott" [The Skipper and His 
God]—and was expelled. 
Herr Wilhelm Jordan of Berlin went to Berlin. Certain student 
meetings were held there. Herr Wilhelm Jordan recited a 
poem — "Der Schiffer und sein Gott" —and was expelled. 
Herr Wilhelm Jordan of Berlin went to Leipzig. There, too, some 
innocuous meetings were held. Herr Wilhelm Jordan recited a 
poem— "Der Schiffer und sein Gott" —and was expelled. 
Herr Wilhelm Jordan, moreover, published several of his writings: 
a poem "Glocke und Kanone" [Bell and Cannon]; a collection of 
Lithuanian folk-songs, including some of his own manufacture, in 
particular songs of Poland written by  himself;  translations of George 
Sand's works; a periodical, the incomprehensible "comprehended 
world" 3 etc.—all this in the service of the renowned Herr Otto 
Wigand, who has not yet got on so far as his French original, 
M. Pagnerre; furthermore, he published a translation of Lelewel's 
Histoire de Pologne, with an introduction full of enthusiasm for 
Poland etc. 
The revolution came. En un lugar de la Mancha, cuyo nombre no 
quiero acordarme h—in a locality in the German Mancha, in Branden­
burg, where Don Quixotes still thrive, a locality the name of which I 
do not like to remember, Herr Wilhelm Jordan of Berlin proposed 
himself as candidate for the German National Assembly. The 
peasants of the district were amiably constitutional men. Herr 
Wilhelm Jordan delivered several impressive speeches, full of the 
most constitutional amiability. The delighted peasants elected the 
great man as their deputy. As soon as he arrived in Frankfurt, the 
noble "irresponsible" man took his seat on the "extreme" Left and 
voted with the republicans. The peasants who, as electors, have 
produced this parliamentary Don Quixote, send him a vote of no 
confidence, reminding him of his promises and recalling him. But 
Herr Wilhelm Jordan considers that his word is as little binding as 
that of a king and at every opportunity continues to sound his "bell 
and cannon" in the Assembly. 
Each time Herr Wilhelm Jordan mounted the pulpit of St. Paul's 
Church, c he in fact recited only a poem— "Der Schiffer und sein 
Gott" —but this does not mean that he therefore deserves to be 
expelled. 
Die begriffene Welt. Blätter für wissenschaftliche Unterhaltung. — Ed. 
"At a certain village of La Mancha, which I shall not name" — the words with 
which Cervantes' Don Quixote begins.—Ed. 
The meeting place of the German National Assembly in Frankfurt.—  Ed 

=====第391页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 361 
Let us listen to the great Wilhelm Jordan's latest ringing of the bell 
and the most recent roar of his cannon about Poland. 
"On the contrary I believe that we must raise ourselves to the world-historical 
standpoint, from which the Posen affair has to be examined in terms of its significance 
as an episode in the great Polish drama." 
The powerful Herr Wilhelm Jordan has, with one move, raised us 
high above the clouds to the lofty, snow-capped Chimborazo of the 
"world-historical standpoint" and unfolds an infinite prospect 
before us. 
But, to begin with, he remains for a moment in the commonplace 
sphere of "special" deliberation, and with much success at that. Here 
are a few examples: 
"It" (the Netze district) "later, as a result of the Treaty of Warsaw" (i.e. the first 
partition), 'came under Prussian rule and has since remained in Prussia, if one leaves 
out of accout the short interlude of the Duchy of Warsaw." 
Herr Jordan speaks here of the Netze district as distinct from the 
rest of Posen. What source does he use here, this knight of the 
world-historical standpoint, the expert in Polish history, the 
translator of Lelewel? None other than the speech of Herr Senff of 
Inowroclaw! He sticks so closely to this source, that he quite forgets 
that, in 1794, the other, Polish part of Posen "came under Prussian 
rule and, if one leaves out of account the short interlude of the 
Duchy of Warsaw, has since remained in Prussia". But the "Netze 
brother" Senff never mentioned this, and the "world-historical 
standpoint" consequently knows merely that the administrative 
district of Posen "came under Prussian rule" only in 1815. 
"Furthermore, from time immemorial, the western districts of Birnbaum, Meseritz, 
Bomst and Fraustadt have been German as regards the overwhelming majority of 
their inhabitants—you can see this even from the names of these towns." 
And the district of Micdzychöd, Herr Jordan, was "from time 
immemorial Polish", as regards the overwhelming majority of its 
inhabitants—you can see this even from the name, can't you, Herr 
Jordan? 
The district of Micdzychöd is nothing but the district of Birnbaum. 
Micdzychöd is the Polish name of the town. 
What backing will these etymological chambers of reunion of the 
"world-historical standpoint" of the "comprehended world" obtain 
from the Christian-German Herr Leol Not to mention the fact that 
Mailand, Lüttich,  Genf,  Kopenhagen b have been "German from 
a The Polish names are Micdzychöd, Miçdzyrzecz, Babimost, Wschowa.—Ed. 
The German names for Milan, Liege, Geneva and Copenhagen.—Ed. 

=====第392页=====
362 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
time immemorial, as you can see even from their names". Does not 
the "world-historical standpoint" also deduce the immemorial 
Germanity of Haimons-Eichicht, Welsch-Leyden, Jenau and Kalten-
felde "even from their names"? True, he will have trouble finding 
these primevally German names on the map and when he learns that 
they denote Le Quesnoi, Lyons, Genoa and Campo Freddo, he will 
only have Herr Leo, who manufactured them, to thank for his 
embarrassment. 
What will the world-historical standpoint say, if presently the 
French claim Cologne, Coblence, Mayence and Francfort as 
primevally French territory? Woe then to the world-historical 
standpoint! 
But let us dwell no longer on these petites misères de la vie humaine, 3 
they also befall greater men. Let us follow Herr Wilhelm Jordan of 
Berlin, as he soars to higher spheres. He says of the Poles that one 
"likes them more the further away one is from them and the less one knows about 
them, and one likes them less the closer one gets to them". Hence the reason for "this 
affection is not some superior quality of the Polish character but rather a certain 
cosmopolitan idealism". 
But how does the world-historical standpoint explain that the 
peoples of the world do not "like" a certain nation, either when they 
are "at a great distance from it" or when they "get closer" to it, and 
that, with rare concurrence, they despise, exploit, deride and spurn 
this nation? This is the German nation. 
The world-historical standpoint will say, this is due to "cosmopolitan 
materialism", thus extricating  himself. 
Quite untroubled by such petty objections, however, the world-
historical eagle on his mighty pinions soars higher and higher, until 
he reaches the pure ether of the idea that exists in itself and for  itself, 
and gives vent to the following heroic world-historical Hegelian 
hymn: 
"Even if one vindicates history, which in the course of its necessary progress 
inexorably crushes with its iron heel a nation that is no longer strong enough to 
maintain its position among equal nations, it would nevertheless be inhuman and 
barbaric to feel no sympathy when one observes the long suffering of such a people, 
and I am far from harbouring such callous thoughts." (God will not fail to reward you 
for this, noble Jordan!) "But it is one thing to be moved by a tragedy, and quite 
another to attempt to undo this tragedy. It is precisely the fact that the hero succumbs 
to iron necessity that turns his fate into true tragedy and, trying to interfere with the 
course of destiny and out of human considerations attempting to stay the revolving 
wheels of history and turn them back once more, is to expose oneself to the danger of 
being crushed by them. The desire to restore Poland simply because her ruin justly 
fills us with sorrow, is, to my mind, imbecile sentimentality!" 
Small mishaps of life.— Ed. 

=====第393页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 363 
What an abundance of ideas! What profound wisdom! What 
stirring language! Thus speaks the world-historical standpoint, once 
he has corrected the shorthand reports of his speeches. 
The Poles have the choice; if they want to stage a "true tragedy" 
they have to submit humbly to being destroyed by the iron heel and 
the revolving wheels of history and say to Nicholas: Thy will be 
done! If, however, they want to rebel and, for a change, try to use 
the "iron heel of history" to crush their oppressors, then there is 
no "true tragedy", and Herr Wilhelm Jordan of Berlin can 
no longer take any interest in them. Thus speaks the world-
historical standpoint whose aesthetic knowledge stems from Profes­
sor Rosenkranz. 
What was the inexorable, the iron necessity which has temporarily 
destroyed Poland? It was the decline of the noblemen's democracy 
based on serfdom, that is the development of a big aristocracy within 
the nobility. This was a step forward, as it was the only way out of the 
antiquated noblemen's democracy. What was the result? The iron 
heel of history, i.e. the three Eastern autocrats, crushed Poland. The 
aristocracy was compelled to enter into an alliance with foreign 
states,  in order to cope with the noblemen's democracy. The Polish 
aristocracy until recently, and partially even up to the present, 
remained the faithful ally of Poland's oppressors. 
What is the reason for the inexorable, the iron necessity for 
Poland's liberation? It is the fact that the rule of the aristocracy in 
Poland, which has continued, since 1815, at least in Posen and 
Galicia, and to some extent even in Russian Poland, is today just as 
antiquated and hollow as was the democracy of the lower nobility 
in 1772. It is the fact that the establishment of a form of agrarian 
democracy has become vital to Poland, not only politically but also 
socially; the fact that agriculture, the source of existence of the 
Polish people, will be ruined, if the peasants who are serfs or liable 
to labour services, do not become free landowners, and the fact 
that an agrarian revolution cannot possibly be carried through 
without simultaneously winning a national existence and taking 
possession of the Baltic coast and the estuaries of the Polish 
rivers. 
And Herr Jordan of Berlin calls this attempting to stay the 
revolving wheels of history and trying to turn them back once 
more! 
It is true that the old Poland of the noblemen's democracy died and 
was buried long since, and only Herr Jordan can expect that anyone 
wants to nullify the "true tragedy" of this Poland, but the "hero" of 
this tragedy has produced a strapping son, and many a foppish 

=====第394页=====
364 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Berlin literary man may indeed shudder at the thought of making 
his closer acquaintance. This son, who is still only preparing to act 
out his drama and to put his shoulder to the "revolving wheels of 
history", but who is bound to achieve success, this son is the Poland 
of the peasant democracy. 
Some stale literary flourishes, a little imitated contempt of the 
world—which in Hegel was a sign of audacity, but becomes a cheap 
and nonsensical platitude in Herr Jordan—in short a sample of the 
bell and cannon, "sound and fury" 3 expressed in inadequate 
sentences and, in addition, incredible confusion and ignorance of 
quite ordinary historical circumstances — this is what the world-
historical standpoint amounts to. 
Long live the world-historical standpoint and its comprehended 
world! 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 90, August 31, 1848] 
Cologne, August 26. The second day of battle provides an even 
grander picture than the first. True, we miss Herr Wilhelm Jordan 
of Berlin, whose lips captivated the hearts of all who heard him, but 
let us be modest, a Radowitz, Wartensleben, Kerst and Rodomont-
Lichnowski are not to be despised. 
Herr Radowitz mounts the rostrum first. The speech of the leader 
of the Right is short, firm and calculated. No more declamation than 
necessary. Wrong premises, but concise rapid conclusions based on 
these premises. An appeal to the fear of the Right. Cold-blooded 
certainty of success which banks on the cowardice of the majority. 
Profound contempt for the entire Assembly, for the Right as well as 
the Left. These are the outlines of the short speech delivered by 
Herr Radowitz, and we understand very well the effect these few icy 
and unostentatious words were bound to produce in an assembly 
used to hearing the most pompous and shallow rhetorical exercises. 
Herr Wilhelm Jordan of Berlin would have been delighted, if with 
his entire "comprehended" and not comprehended world of images 
he had produced a tenth of the effect Herr Radowitz produced with 
his short and, basically, also quite superficial speech. 
Herr Radowitz is not a man of "character", not a steadfast worthy, 
but he is a person with clear-cut, distinct traits; one needs only to 
read one of his speeches to know him thoroughly. 
Goethe, Faust, Erster Teil, "Marthens Garten".— Ed. 

=====第395页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 365 
We have.never coveted the honour of being an organ of any 
particular group of the parliamentary Left. On the contrary, because 
of the various different elements from which the democratic party 
has been formed in Germany, we have considered it essential to keep 
an especially close watch on the democrats. In view of the lack of 
energy, of decision, of talent and of knowledge we have encountered 
among the leaders, with a few exceptions, of all parties, we are 
pleased that Herr Radowitz is at least a worthy opponent. 
Herr Radowitz is followed by Herr Schuselka. In spite of all 
previous warnings, he nevertheless makes a touching appeal to the 
heart. An immensely long-winded discourse, interspersed with a few 
historical arguments and occasionally some Austrian common sense. 
On the whole, it has a wearisome effect. 
Herr Schuselka has gone to Vienna, having been elected a member 
of the Imperial Diet which meets in that city. This is the right place 
for him. If in Frankfurt he sat on the Left, there he will find 
himself in the Centre. If in Frankfurt he had some influence, his 
first speech in Vienna will prove a failure. This is the fate of all 
literary and philosophical great pot-house politicians, who use 
the revolution only to improve their own position—if for a moment 
they are placed on really revolutionary ground, they disappear at 
once. 
The ci-devant Count von Wartensleben follows. Herr Wartensleben 
steps forth as a portly, honest man overflowing with benevolence, 
who tells anecdotes about his march as a member of the army reserve 
to the Polish frontier in 1830, he then turns into Sancho Panza and 
speaks in proverbs to the Poles, e.g. a bird in the hand is worth two in 
the bush, and, at the same time, he quite innocently manages to slip 
in the following perfidious remark: 
"What is the reason that even Polish officials were not prepared to take over the 
reorganisation of the part that was to be ceded? I fear they are themselves afraid, they 
feel that they are not yet advanced enough to be able to organise the population in an 
orderly manner, and consequently merely pretend that it is Polish patriotism which 
prevents them from making even the initial preparations for a happy resurrection!" 
In other words, the Poles have, for eighty years, been continuously 
fighting and sacrificing their lives and property for a cause which 
they themselves regard as impossible and absurd. 
In conclusion Herr Wartensleben is in agreement with Herr 
Radowitz. 
Mr. Janiszewski from Posen, a member of the Posen National 
Committee, mounts the rostrum. 
Mr. Janiszewski's speech is the first piece of truly parliamentary 
eloquence to be delivered from the rostrum of St. Paul's Church. At 

=====第396页=====
366 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
last we hear a speaker who does not simply try to win the approval of 
the hall, but whose language is marked by true dynamic passion, and 
who,  for this reason, produces an effect quite different from that 
produced by any of the preceding speakers. Blum's appeal to the 
conscience of the Assembly, Jordan's cheap bombast, Radowitz's cold 
logic,  Schuselka's genial prolixity, all, without exception, sink into 
insignificance by the side of this Pole who fights for the existence 
of his nation and demands the restoration of his legitimate rights. 
Janiszewski speaks in an impassioned and forceful way, but without 
declamation. He merely reports facts with the justified indignation, 
without which a correct description of such facts is impossible and 
which is doubly justified after the shameless misrepresentations 
made earlier in the debate. His speech, which in fact constitutes the 
core of the debate, refutes all earlier attacks against the Poles, makes 
amends for the mistakes of the supporters of the Poles, leads the 
debate back to the only real and just basis, and deprives speakers of 
the Right who are to follow of the most high-sounding arguments in 
advance. 
231 
"You have swallowed the Poles, but, by God, you shall not digest them!" 
This striking summary of Janiszewski's speech will endure, as will 
also the pride with which he replies to the begging speeches of the 
supporters of the Poles: 
"I do not come to you as a beggar, I come relying on my legitimate right; I do not 
ask for sympathy but only for justice." 
Mr. Janiszewski is followed by Herr Kerst, a head-master from 
Posen. The Pole fighting for the existence and the social and political 
freedom of his people is followed by a Prussian schoolmaster who 
has immigrated to Posen and is fighting for his salary. The fine 
passionate indignation of the oppressed is followed by the trite 
impudence of the bureaucrat who lives on oppression. 
The partition of Poland "which today is called a disgrace" was at 
the time "a quite ordinary event". 
"The right of peoples to separate according to nationality is a brand-new right 
recognised nowhere.... It is only actual  possession  which matters in politics." 
These are a few of the pithy expressions on which Herr Kerst 
bases his arguments. They are followed by the most clumsy contra­
dictions: 
"As a result of the acquisition of Posen, a piece of land has been incorporated into 
Germany which is indeed predominantly Polish", and a little later: "As far as the 
Polish part of Posen is concerned, it has not asked to be joined to Germany and, as far 
as I know, you, gentlemen, do not intend to admit this part against its will!" 

=====第397页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 367 
In this connection he gives statistical data about the population 
ratio,  data which correspond to the famous survey of the "Netze 
brethren", according to which only those are regarded as Poles who 
do not speak any German, and all those are deemed Germans 
who speak a litde broken German. Finally comes a most artificial 
calculation, by which he proves that the minority that voted for 
joining Germany, when the vote was taken in the Posen Provincial 
Diet — a minority of 17 to 26 — was really a majority.; 
"It is true that under the Provincial Law there must be a majority of /3 to pass 
resolutions. Now, it is true that 17 is not quite /3 of 26, but the missing fraction is so 
small that over such a serious question it cannot really be taken into consideration."!! 
Thus,  if the minority is 2/3  of the majority, then it is "under the 
Provincial Law" a majority! The old Prussians will greatly honour 
Herr Kerst for this discovery.— But in fact the position is this — in 
order to make an application, 2/3 must vote for it. Admission into the 
German Confederation was such an application. Application for 
admission was therefore only legal if 2/3 of the Assembly, i.e. 2/3 of the 
43 who took part in the division, voted for it. But, instead, almost 2/s 
voted against it. But what does it matter? For 17 is almost "2/3 of 43"! 
It is not surprising that the Poles are not so well "educated" as are 
the citizens of the " Staat der Intelligenz" a if this intelligent state sends 
them teachers who are such expert arithmeticians. 
Herr Clemens from Bonn makes the correct observation that the 
Prussian Government was not interested in the Germanisation of 
Posen but in its Prussianisation, and compares the attempts to 
Prussianise Posen with similar attempts in the Rhineland. 
Herr Ostendorf of Soest, the son of red soil, b reads from a 
compendium of political platitudes and twaddle, he indulges in 
possibilities, probabilities and conjectures, jumping from one subject 
to another, from Herr Jordan to the French, from the red republic 
to the redskins of North America, and puts the Poles on a par with 
them, and the "Netze brethren" on a par with the Yankees. An 
audacious comparison worthy of the red soil! Imagine Herr Kerst, 
Herr Senff and Herr Goeden as backwoodsmen in a log hut with 
shotgun and spade—what a priceless comedy! 
Herr Franz Schmidt from Löwenberg mounts the rostrum. He 
speaks calmly and unostentatiously. This is all the more commend­
able since Herr Schmidt belongs to a profession which is usually 
a See G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie. Vorrede, 
gesprochen zu Heidelberg den 28sten Oktober 1816,  note.— Ed. 
b Westphalia.—Ed. 
14-3447 

=====第398页=====
368 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
excessively fond of declamation, i.e. the German Catholic priest­
hood. Herr Schmidt's speech, after that of Janiszewski, is certainly 
the best of the whole debate, because it is the most convincing and 
best informed. Herr Schmidt demonstrates that the committee's 
display of learning (the content of which we have already examined*) 
hides abysmal ignorance of actual conditions. Herr Schmidt, who has 
lived for many years in the Grand Duchy of Posen, shows that even 
with regard to this small district, which he knows in great detail, the 
committee has made the crudest blunders. He shows that the 
committee has failed to give the Assembly adequate information 
about any of the decisive questions and has even called upon the 
Assembly to make decisions at random without any factual data or 
any knowledge of the matter. He demands in the first place 
information about the actual state of affairs. He proves that the 
proposals of the committee are incompatible with their premises. He 
quotes Flottwell's memorandum and calls upon Flottwell, who is also 
present as a deputy, to make a statement should the document not be 
genuine. He finally makes public the fact that the "Netze brethren" 
came to Gagern and, by false news about an alleged uprising in 
Posen, tried to persuade him to bring the debate to a rapid close. 
True,  Gagern denied this, but Herr Kerst has loudly boasted of it. 
The majority has taken revenge on Herr Schmidt for his bold 
speech by seeing to it that the speech was falsified in the stenographic 
reports. Herr Schmidt himself three times rectified the nonsense 
inserted in one passage, but it was nevertheless printed. Table-
banging against Schlöffel, b crude violence against Brentano 232 and 
falsification against Schmidt—the gendemen of the Right are indeed 
subde critics! 
Herr Lichnowski concludes the sitting, but we shall save this friend 
of ours for the next article; one should not act precipitately when 
dealing with a speaker of Herr Lichnowski's calibre! 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 91, September 1, 1848] 
Cologne, August 31. The bel-homme of the Assembly, the German 
Bayard, the knight without fear and without reproach, the ex-Prince 
(Paragraph 6 of the Fundamental Rights283) von Lichnowski mounts 
the rostrum with chivalrously courteous propriety and a self-satisfied 
smile. With the pure accents of a Prussian lieutenant and with 
a See this volume, pp. 337-49.—Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 18.— Ed. 

=====第399页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 369 
disdainful nonchalance, he divests himself of the few disconnected 
thoughts he has to communicate to the Assembly. 
The handsome knight is definitely a necessary element in this 
debate. If there is anyone to whom Herr Goeden, Herr Senff and 
Herr Kerst have still not demonstrated the worth of the German 
Poles sufficiently clearly, the example of the knight Lichnowski will 
show him what a disgusting phenomenon — despite the comely 
figure —  is the Prussianised Slav. Herr Lichnowski and the German 
Poles are kindred spirits; by his mere appearance on the rostrum, 
Herr Lichnowski makes the dossier more complete. The  slachcic* 
from Upper Silesia who has been transformed into a Prussian squire 
from the backwoods provides a living example of what the loving 
Prussian Government intends to do with the nobility of Posen. Herr 
Lichnowski, despite all his protestations, is not a German, he is a 
"reorganised" Pole; he does not speak German, he speaks Prussian. 
Herr Lichnowski begins with the assertion that he feels the 
most chivalrous sympathy for the Poles, he pays compliments to 
Mr. Janiszewski, he upholds the Poles' claim to "the great poetry of 
martyrdom", and then he suddenly makes an about turn and asks: 
Why has this sympathy waned? Because "the Poles fought in the first 
line at the barricades" in all insurrections and revolutions! This is 
indeed a crime that will no longer be committed once the Poles are 
"reorganised". Incidentally, we can give Herr Lichnowski the 
reassuring information that even among the "Polish emigrants" and 
even among the Polish nobility in exile who, according to Herr 
Lichnowski, have sunk so low, there are people who have remained 
entirely uncontaminated by any contact with the barricades. 
Now follows an amusing scene. 
Lichnowski: "The gentlemen of the Left, who trample under foot documents that 
have turned yellow with age, have, in a conspicuous way, evoked historical rights. 
There is no justification for stressing one date as against another in the interest of the 
Polish cause. With regard to historical right there does not exist no date." (Loud 
laughter on the Left.) 
"With regard to historical right there does not exist no date." (Loud laughter on 
the Left.) 
President: "Gentlemen, allow the speaker to finish the sentence, do not interrupt 
him." 
Lichnowski: "Historical right does not have no date." (Laughter on the Left.) 
President: "Please do not interrupt the speaker, silence, please!" (Agitation.) 
Lichnowski: "As regards historical right, no date exists" (cheers and hilarity on the 
Left) "which could vindicate a greater degree of right than any earlier date!" 
A Polish nobleman.— Ed. 
This ungrammatical phrase of Lichnowski's is used several times by Engels in 
this series of articles.—Ed. 
14* 

=====第400页=====
370 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Were we not justified in saying that the noble knight speaks not 
German, but Prussian? 
The historical right which "does not have no date" encounters a 
formidable adversary in our noble paladin. 
"If we go further back into history, we find" (in Posen) "many districts which were 
Silesian and German; if we go back still further, we reach the time when Leipzig and 
Dresden were built by Slavs, and we then arrive at Tacitus, and God only knows, 
where the gentlemen would lead us if we were to broach this subject." 
The world must be in a bad way. The estates of the Prussian 
knights must be mortgaged beyond redemption, the pressure of 
their Jewish creditors must have become formidable, their promis­
sory notes must be coming due for payment in rapid succession, 
public auction, imprisonment, dismissal from service owing to 
thoughdessly incurred debts—all these horrors of extreme 
pecuniary distress must threaten the Prussian knights with inevitable 
ruin, for things to have come to such a pass that a Lichnowski attacks 
the same historical right in whose defence he won his spurs at Don 
Carlos' round table.234 
True,  only God knows whither the bailiffs would convey the lean 
knights3 if we were to broach the subject of the historical right 
governing debts! Yet, are these debts not their best quality and the 
only one that can serve the Prussian paladins as an excuse? 
The bel-homme then comes to his subject and observes that, when 
speaking to the German Poles, one should not "paint a vague picture 
of a remote and obscure future Poland" (!); he thinks the Poles 
would not be satisfied with Posen: ' 
"If I had the honour to be a Pole, I would every morning and every evening ponder 
on the re-establishment of the old Polish kingdom." 
But since Herr Lichnowski does not "have the honour", since he is 
merely a reorganised Pole of Upper Silesia [Wasserpolack], 235 he 
ponders on quite different and less patriotic matters "every morning 
and every evening." 
"To be frank, I must say that a few hundred thousand Poles must become 
Germans, which, to tell the truth, would not, under the present conditions, be a 
misfortune for them either." 
On the contrary, how nice it would be if the Prussian Government 
laid out a new plantation to grow still more of the wood from which 
the Lichnowskis are made. 
"The lean knights" (die magere Ritterschaft) is from Heinrich Heine's poem 
Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput VIII.— Ed. 

=====第401页=====
Trie Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 371 
The moustache-twirling knight continues to talk for some time in 
the same pleasantly nonchalant manner, which is in the main 
intended for the ladies in the gallery, but is still good enough for the 
Assembly as well, and then concludes: 
"I have nothing more to say. It is now up to you to decide whether to absorb five 
hundred thousand Germans or to turn them away ... but in that case, you will cross out 
the poem of our old national bard: 'As far as the German language rings, and God in 
Heaven his poem sings.'3 Strike out this poem!" 
It is indeed bad that, when old Arndt wrote his poem, he did not 
think of the Polish Jews and their German. But fortunately, we have 
our Upper Silesian paladin. Who is not aware of the nobility's old 
obligations to the Jews, obligations that have become respectable in 
the course of centuries? What the old plebeian omitted, Lichnowski, 
the knight, remembers. 
As far as a Polish Jew jabbers of German a spate, 
Lends at high interest, falsifies money and weight 
— that is the extent of Herr Lichnowski's fatherland! 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 93, September 3, 1848] 
Cologne, September 2. The third day of the debate revealed a 
general weariness. The same arguments are repeated without any 
improvement and the stenographic report would have been dull 
enough to send one to sleep if the first honourable speaker, Citizen 
Arnold Ruge, had not produced his rich stock of new reasons. 
Citizen Ruge moreover [knows] his merits better than anyone else. 
He promises: 
"I will apply all the passion I possess and all my knowledge." 
He tables a motion; this is, however, not an ordinary motion, not a 
motion in general, but the only correct motion, the true motion, the 
absolute motion: 
"There is nothing  else  that can  be proposed  and that is admissible. One can choose to do 
something else, gentlemen, for man is able to deviate from the correct path. By 
deviating from what is right, man shows that he has free will ... but what is right does 
not thereby cease to be right. In our case, my motion represents the only right thing that 
can be done." 
From Ernst Moritz Arndt's poem "Des Deutschen Vaterland". — Ed. 

=====第402页=====
372 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
(In this case therefore, Citizen Ruge sacrifices his "free will" to 
what is "right".) 
Let us closer examine the passion, the knowledge and the only 
right thing of Citizen Ruge. 
"The destruction of Poland is a shameful injustice because it has stifled the 
remarkable development of a nation that had rendered great services to the European 
family of nations and in a resplendent way had developed chivalry, one of the aspects 
of medieval life. The republic of nobles was prevented by despotism from bringing 
about its own internal (!) abolition, which would have been possible by means of the 
Constitution that had been prepared during the revolutionary period." 
The people in Southern France were, in the Middle Ages, no 
closer to the people in Northern France than the Poles are now to the 
Russians. In the Middle Ages, the Southern French, commonly 
called Provencals, achieved not only a "remarkable development", 
they even led European development. They were the first modern 
nation to have a literary language. Their poetry was regarded by all 
Romance peoples, and even by the Germans and the English, as a 
model unequalled at the time. They vied with the Castilians, the 
Northern Frenchmen and the English Normans in the perfection of 
feudal chivalry and were equal to the Italians in industry and 
commerce. They did not only develop "one aspect of medieval life" 
"in a resplendent way", they even produced a flash of the ancient 
Hellenic culture in the darkest Middle Ages. The people from 
Southern France have, therefore, rendered not only great, but 
immeasurable "services to the European family of nations". 
Nevertheless, like the Poles, they were first partitioned between 
Northern France and England and later completely subjugated by 
the Northern French. From the wars against the Albigenses236 to 
Louis XI, the Northern French — who were culturally just as inferior 
to their Southern neighbours as the Russians to the Poles — waged 
continuous wars of conquest against the Southern French and, 
finally, conquered the whole country. The Southern French 
"republic of nobles" (this designation is quite correct for its heyday) 
"was prevented by despotism" (Louis XI) "from bringing about its 
own internal abolition", which would have been certainly no less 
possible there, owing to the rise of the middle class in the towns, than 
it would have been in the Polish case by means of the Constitution of 
1791. 
The Southern French fought against their oppressors for 
centuries — but historical development was inexorable. After a 
struggle lasting three centuries, their beautiful language was 
reduced to a patois and they themselves were turned into 
Frenchmen. Northern French despotism ruled over Southern 

=====第403页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 373 
France for three hundred years and, only then, did the Northern 
French make amends for their oppressive rule — by destroying the 
last vestiges of Southern French independence. The Constituent 
Assembly divided up the independent provinces, and it was the iron 
fist of the Convention that first turned the inhabitants of Southern 
France into Frenchmen and, in reparation for their nationality, gave 
them democracy. What Citizen Ruge says about the Poles is, 
however, quite literally a fitting description of the three hundred 
years of oppression: 
"Russia's despotism has not liberated the Poles; the annihilation of the Polish 
nobility and the exile of so many noble families from Poland has not established 
democracy or humane conditions of life in Russia." 
But the subjugation of Southern France by the Northern French 
has never been called "shameful injustice". What is the reason, 
Citizen Ruge? Either the subjugation of Southern France is a 
shameful injustice, or the subjugation of Poland is not a shameful 
injustice. It is up to Citizen Ruge to decide. 
What is the difference between the Poles and the people of 
Southern France? Why was Southern France like inert ballast taken 
in tow by the Frenchmen from the North, even as far as the total 
obliteration of its nationality, whereas the Poles have every prospect 
of finding themselves very soon in the van of all Slav nationalities? 
As a result of social conditions which we cannot explain in detail 
here,  Southern France became the reactionary section of France. Its 
opposition to Northern France very soon became opposition to the 
progressive classes in the whole of France. It became the principal 
support of feudalism and has remained the backbone of the French 
counter-revolution up to now. 
Poland, on the other hand, became a revolutionary part of Russia, 
Austria and Prussia, as a result of social conditions which we 
examined earlier (No. 81).a Its opposition to its oppressors was, at the 
same time, opposition to the big aristocracy in Poland  itself.  Even the 
nobility, which was in part still feudal, supported the democratic-
agrarian revolution with quite unprecedented selflessness. Poland 
had already become the focus of East-European democracy, when 
Germany was still floundering in the ideology of the most insipid 
constitutionalism and high-flown philosophy. 
This,  and not the resplendent development of chivalry which 
belongs to the past, guarantees the restoration of Poland and makes 
it inevitable. 
a See this volume, pp. 350-53.— Ed. 

=====第404页=====
374 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
But Herr Rüge has also a second reason for the necessity of an 
independent Poland within the "European family of nations". 
"The violence which has been done to the Poles has scattered them throughout 
Europe and they are everywhere giving vent to their anger over the injustice they 
suffered ... the Polish spirit has been humanised and purified in France and in 
Germany (!?): the Polish emigration constitutes propagation of freedom" (No. 1). "The 
Slavs have become capable of entering the great European family of nations" (the 
"family" is unavoidable!) "for ... their emigration has become the true apostolate of 
freedom" (No. 2). "The entire Russian army (!!) has been infected with modern ideas 
by the Poles, these  apostles  of freedom" (No. 3.). "I respect the forthright conviction of 
the Poles, which they have demonstrated throughout Europe, to make propaganda for 
freedom with all their might" (No. 4). "Throughout the annais of history they will be 
honoured for being pioneers" (No. 5), "wherever they have acted as pioneers (!!!).... The 
Poles are the element of freedom" (No. 6), "which has been tossed into Slavdom; they 
have led the Slav Congress in Prague towards freedom" (No. 7), "they have been 
active in France, Russia and Germany. The Poles consequently constitute an effective 
element in present-day culture as well, they are effective, and because they are 
effective, because they are necessary, they are by no means dead." 
Citizen Ruge has to prove that the Poles are, first, necessary, and 
second, not dead. He does this by saying: "Because they are 
necessary, they are by no means dead." 
If one removes a few words—Poles, element, freedom, propagan­
da, culture, apostolate—from the above lengthy passage, in which 
one and the same idea is repeated seven times, one can see what 
remains of the whole bombastic statement. 
Citizen Ruge has to prove that the restoration of Poland is 
necessary. He proves this in the following way: The Poles are not 
dead, on the contrary they are very much alive, they are effective, 
they are the apostles of freedom in the whole of Europe. What is the 
reason for this? The violence, the shameful injustice perpetrated on 
them, has scattered them all over Europe, where they gave vent to 
their anger over the injustice they suffered, to their just revolution­
ary anger. This anger has been "purified" during their exile, and 
this purified anger has enabled them to become apostles of freedom 
and has placed them "first at the barricades". What follows from 
this? Wipe out the shameful injustice, the violence done, restore 
Poland, and the "anger" ceases, in can no longer be purified, the 
Poles go home and cease to be "apostles of freedom". If it was only 
the "anger over the injustice they suffered" that turned the Poles 
into revolutionaries, then the removal of the injustice will turn them 
into reactionaries. If the only thing that keeps the Poles alive is 
reaction to oppression, then remove oppression and they will be 
dead. 
Citizen Ruge therefore proves the exact opposite of what he wants 

=====第405页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 375 
to prove. His arguments show that, in the interest of freedom and of 
the European family of nations, Poland must not be re-established. 
Incidentally, the fact that, when discussing Poland, Citizen Ruge 
mentions only the emigrants and sees only emigrants at the 
barricades, throws a strange light on his "knowledge". We certainly 
do not want to hurt the feelings of the Polish emigrants, who have 
proved their energy and courage on the battlefield and during 
eighteen years of conspiratorial activity in the interests of Poland. 
But we cannot deny that those who are well acquainted with the 
Polish emigrants know that they are far from being as apostolically 
freedom-loving and as keen on barricade fighting as they are 
depicted by Citizen Ruge who, in good faith, repeats ex-Prince 
Lichnowski's assertions. The Polish emigrants have steadfastly 
persevered, have endured much and have worked hard for the 
restoration of Poland. But have the Poles within Poland done less, 
have they not braved greater dangers, have they not risked 
incarceration in Moabit and Spielberg, the knout and Siberian mines, 
Galician butcheries 238 and Prussian shrapnel? But all this does not 
exist for Herr Ruge. He has not noticed either that the Poles who did 
not emigrate, have absorbed much more of the general European 
culture and have understood the needs of Poland, where they have 
lived all the time, much better than almost all the emigrants apart 
from Lelewel and Mieroslawski. All intelligent thinking which exists 
in Poland, or to use Ruge's expression, which "has come to the Poles 
and upon the Poles", is attributed by Citizen Ruge to their stay 
abroad. In No. [81] a we have shown that the Poles did not have to go 
either to the French political dreamers — who failed in February, 
thanks to their own phrases — or to the profound German 
ideologists — who have not yet been able to find an opportunity to 
fail — in the quest for an understanding of their country's needs; and 
that Poland itself was the best school to gain an understanding of 
what Poland needs. It is the great merit of the Poles that they were 
the first to realise and to propagate the fact that, for all Slav nations, 
the only possible form of liberation is agrarian democracy and not, as 
Citizen Ruge imagines, that the Poles "introduced into Poland and 
Russia" general phrases, such as "the great idea of political freedom, 
which matured in France, and even (!) the philosophy which 
emerged in Germany" (and in which Herr Ruge was submerged). 
After this speech by Citizen Ruge, the Poles can exclaim: God 
protect us from our friends and we will protect ourselves from our 
enemies! But it has always been the greatest misfortune of the Poles 
a See this volume, pp. 350-53.— Ed. 

=====第406页=====
376 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
that their non-Polish friends defend them with the worst possible 
arguments. 
It certainly speaks in favour of the Left in Frankfurt that, apart 
from a few exceptions, the deputies of the Left were perfectly 
delighted with Citizen Ruge's speech on Poland, a speech which 
contained the following passage: 
"Whether we have in mind democratic monarchy, democratised monarchy (!) or 
pure democracy, let us not quarrel about this; on the whole we want the same 
thing—freedom, national freedom, and rule of the people!" 
Are we expected to be enthusiastic about a Left that allows itself to 
be carried away when someone says that it wants "on the whole the 
same thing" as the Right, as Herr Radowitz, Herr Lichnowski, Herr 
Vincke and all the other fat or lean knights? A Left whose head has 
been turned with rapture and which forgets everything as soon as it 
hears a few empty slogans, such as "national freedom" and "rule of 
the people"? 
But let us leave the Left and return to Citizen Ruge. 
"So far, no revolution that swept the world was greater than the revolution of 
1848." 
"As regards its principles, it is the most humane revolution" for 
these principles have arisen as a result of the glossing over of the 
most contradictory interests. 
"It is the most humane revolution as regards its decrees and 
proclamations", for they represent a compendium of philanthropi-
cal fantasies and sentimental phrases about fraternity produced by 
all the feather-heads of Europe. 
"It is the most humane revolution as regards its actuality", that is 
the massacres and barbarities in Posen, the murderous incendiarism 
of Radetzky, the ferocious cruelties committed in Paris by the victors 
of June, the butcheries in Cracow and Prague, the rule of brutal 
soldiery everywhere—in short, all the outrages which constitute the 
"actuality" of this revolution today, September 1, 1848, and which 
have spilled more blood in four months than was spilled in 1793 and 
1794 taken together. 
The "humane" Citizen Ruge! 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 96, September 7, 1848] 
Cologne, September 6. We have followed the historical investiga­
tions about the necessity of the existence of Poland undertaken by 
the "humane" Citizen Ruge. Citizen Ruge has spoken so far about 

=====第407页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 377 
the bad past, the period of despotism, he has edited the events of 
irrationalism; he comes now to the present, to the glorious year 1848, 
to the revolution, he is now on his home ground, he now edits the 
"rationale of events".239 
"How can the emancipation of Poland be brought about? It can be brought about 
by agreements in which the two great civilised nations of Europe participate; they, 
together with Germany, a liberated Germany, are  therefore  bound to form a new Triple 
Alliance, for they think the same way and, on the whole, want the same thing." 
Here, in one bold passage, we have the whole rationale of events in 
foreign policy—alliance between Germany, France and Britain, all 
three of whom "think the same way and, on the whole, want the 
same thing", a new Rütli Federation 240 concluded by the three 
modern Swiss—Cavaignac, Leiningen and John Russell! It is true 
that France and Germany, with God's help, have meanwhile again 
retrogressed so far that as regards general political principles their 
governments "think" more or less "the same way" as official circles 
in Britain, that stable counter-revolutionary rock surrounded by the 
sea. 
But the countries do not only "think" the same way, they "also, on 
the whole, want the same thing". Germany wants Schleswig, and 
Britain does not want to cede it to her; Germany wants protective 
tariffs, and Britain wants free trade; Germany wants unity, and 
Britain wants to see her disunited; Germany wants to be indepen­
dent, and Britain seeks to subjugate her industrially—but what does 
that matter? "On the whole" they nevertheless want "the same 
thing"! And as to France, France issues tariff laws directed against 
Germany and France's Minister Bastide sneers at schoolmaster 
Raumer, who represents Germany there — hence it is obvious 
that France "on the whole" wants "the same thing" as Germany! 
Indeed, Britain and France prove in the most striking manner that 
they want the same thing as Germany, by threatening her with war, 
Britain on account of Schleswig and France on account of Lom-
bardy! 
Citizen Ruge is ideologically naive enough to believe that nations 
which have certain political ideas in common, would, just for that 
reason, conclude an alliance. Altogether, Citizen Ruge's political 
palette has only two colours—black and white, slavery and freedom. 
The world for him is divided into two great camps—into civilised 
nations and barbarians, freemen and serfs. The boundary line of 
freedom, which six months ago was situated on the other side of the 
Rhine, now coincides with the Russian frontier, and this advance is 
called the revolution of 1848. It is in this confused manner that the 

=====第408页=====
378 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
present movement is reflected in Citizen Ruge's head. That is how he 
translates the battle-cry of those who fought at the barricades in 
February and March into Pomeranian.3 
If we translate it from the Pomeranian back into German, we find 
that the three civilised nations, the three free peoples, are those 
where bourgeois rule exists in various forms and at various stages 
of development, whereas the "slaves and serfs" are peoples 
ruled by patriarchal and feudal absolutism. For Arnold Ruge, 
the faroucheh republican and democrat, freedom denotes the 
most ordinary "insipid" liberalism, the rule of the bourgeoisie, 
with perhaps some quasi-democratic forms — so that is the poodle's 
core!c 
Citizen Ruge argues that France, Britain and Germany must of 
course be allies, because the bourgeoisie rules in these countries. And 
if the objective interests of the three countries are diametrically 
opposed to one another, if free trade with Germany and France is an 
indispensable condition for the existence of the British bourgeoisie, 
if protective tariffs against Britain are an indispensable condition for 
the existence of the French and German bourgeoisie, if, in many 
respects, similar relations obtain between Germany and France, and 
if this Triple Alliance amounted, in practice, to the industrial 
subjugation of France and Germany? — "Narrow-minded egoism, 
mean mercenary minds," mutters Ruge, the Pomeranian thinker, 
into his blond beard. 
Herr Jordan spoke of the tragic irony of universal history. 
Citizen Ruge is a striking example of this. He, like the rest of the 
more or less ideological Left, sees his most cherished pet fantasies, 
his greatest mental efforts, wrecked by the class whom he represents. 
His philanthropically cosmopolitan project is wrecked by mean 
mercenary minds and he himself must, unknowingly and uninten­
tionally, represent precisely these mercenary minds in a more or less 
ideologically distorted fashion. The ideologist proposes, the shop­
keeper disposes. Tragic irony of universal history! 
Citizen Ruge then says that France "has declared that, though the 
treaties of 1815 241 have been torn up, she is nevertheless willing to 
recognise the territorial division as it exists at present". "This is quite 
right" for Citizen Ruge has found something in Lamartine's 
manifesto,242 which so far nobody tried to find there — that is the 
Paraphrase from Heinrich Heine who spoke about Ruge as a man who knew 
"how to translate Hegel into Pomeranian".— Ed. 
Fierce, wild.— Ed. 
c "The poodle's core" (des Pudels Kern) — Goethe, Faust, Erster Teil, "Studier­
zimmer". — Ed. 

=====第409页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 379 
basis of a new international right. He explains this in the following 
way: 
"The new historical (!) right" (No. 1) "must proceed from this relationship with 
France. Historical right is the right of nations" (! No. 2). "In the case we are discussing 
(?), it is the new international right" (! No. 3). "This is the only correct interpretation of 
historical right" (!No. 4). "Any other interpretation of historical right" (!No. 5) "is 
absurd. There is no other international right" (!No. 6). "Historical right"(No. 7) "is the 
right" (at last!) "which is brought about  by history  and sanctioned  by time, since it" (which?) 
"annuls and tears up hitherto existing treaties and replaces them by new ones." 
In short, historical right — edits the rationale of events! 
Thus it is written, word for word, in the acts of the apostles of 
German unity, i.e. the stenographic reports of Frankfurt, page 1186, 
column one—and people complain that the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
criticises Herr Rüge by means of exclamation marks! But this dizzy 
gyrating dance of historical right and international right was, of 
course, bound to stun the worthy members of the Left, as they were 
bound to be filled with admiration when the philosopher from 
Pomerania called out to them with unshakeable certainty: 'Historical 
right is the right which is brought about by history and. sanctioned by 
time"  etc. 
"History" has indeed always "brought about" the exact opposite 
of what had been "sanctioned by time", and the sanction of "time" 
has always consisted in overturning that which had been "brought 
about by history". 
Citizen Ruge then tables the "only correct and admissible" motion: 
"To instruct the Central Authority, in concert with Britain and France, to prepare 
a congress for the restoration of a free and independent Poland; all powers concerned 
are to be invited to send their envoys to this congress." 
What upright, honest views! Lord John Russell and Eugène 
Cavaignac are to restore Poland. The English and French 
bourgeoisie are to threaten Russia with war so as to bring about the 
liberation of Poland, which at present is a matter of complete 
indifference to them! At this time of general confusion and disarray, 
when the effect of every piece of reassuring news causing shares to 
rise by 7 8 per cent is nullified by six disturbing blows, when industry 
is struggling against creeping bankruptcy, when commerce is 
stagnant, when the unemployed proletariat has to be supported 
by enormous sums of money to prevent it from taking a last 
desperate stand—at this moment, can the bourgeoisie of the three 
civilised nations be expected to create an additional difficulty? And 
what a difficulty! A war with Russia, which has been the closest ally of 
Britain since February! War with Russia, a war which, as everybody 
knows, would spell the downfall of the German and French 

=====第410页=====
380 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
bourgeoisie! To what advantage? None at all. This is indeed more 
than Pomeranian ingenuousness! 
But Citizen Ruge is absolutely confident that a "peaceful solution" 
of the Polish question is possible. This is getting better and better! 
And why? Because the point now is: 
"What the treaties of Vienna want must now be put into practice and really carried 
out.... The treaties of Vienna wanted to maintain the right of all nations against the 
great French nation ... they wanted the restoration of the German nation." 
Now it becomes clear why Herr Ruge "on the whole wants the 
same thing" as the Right. The Right also wants the treaties of Vienna 
carried out. 
The treaties of Vienna are the epitome of the great victory of 
reactionary Europe over revolutionary France. They are the classic 
form in which European reaction ruled for fifteen years during the 
Restoration period. They restore legitimacy, monarchy by divine 
right, feudal aristocracy, clerical rule, and patriarchal jurisdiction 
and administration. But since victory was won with the help of the 
English, German, Italian, Spanish and especially the French 
bourgeoisie,  concessions had also to be made to the bourgeoisie. While 
the sovereigns, aristocrats, priests and bureaucrats divided the rich 
spoils among themselves, the bourgeoisie was put off with promis­
sory notes drawn on the future, which were not honoured and which 
nobody had any intention of honouring. Instead of examining the 
real practical content of the treaties of Vienna, Herr Ruge assumes 
that these empty promises are their true content, and that 
reactionary practice is merely an improper misinterpretation! 
One must indeed be an astonishingly good-natured person to 
believe, after 33 years, after the revolutions of 1830 and 1848, that 
these promissory notes will still be paid and to imagine that the 
sentimental phrases in which the illusory promises of Vienna are 
wrapped up have still any meaning in the year 1848. 
Citizen Ruge appears as the Don Quixote of the treaties of 
Vienna. 
Finally, Citizen Ruge reveals a great secret to the Assembly — it is 
only the fact that the treaties of 1815 were broken in Cracow in 1846 
which caused the revolutions of 1848. Let this be a warning to all 
despots! 
To sum up, Citizen Ruge has not changed in any way since we last 
met him in the field of literature. He still uses the same phrases 
which he had learned by heart and repeated ever since he worked as 
the door-keeper of German philosophy at the Hallischen and 
Deutschen Jahrbücher; there is still the same confusion, the same 

=====第411页=====
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question 381 
jumble of views, the same lack of ideas, the same gift of presenting 
the most banal and nonsensical ideas in a pompous manner, the 
same lack of "knowledge", and, in particular, the same pretensions 
to the approbation of the German philistine, who has never heard 
the like in his life. 
Here we conclude our summary of the debate on Poland. To 
expect us to deal with Herr Low from Posen and the other great 
intellects that follow, is asking too much. 
The debate as a whole leaves a sad impression. So many long 
speeches and so little content, so litde knowledge of the subject and 
so little talent! The worst debate in the previous or the present 
French Chamber or in the British House of Commons contains more 
intelligence, more expert knowledge and more real content than this 
discussion, which lasted for three days and dealt with one of the most 
interesting subjects of modern politics. Everything could have been 
made of it, and the National Assembly simply turned it into political 
twaddle. 
There has indeed never and nowhere been an assembly like this! 
The results are well known.243  Three-quarters of Posen has been 
conquered but it has been conquered not by force, or "German 
industry" or the "plough", but by political twaddle, false statistics 
and timorous decisions. 
"You have swallowed the Poles, but, by God, you shall not digest 
them!"3 
Written by Engels between August 7 and 
September 6, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in full in English for the 
first time First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung Nos. 70, 73, 81, 82, 86, 90, 91, 93 
and 96, August 9, 12, 20, 22, 26 and 31, 
September 1, 3 and 7, 1848 
See this volume, p. 366.— Ed. 

=====第412页=====
382 
THE DANISH ARMISTICE AND HANSEMANN 
Cologne, August 10. We draw our readers' attention to our article 
on Denmark.3 The Danish newspapers have furnished us with some 
quite new disclosures about the behaviour of the "Government of 
Action" in the armistice affair.b  So, in one way or another, Herr 
Hansemann's secret transgressions are coming to light after all. 
Written by Engels on August 10, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 72, August 11, 1848 time 
See "Kopenhagen, 5. August", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 72, August 11, 
1848.—  Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 266-70 and 287.— Ed. 

=====第413页=====
383 
THE GERMAN CITIZENSHIP AND THE PRUSSIAN 
POLICE 
Cologne, August 11. It is well known how the Prussian army paid 
homage to German unity on August 6.244 The Prussian police must 
not lag behind the Prussian army. Never have there been in its 
opinion more German foreigners or foreign Germans in Prussia than 
since an indivisible German National Assembly, a German Imperial 
Regent3 and a German Imperial Government have been meeting in 
Frankfurt. 
Herr Geiger, acting Police Superintendent, whose accession to the 
throne was greeted by us earlier b with misgivings, seems to have 
received the special order to purge Cologne of German foreigners 
and to tolerate only Prussian subjects within the walls of the old 
imperial city. If he is consistent, who will save a person's right of 
domicile except the police, the army, the bureaucracy and the 
natives? Herr Geiger himself will not be missing among these "last  of 
the Mohicans". 
We shall report at a later time about the conflicts the editor-in-
chief of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Karl Marx, had with regard to 
the Prussian right of citizenship. 0 Today we are dealing with Herr 
Karl Schapper, a contributor and proof-reader of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. 
Herr Schapper has received an invitation to visit the Police 
Inspector of his district this morning. The Police Inspector informed 
him that due to an order of Herr Geiger, he would have to leave 
Cologne and the Prussian state by tomorrow because he is a 
Archduke John of Austria.— Ed. 
b See this volume, p. 178.— Ed. 
c Ibid., pp. 407-10.— Ed. 

=====第414页=====
384 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
foreigner. The Inspector informed him at the same time that he 
would extend the period by a week out of courtesy. 
Herr Schapper is not only a German but he is also a citizen of 
Nassau and he is equipped with a Nassau passport in optima forma. 3 
Herr Schapper resides at Cologne with his wife and three children. 
His crime consists of being a member of the Democratic Society and 
the Workers' Association 245 as well as being the proof-reader of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. These are, of course, three crimes all at 
once. 
"Every German  possesses  the general German citizenship," reads the 
first paragraph of the German Fundamental Rights246  which has 
already been approved. Herr Geiger seems to interpret this in such a 
way that every German has the right to be expelled from 37 German 
states.  Besides the legislation of the National Assembly, there is now 
Geiger's legislation! 
For Herr Hansemann, however, the Minister of action, we have a 
piece of advice: he may use police methods against deputies at his 
own discretion, but there is no playing around with the press. It can 
open the book of the bourgeois past and 
If you are after a litde amusement, 
You may go dancing, but I'll play the tune — 
no matter how many Geigers may threaten with their violins.' 
Written on August 11, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 73, August 12, 1848 time 
In all formality.— Ed. 
Mozart, The Marriage of Figaro, English version by Edward. J. Dent, Oxford 
University Press, London, 1937, Act I, Cavatina Figaro.— Ed. 
c Play on the words Geiger —the name of the Police Superintendent of 
Cologne — which literally translated means "violinist", and violine (derived from the 
French word violon meaning both "violin" and "prison").— Ed. 

=====第415页=====
385 
THE ITALIAN LIBERATION STRUGGLE 
AND THE CAUSE OF ITS PRESENT FAILURE 
With the same celerity with which they were expelled from 
Lombardy in March, the Austrians have now returned in triumph 
and have already entered Milan. 
The Italian people spared no sacrifice. They were prepared at the 
cost of life and property to complete the work they had begun and 
win their national independence. 
But this courage, enthusiasm and readiness to make sacrifices were 
nowhere matched by those who stood at the helm. Overtly or 
covertly, they did everything to use the means at their disposal, not 
for the liberation of the country from the harsh Austrian tyranny, 
but to paralyse the popular forces and, in effect, to restore the old 
conditions as soon as possible. 
The Pope,3 who was worked on more and more every day and won 
over by the Austrian and Jesuitical politicians, put all the obstacles in 
the way of the Mamiani Ministry which he, in conjunction with the 
"Blacks"b and the "Black-Yellows",c could find. The Ministry itself 
delivered highly patriotic speeches in both Chambers, but did not 
have the energy to carry out its good intentions. 
The Government of Tuscany distinguished itself by fine words, 
but even fewer deeds. But the arch-enemy of Italian liberty among 
the native princes was and remains Charles Albert. The Italians 
should have repeated and borne in mind every hour of the day the 
saying: "Heaven protect us from our friends, we will protect 
ourselves from our enemies!" They hardly needed to fear Ferdinand 
a Pius IX.— Ed. 
An allusion to the Jesuits.— Ed. 
c An allusion to the Austrians, whose colours were black and yellow.— Ed. 

=====第416页=====
386 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
of Bourbon, he was unmasked long ago. Charles Albert, on the other 
hand, let himself be acclaimed everywhere as "la spada d'ltalia" (the 
sword of Italy) and the hero whose rapier was Italy's best guarantee 
of freedom and independence. 
His emissaries went to all parts of Northern Italy portraying him as 
the only man who could and would save the country. To enable him 
to do this, however, it was necessary to set up a North Italian 
kingdom. Only this could give him the power required not only to 
oppose the Austrians but to drive them out of Italy. The ambition 
which had previously made him join forces with the Carbonari,248 
whom he afterwards betrayed, this ambition became more in­
flamed than ever and made him dream of a plenitude of power and 
magnificence before which the splendour of all the other Italian 
princes would very soon pale. He thought that he could appropriate 
the entire popular movement of 1848 and use it in the interests of his 
own miserable  self.  Filled with hatred and distrust of all truly liberal 
men, he surrounded himself with people more or less loyal to 
absolutism and inclined to encourage his royal ambitions. He placed 
at the head of the army generals whose intellectual superiority and 
political views he did not have to fear, but who neither enjoyed the 
confidence of the soldiers nor possessed the talent required to wage a 
successful war. He pompously called himself the "liberator" of Italy 
while making it a condition that those who were to be liberated 
accept his yoke. Seldom was a man so favoured by circumstances as 
he was. His greed, his desire to possess a great deal and if possible 
everything led in the end to his losing all that he had gained. So long 
as there was no firm decision that Lombardy would join Piedmont, 
so long as the possibility of a republican form of government still 
existed, he remained in his entrenchments and djd not move against 
the Austrians, although they were relatively weak at the time. He let 
Radetzky, d'Aspre, Weiden, and others seize the towns and 
fortresses of the Venetian provinces one by one and did not stir a 
finger. Only when Venice sought the refuge of his crown did he 
deign to give his help. The same applies to Parma and Modena. 
Radetzky meanwhile had mustered strength and made all prepara­
tions for an attack which, in view of the incompetence and blindness 
of Charles Albert and his generals, led to a decisive victory. The 
outcome is well known. Henceforth Italians can and will no longer 
entrust their liberation to a prince or king. On the contrary, in order 
to save themselves they must completely discard this useless "spada 
d'ltalia" as quickly as possible. If they had done this earlier, and had 
superannuated the King with his system and all the hangers-on, and 
had formed a democratic union, it is likely that by now there would 

=====第417页=====
The Italian Liberation Struggle and the Cause of Its Present Failure 387 
have been no more Austrians in Italy. Instead, the Italians not only 
bore all the hardships of a war waged with fury and barbarity by 
their enemies and suffered the heaviest sacrifices in vain, but were 
left defenceless to the thirst for vengeance of the Metternich-
Austrian reactionaries and their soldiery. Anyone reading Radetz-
ky's manifestos to the people of Lombardy and Weiden 's manifestos 
to the Roman legations will understand that to the Italians Attila and 
his Hun hordes would have appeared merciful angels. The reaction 
and restoration have triumphed. The Duke of Modena, 3 called "il 
carneficé" (the hangman), who loaned the Austrians  1,200,000  florins 
for war purposes, has returned as well. The people, in their 
magnanimity, have so often made a stick for their own back, that it is 
time they got wiser and learned something from their enemies. 
Although, during his previous reign, the Duke had imprisoned, 
hanged and shot thousands of people for their political convictions, 
the Modenese let him depart unmolested. Now he has returned to 
discharge his sanguinary princely office with redoubled zeal. 
The reaction and restoration have triumphed, but only for a time. 
The people are so deeply imbued with the revolutionary spirit that 
they cannot be held in check for long. Milan, Brescia and other towns 
showed in March what this spirit is capable of. The excessive 
suffering inflicted upon them will lead to a new rising. By taking into 
account the bitter experience of the past months, Italy will be able to 
avoid new delusions and to secure her independence under a single 
democratic banner. 
Written by Engels on August 11, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 73, August 12, 1848 
Francis V.— Ed. 

=====第418页=====
388 
CHARLES ALBERT'S BETRAYAL 
The newspapers of Turin, Genoa etc. are loudly complaining that 
the cause of Italy's freedom and independence has been betrayed by 
him and by those who up to the very last moment were repeatedly 
swearing under oath that they would win or die for Italy. What was 
earlier uttered only by a small handful of men—that Charles Albert 
is a traitor—is now loudly repeated day after day by the mass of the 
people and by all those newspapers that have not completely sold out 
to the perfidious King of Sardinia. This insight will later bear its 
fruit; this time, however, it has come too late. Since the battles of 
Goito and Mozambano249 it became more and more clear to many 
people as the days went by that the Sardinian was either plotting a 
betrayal or was totally incapable of carrying out the task that he has 
undertaken. He lapsed into complete inactivity and whatever was 
done was against all the rules of common sense, of politics and of the 
art of war. For a long time now many questions have been obtruding 
themselves on the public's attention. Some of the answers to these 
questions have in fact already been given, and others will shortly 
come to light. Who, for example, constandy obstructed the arrange­
ments for the arming of the whole people? Who distributed 
and dispersed the Italian army over so many points and neglected to 
form a reserve-line, with the result that every defeat was bound to 
lead to ruin? Why did Charles Albert not advance on Vicenza? Why 
did the army in Valleggio lack bread? Why did the Modenese desert? 
How did it happen that the Lombardian volunteers did not find a 
single cannon on the banks of the Mincio? How was it that the 
cartridges distributed during the battle to several Piedmontese corps 
could not be used because the bullets were too big? And lastly: how 

=====第419页=====
Charles Alberts Betrayal 389 
could Charles Albert, who had long since decided to retreat, still 
order the destruction of a large number of houses in the suburbs of 
Milan, to the value of 30 million lire? There is only one answer to 
these questions, unless we are prepared to assume the most 
lamentable and incredible incompetence, and that is that Charles 
Albert behaved just as treacherously and perfidiously in the year 
1848 as he did in the year 1821, when he shamelessly betrayed his 
fellow conspirators and helped to deliver them up to the hangman's 
rope,  to the galleys and to banishment.250 
Written by Engels on August 16, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 77-78, August 17, 1848 time 

=====第420页=====
390 
THE ATTEMPT TO EXPEL SCHAPPER 
Cologne, August 18. 
"We demand a universal German right of domicile and full freedom of movement 
throughout the German fatherland." 
So said His Majesty Frederick William IV in his charter of March 
18.251 
But the King proposes and Herr Geiger disposes. Herr Geiger, 
acting Police Superintendent of Cologne, is insisting on the expul­
sion of Herr Karl Schapper on the pretext that Herr Schapper is a 
citizen of Nassau and moreover a German in partions infidelium. 3 
Yesterday a police-sergeant pushed his way into Frau Schapper's 
bedroom and deposited the following letter, which we reproduce 
exactly as it was written. What might appear to be incorrectness is 
perhaps nothing more than a Prussian protest against German 
grammar. 
Herr Schapper, 
I am instructed to inform you that the Police Superintendent still continues to 
insist that you should leave the city, should you however have any objection to raise 
against the laws then please lodge an appeal immediately with the Police Inspector, to 
be sent to him immediately. 
Cologne 17/8. 48 
Quetting 
Police-Sergeant 
Beyond the realm of reality (literally "in the country of infidels")—an addition 
to the title of Catholic bishops appointed to a purely nominal diocese in non-Christian 
countries.— Ed. 

=====第421页=====
The Attempt to Expel Schapper 391 
Thereupon, Herr Schapper addressed the following note to the 
Police Inspector: 
Dear Sir, 
Under the date of the 11th of this month you signified to me that I must leave the 
city of Cologne within a week, in accordance with the decision of Herr Geiger, Police 
Superintendent. I had already lodged a protest against the decision on that occasion. 
You have now communicated to me through a police-sergeant that the said expulsion 
order still stands but that I may appeal against it. This I am now doing and I base my 
case on the following reasons. 
1) As early as March 18, 1848, the day  before  the March revolution, the King of 
Prussia issued a charter calling on all German states to observe a universal German 
right of domicile and admit the freedom of movement. No Prussian authority ought to 
refuse the citizens of another German state what the King of Prussia has demanded 
for citizens of the Prussian state. The charter of March 18 either has no meaning at all 
or it implies the abolition of all earlier provisions for the expulsion of non-Prussian 
German citizens. 
2) On July 21 of this year the German National Assembly at Frankfurt adopted 
Paragraph 2, Article 1, of the German Fundamental Rights in a form 
which expressly forbids all expulsions of Germans from German cities or states. 
It says: 
" Every German has the right to sojourn and make his  domicile,  acquire real estate 
etc., etc. ... pursue any type of employment in  any part of  the territory  of the Empire.... 
"The conditions of sojourn and domicile will be laid down for the whole 
of Germany ... by a law of domicile issued by the imperial authority. Until such a 
time as these laws of the Empire are proclaimed, the exercise of the said rights is 
open to every German in every German state under the same conditions as apply to 
the citizens of the state in question. 
"No German state may make any distinction in connection with civil, penal 
or adjective law between its own citizens and the citizens of any other German 
state whereby the latter, as foreigners, are treated at a disadvantage." 
According to this paragraph I have the right, until the proclamation of the relevant 
laws of the Empire, to sojourn or domicile in Cologne, a town situated on the territory 
of the German Empire, and gain my livelihood as a proof-reader under the same 
conditions as the citizens of the Prussian state. But citizens of the Prussian state can 
only be expelled from Cologne, under the existing laws, if they have no means of 
subsistence. I have not been accused of lacking these and if I were I could at any 
time prove the contrary, since my salary as proof-reader on the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung is sufficient to guarantee myself and my family a decent standard of 
living. 
It is not valid to object that the relevant paragraph of the Fundamental Rights has 
not yet been promulgated. It has all along been the practice of administrative 
authorities in all constitutional states to suspend the execution of regulations such as 
the right of expulsion and other restrictions on personal freedom when a resolution 
abolishing these regulations has been passed by the appropriate Legislative Assembly 
and only awaits formal promulgation. 
We are here dealing, then, with a resolution of the National Assembly which 
abolishes the powers of expulsion and a royal charter which recognises this resolution 
in advance. Consequently I believe that I am fully within my rights when I declare 
that I protest against the expulsion order, which was not even communicated to 
me in writing or accompanied by a statement of reasons, as an illegal act and that I 
will only yield to force. 

=====第422页=====
392 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Sir, I would ask you to be so kind as to lodge this protest with the appropriate 
authorities and to forward the decision to me as soon as possible, for if it is ignored I 
will appeal immediately to the royal Regierungspräsident or the Ministry of the Interior 
and in the last instance to the Berlin Constituent Assembly and the German National 
Assembly. 
Cologne, August 17, 1848 
(signed) Karl Schapper 
The "cathedral of German unity", in which the solemn speeches that 
our great political architects made for three days running culminate, 
has, as its foundation stone the expulsion of a citizen of Nassau from 
Cologne on the Rhine. 
Written on August 18, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 80, August 19, 1848 time 

=====第423页=====
393 
GEIGER AND SCHAPPER 
Cologne, August 22. At the request of Police Superintendent 
Geiger (from Koblenz), Herr Schapper has been ordered to leave 
Cologne, since he is not a Prussian subject but a citizen of Nassau. 
The Workers' Association, of which Herr Schapper is an active mem­
ber, feels compelled to make this cause its own and to protest against 
the arbitrary expulsion of Herr Schapper. Last Friday the protest 
was handed over to Herr Dolleschall in the absence of Herr Geiger. 
Since Herr Dolleschall declared that he knew nothing of the affair, 
the deputation appointed to deliver the protest was postponed to the 
following Tuesday, August 22, so as to be able to speak to Herr 
Geiger  himself.  Today Herr Geiger received the deputation with the 
declaration that the matter was no longer in his hands but that 
following an article in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung* the Ministry had 
asked him, Geiger, for a detailed report on the affair. The report 
had been sent off today; it was therefore no longer within his powers 
either to carry out or to countermand the expulsion of Schapper. 
One member of the deputation believed he understood Herr Geiger 
to say that Herr Schapper's expulsion order emanated from the 
Ministry, whereupon Herr Geiger vehemently assured the deputa­
tion on his most sacred word of honour that it was  he who had taken 
the initiative in this measure. He referred first of all to his special 
knowledge of the law, since he had earlier been an examining 
magistrate; but that was not the only reason. 
"I believe that I have acted not only as Police Superintendent, but also in 
accordance with the dictates of reason: J have acted as I  myself." 
a See this volume, pp. 383-84.— Ed. 

=====第424页=====
394 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
He knew full well, he added, that everything he said would be 
reprinted in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung and given a special 
interpretation, but that did not worry him: "I have acted as I  myself." 
Another member of the deputation pointed out to him that if Herr 
Geiger had acted as "I  myself",  then this "I" was surely none other 
than the "I" of the Police Superintendent and it was of course 
possible that this "/"was in accordance with the dictates of reason. 
But the Workers' Association also had an "I", the "I" of 6,000 
workers, and this "I" probably carried just as much weight as Herr 
Geiger's "I" and was likewise in accordance with the dictates of 
reason. The Workers' Association, he added, protested against a 
measure that went against all existing laws and the Frankfurt 
National Assembly. The first member of the deputation demanded 
that Herr Geiger at least disavow the measure; Herr Geiger refused, 
and gave the deputation the assurance that for his part, until the 
Minister gave a reply, Herr Schapper could stay undisturbed in 
Cologne. Herr Geiger also refused to give an explanation as to how 
his report had been drawn up. Has Herr Geiger taken different 
decisions from Herr Gagern and is a citizen of Nassau not a German 
citizen, who is entitled to settle in any of the 34 German fatherlands? 
Written on August 22, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 84, August 24, 1848 time 

=====第425页=====
395 
THE KÖLNISCHE ZEITUNG ABOUT ITALY 
Cologne, August 26. Yesterday we were condemned to having to 
listen to the political hot air of a writer of belles-lettres, Herr 
Wilhelm Jordan of Berlin, who lectured from the world-historical 
standpoint. 3 Fate is pursuing us relentlessly. A similar lot befalls us 
today: the main achievement of March consists in the belles-lettres 
writers having monopolised political life. 
Herr Levin Schückingoi Münster, the fourthor fifth wheel on the 
advertising wagon of Herr Dumont, has published an article in the 
Kölnische Zeitung on "our policy in Italy". b 
And what does "my friend Levin with the eerie eyes"c have to say? 
"There has never been a more propitious moment for Germany than the present one 
to place its policy vis-à-vis Italy upon a healthy basis which promises to endure for 
centuries. We have gloriously" (!by the betrayal of Charles Albert) "wiped off the 
disgrace with which our flags were besmirched by a people that in times of fortune 
easily becomes overweening. At the head of a matchless army, worthy of admiration 
not only in victory and battle but also for its patience and endurance,  barba  bianco,  the 
White-Beard, planted Germany's glorious (!?) double-headed eagle on the battlements 
of the  rebellious  town where more than six hundred years ago the imperial Red-Beard 
hoisted the same banner as a symbol of Germany's sovereignty over Italy. This sovereignty 
still belongs to us today." 
Thus speaks Herr Levin Schücking of the Kölnische Zeitung. 
In those days when Radetzky's Croats and Pandours were driven 
out of Milan by an unarmed people after a five-day battle, in those 
a See this volume, pp. 359-64.— Ed. 
b "Unsere Politik in Italien", Kölnische Zeitung No. 238, August 26, 1848.— Ed. 
From Ferdinand Freiligrath's poem "Die Rose".— Ed. 

=====第426页=====
396 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
days when the "army worthy of admiration" which had been routed 
at Goito withdrew to Verona, in those days the political lyre of "my 
friend Levin with the eerie eyes" was silent! But ever since the 
reinforced Austrian army achieved an undeserved victory because of 
the equally cowardly and clumsy betrayal of Charles Albert, a 
betrayal which we predicted innumerable times, ever since then the 
neighbouring journalists have been reappearing on the scene, ever 
since then they have been trumpeting about the "wiped-off 
disgrace", risking parallels between Frederick Barbarossa and 
Radetzky Barbabianca and reducing heroic Milan, which made the 
most glorious revolution of 1848, to a mere "rebellious town". Ever 
since then "sovereignty over Italy" belongs to us Germans, to whom 
otherwise nothing ever belongs. 
"Our flags"! The black-and-yellow rags of the Metternich reaction 
which are being trodden under foot in Vienna, those are the flags of 
Herr Schücking of the Kölnische Zeitung. 
"Germany's glorious double-headed eagle"! That selfsame heral­
dic monster which had its feathers plucked by the armed revolution 
at Jemappes, Fleurus, Millesimo, Rivoli, Neuwied, Marengo, Hohen-
linden, Ulm, Austerlitz and Wagram 253 happens to be the "glorious" 
Cerberus of Herr Schücking of the Kölnische Zeitung. 
When the Austrians were beaten, they were separatists [Sonderbun-
dler]254  and practically traitors to their country. Ever since Charles 
Albert was caught in the trap and they have moved to the Ticino, 
they have become "Germans" and it is "we" who have accomplished 
all this. We have no objections to the Kölnische Zeitung having 
achieved the victories of Volta and Custozza and conquered 
Milan 255, but then it will also have to assume the responsibility for the 
— to it — very well known brutalities and infamies of that barbarian 
army "whose patience and endurance are worthy of admiration", 
just as it also assumed in former times the responsibility for the 
Galician slaughter.256 
"This sovereignty still belongs to us today. Italy and Germany are nations around 
which nature and history have after all formed a bond. They belong together 
providentially, being related like science and art, thought and sentiment." 
Just like Herr Brüggemann and Herr Schücking! 
And it is exactly for that reason that the Germans and Italians have 
constantly fought each other for 2,000 years. It is exactly for that 
reason that the Italians shook off German oppression again and 
again. It is exactly for that reason that German blood has so often 
reddened the streets of Milan. All this was done to prove that 
Germany and Italy "belong together providentially". 

=====第427页=====
The Kölnishe Zeitung about Italy 397 
It is exactly because Italy and Germany "are related" that 
Radetzky and Weiden have allowed the burning and plundering of 
all Venetian towns! 
My friend Levin with the eerie eyes now demands that we 
surrender Lombardy up to the River Etscha because the people does 
not want us even if a few poor " cittadini,,h  (the learned Herr 
Schücking thus refers to the contadini, peasants) received the 
Austrians jubilandy. But if we conduct ourselves as "a free people", 
"then it [the Italian people] will gladly offer us its hand in order to let us guide it 
along a path which it cannot enter upon by  itself,  the path to freedom". 
Indeed! Italy which won for herself freedom of the press, a jury 
system and a Constitution before Germany had awakened from the 
laziest slumber; Italy which at Palermo fought the first revolution of 
this year257 ; Italy which without weapons conquered the "matchless" 
Austrians at Milan, that Italy cannot enter upon the path to freedom 
without being guided by Germany, which means by a Radetzky! Of 
course, if it takes a Frankfurt Assembly, a meaningless central power, 
39 separatist leagues [Sonderbünde] and the Kölnische Zeitung to walk 
the path of freedom.... 
Enough of that! So as to make sure that the Italians "will let 
themselves be guided towards freedom" by the Germans, Herr 
Schücking retains Italian Tyrol and Venetia for the enfeoffment of 
an Austrian archduke and he sends 
"2,000 South German imperial troops to Rome so that Christ's vicar may restore 
order in his own domain". 
But unfortunately 
The French and Russians own the land, 
The English rule the sea; 
But we in dream's ethereal realm 
Hold sovereign mastery. 
Our unity is perfect there, 
Our might beyond dispute. 
The other folk in solid earth 
Have meanwhile taken root.0 
And up there in the ethereal realm of dreams we also possess 
"sovereignty over Italy". Nobody knows this better than Herr 
Schücking. After he has developed this worthy policy of sovereignty 
for the benefit of the German Empire, he closes with a sigh: 
a The Italian name is Adige.— Ed. 
Citizens.— Ed. 
c Heinrich Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput VII.— Ed. 

=====第428页=====
398 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
"A policy which is great, high-minded and worthy of a power like that of the 
German Empire has unfortunately always been regarded by us as fantastic and thus it 
will probably be for a long time to  cornel  " 
We recommend Herr Schücking as door-keeper and frontier 
guard of German honour upon the summit of the Stilfser Ridge. 
From up there the vigorous literary supplement of the Kölnische 
Zeitung may survey Italy and make certain that not one iota of 
"Germany's sovereignty over Italy" will be lost. Only then can 
Germany sleep calmly. 
Written by Engels on August 26, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 87, August 27, 1848 time 

=====第429页=====
399 
THE ZEITUNGS-HALLE ON THE RHINE 
PROVINCE 258 
Cologne, August 26. The Berliner Zeitungs-Halle contains the 
following article 3: 
"We recendy had occasion to mention that the time has come when the spirit which 
for so long has held together the old political entities is gradually vanishing. As 
regards Austria, hardly anyone will call this in question, but in Prussia, too, the signs of 
the times confirming oui* observation are becoming daily more manifest, and we 
cannot turn a blind eye to them. There is at present only one interest capahle of tying 
its various provinces to the Prussian state, namely that of developing liberal political 
institutions and jointly establishing and promoting a new and free mode of social 
relations. Silesia, which is making vigorous advances on the road to political and social 
progress, will hardly be happy in Prussia unless Prussia as a state is entirely adequate 
to these aspirations. As regards the Province of Saxony we know only too well that ever 
since its incorporation into the Prussian state it has resented it at heart. And as to the 
Rhine Province, surely everybody will still remember the threats which the Rhenish 
deputies made here prior to March 18, and thus helped to precipitate the turn of 
events. There is a growing spirit of alienation in this province. New evidence of this is 
provided in a now rather widely distributed leaflet which contains no mention of the 
publisher or place of publication." 
The leaflet referred to by the Zeitungs-Halle is presumably known 
to all our readers. 
What must please us is the view—which is at last advanced by at 
least one of the inhabitants of Berlin—that Berlin does not play the 
role of Paris as far as either Germany or the Rhineland in particular 
is concerned. Berlin is beginning to realise that it cannot govern us, 
cannot acquire the authority befitting a capital city. Berlin has amply 
proved its incompetence during the indecisive March revolution, 
"Das Rheinlands Herz zu Preussen", Berliner Zeitungs-Halle No. 194, August 24, 
1848.—  Ed. 
15-3447 

=====第430页=====
400 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
during the storming of the arsenal and during the recent 
disturbances.259  To the irresolution displayed by the people of Berlin 
is added a complete lack of talent in all parties. Since February the 
whole movement has not produced a single man in Berlin capable of 
leading his party. The spirit in this capital of the "spirit" is indeed 
very willing but just as weak as the flesh. The Berliners even had to 
import their Hansemann, their Camphausen and their Milde from 
the Rhine or Silesia. Far from being a German Paris, Berlin is not 
even a Prussian Vienna. It is not a metropolis, it is a "seat of the 
Court". 
It is, however, noteworthy that even in Berlin people are coming to 
the conclusion, long widespread in the Rhineland, that German 
unity can come about only as a result of  the disintegration of the German 
so-called great powers. We have never concealed our views on this 
point. We are not enraptured with either the past or present glory of 
Germany, with either the wars of independence 260  or the "glorious 
victories of German arms" in Lombardy and Schleswig. But if 
Germany is ever to achieve anything she must* unite, she must 
become one state not only in word but in deed. And to bring this 
about it is necessary above all that there should be "neither an 
Austria nor a Prussia". 3 
Incidentally, "the spirit" which "for so long held together" us and 
the old Prussian provinces was a very palpable, crude spirit; it was 
the spirit of 15,000 bayonets and a number of cannon. It was not for 
nothing that a military colony of Wasserpolacken261  and Kashubians 
was set up here on the Rhine, and that our young men had to serve 
in guards regiments in Berlin. This was done not in order to 
reconcile us with the other provinces, but to stir up hatred between 
the provinces and to exploit the national enmity between the 
Germans and Slavs, and the regional hatred of every petty German 
province against all the neighbouring provinces, in the interests of 
patriarchal feudal despotism. Divide et impera! 
It is indeed time to put an end to the fictitious role assigned to the 
Berliners by "the provinces", i.e. by the junkerdom of the 
Uckermark and Further Pomerania, in their panic-stricken declara­
tions,  a role which the Berliners promptly accepted. Berlin is not and 
will never become the seat of the revolution, the capital of 
democracy. Only the imagination of the knights of Brandenburg, 
terrified at the prospect of bankruptcy, the debtor's prison and the 
lamp-post, could ascribe to Berlin such a role, and only the 
coquettish vanity of the Berliners could believe that Berlin rep-
From Ernst Moritz Arndt's poem "Der Freudenklang". — Ed. 

=====第431页=====
The Zeitungs-Halle on the Rhine Province 401 
resented the provinces. We acknowledge the, March revolution, but 
only for what it really was. Its greatest shortcoming is that it has not 
revolutionised the Berliners. 
The Zeitungs-Halle believes that the disintegrating Prussian state 
can be cemented by means of liberal institutions. On the contrary. 
The more liberal the institutions are, the more will the heterogene­
ous elements be at liberty to separate, and the clearer will become the 
necessity of dissociation and the more evident the incompetence of 
the politicians of all parties in Berlin. 
We repeat, the Rhine Province by no means objects to remaining 
within Germany, together with the old Prussian provinces, but trying 
to compel it to remain for ever within Prussia, whether it be an 
absolutist, a constitutional or a democratic Prussia, means making 
Germany's unity impossible, perhaps means even losing for Ger­
many — we express the general attitude of the people — a large and 
beautiful territory by attempting to keep it for Prussia. 
Written by Engels on August 26, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
ZeitungNo. 87, August 27, 1848 

=====第432页=====
402 
MEDIATION AND INTERVENTION. 
RADETZKY AND CAVAIGNAC 262 
The armistice concluded as the result of Charles Albert's, 
treachery will expire in about three weeks (on September 21). France 
and Britain have offered to act as mediators. The Spectateur 
républicain, Cavaignac's paper, writes that Austria has not yet stated 
whether she will accept or decline the offer. France's dictator is 
getting annoyed over the discourtesy of the Austrians and threatens 
armed intervention if by a given date the Viennese Cabinet does not 
reply, or rejects mediation. Will Austria allow a Cavaignac to 
prescribe the peace terms to her, especially now after the victory over 
democracy in Vienna 264 and over the Italian "rebels"? Austria 
understands perfectly well that the French bourgeoisie wants "peace 
at any price", that the freedom or bondage of the Italians is 
altogether a matter of complete indifference to the bourgeoisie and 
that it will agree to anything so long as it is not openly humiliated and 
thus reluctantly compelled to draw the sword. It is said that Radetzky 
will pay a short visit to Vienna in order to say the decisive word about 
mediation. He does not have to travel to Vienna to do that. His policy 
has now prevailed, and his opinion will be none the less weighty for 
his remaining in Milan. If Austria were to accept the basis for peace 
proposed by Britain and France, she would do so not because she is 
afraid of Cavaignac's intervention but for much more pressing and 
compelling reasons. 
The Italians were just as much deluded by the March events as the 
Germans. The former believed that foreign rule at any rate was now 
at an end; the latter thought that the old system was buried for good 
and all. On the contrary, the foreign rule in Italy is worse than ever, 
and in Germany the old system has recovered from the few blows it 

=====第433页=====
Mediation and Intervention. Radetzky and Cavaignac 403 
sustained in March and it acts with greater ferocity and vindictive-
ness than ever before. 
The Italians are now making the mistake of expecting salvation 
from the present Government of France. Only the fall of this 
Government could save them. The Italians are further mistaken in 
regarding the liberation of their country as possible while democracy 
in France, Germany and other countries continues to lose ground. 
Reaction, to whose blows Italy has succumbed, is not merely an 
Italian phenomenon, it is a European phenomenon. Italy alone 
cannot possibly free herself from the grip of this reaction, least of all 
by appealing to the French bourgeoisie, which is the real pillar of 
reaction in Europe as a whole. 
Before reaction can be destroyed in Italy and Germany, it must be 
routed in France. A democratic social republic must first be 
proclaimed in France and the French proletariat must first subjugate 
its bourgeoisie before a lasting victory of democracy is conceivable in 
Italy, Germany, Poland, Hungary and other countries. 
Written by Engels on August 31, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 91, September 1, 1848 

=====第434页=====
404 
* 
THE ANTWERP DEATH SENTENCES 
Cologne, September 2. Belgium, the model constitutional state, has 
produced a further brilliant proof of the excellence of her 
institutions. Seventeen death sentences resulting from the ridiculous 
Risquons-Tout affair266! Seventeen death sentences to avenge the 
humiliation inflicted upon the prudish Belgian nation by a few 
imprudent men, a few hopeful fools,3 who attempted to raise a small 
corner of the constitutional cloak! Seventeen death sentences — 
what savagery! 
The Risquons-Tout affair is well known. Belgian workers in Paris 
joined forces to attempt a republican invasion of their country. 
Belgian democrats came from Brussels to support the venture. 
Ledru-Rollin assisted as much as he could. Lamartine, the "noble-
minded" traitor, who was as ready with fine words and ignoble deeds 
for foreign as for French democrats— Lamartine, who prides himself 
on having conspired with the anarchists, like a lightning-conductor 
with the lightning— Lamartine at first supported the Belgian Legion 
the better to be able later to betray it. The Legion set out. Delescluze, 
Commissioner of the Department du Nord, sold the first column to 
Belgian railway officials,- the train in which it travelled was 
treacherously hauled into Belgian territory right into the midst of 
the Belgian bayonets. The second column was led by three Belgian 
spies (we were told this by a member of the Paris Provisional 
Government, and the course of events confirms it), and these 
treacherous leaders brought it into a forest on Belgian territory, 
where an ambush of loaded guns was waiting for it. The column was 
shot to pieces and most of its members were captured. 
This tiny episode of the 1848 revolution—an episode which 
assumed a farcical aspect as a result of the many betrayals and the 
magnitude ascribed to it in Belgium—served the Brussels judiciary as 
Hoffnungsvolle Toren (hopeful fools)— from Goethe's poem "Prometheus".— Ed. 

=====第435页=====
The Antwerp Death Sentences 405 
a canvas on which to embroider the most colossal plot that was ever 
devised. Old General Mellinet, the liberator of Antwerp, Tedesco 
and Ballin, in short the most resolute and most active democrats of 
Brussels, Liege and Ghent, were implicated. M. Bavay would even 
have M. Jottrand of Brussels dragged into it, had not the latter 
known things and possessed documents whose publication would 
greatly compromise the entire Belgian Government, the wise 
Leopold included. 
Why were these democrats arrested, why were these most 
monstrous proceedings started against men who had as little to do 
with the whole affair as the jurymen who faced them? It was meant 
to scare the Belgian bourgeoisie and, under cover of this scare, to 
collect the excessive taxes and compulsory loans, which are the 
cement of the glorious Belgian political edifice, and the payments on 
which were rather behindhand. 
In short, the accused were arraigned before the Antwerp jury, the 
élite of the Flemish faro-playing fraternity, who lack both the élan of 
French political dedication and the cool assurance of magnificent 
English materialism, i.e. before those dried-cod merchants who 
spend their whole life vegetating in philistine utilitarianism, in the 
most short-sighted and timid profiteering. The great Bavay knew his 
men and appealed to their fear. 
Indeed, had anyone ever seen a republican in Antwerp? Now 
thirty-two of the monsters faced the terrified men of Antwerp, and 
the trembling jury in concert with the wise bench consigned 
seventeen of the accused to the tender mercies of Article 86 and 
others of the Code pénal, i.e. the death sentence. 
Mock trials were also held during the Reign of Terror in 1793, and 
convictions based on other facts than those officially stated did occur, 
but even the fanatical Fouquier-Tinville did not conduct a trial so 
distinguished by clumsy barefaced lies and blind partisan hatred. 
Moreover, is Belgium in the grip of a civil war and are the armies of 
half Europe assembled at her frontiers conspiring with the rebels, as 
was the case in France in 1793? Is the country in danger? Has a crack 
appeared in the crown? On the contrary, no one intends to subjugate 
Belgium, and the wise Leopold still drives every day without an 
escort from Laeken to Brussels and from Brussels to Laeken. 
What has the 81-year-old Mellinet done to be sentenced to death 
by jury and judges? The old soldier of the French Republic saved the 
last spark of Belgian honour in 1831. He liberated Antwerp and in 
return Antwerp condemns him to death! His only sin is that he 
defended his old friend Becker against the insinuations of the 
Belgian official press and did not change his friendly attitude 

=====第436页=====
406 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
towards Becker even when the latter was plotting in Paris. Mellinet 
was in no way connected with the plot. And because of this he is 
without further ado sentenced to death. 
As to Ballin, he was a friend of Mellinet's, often visited him, and 
was seen in the company of Tedesco in a coffee-house. Reason 
enough to sentence him to death. 
And finally Tedesco. Had he not visited the German Workers' 
Association, did he not associate with people on whom the Belgian 
police had planted stage daggers? Had he not been seen with Ballin 
in a coffee-house? The case was established—Tedesco had provoked 
the great battle of Risquons-Tout—to the scaffold with him! 
And so with the others. 
We are proud of being able to call many of these "conspirators", 
sentenced to death only because they are democrats, our friends. If 
the venal Belgian press slings mud at them, then we, at least, want to 
vindicate their honour before the face of German democracy; if their 
country disowns them, we want to acclaim them. 
When the President of the Court pronounced the death sentence 
on them, they passionately exclaimed: "Long live the republic!" 
Throughout the whole procedure and the reading of the sentence 
they behaved with truly revolutionary steadfastness. 
And now listen to what the wretched Belgian press has to say: 
"The verdict," writes the Journal d'Anvers, "has caused no more of a sensation in 
the city than the entire trial, which aroused hardly any interest. Only among the 
working classes" (read: the lumpenproletariat) "can one find sentiments hostile to the 
paladins of the republic; the rest of the population hardly took any notice of it. The 
attempt to bring about a revolution does not cease to appear absurd to them even after 
the death sentence, which, in any case, no one believes will be executed." 
To be sure, if the citizens of Antwerp were afforded the 
interesting spectacle of watching the guillotining of seventeen 
republicans headed by old Mellinet, their liberator, then they would 
certainly have taken notice of the trial. 
The savagery of the Belgian Government, the Belgian jury and 
law-courts lies precisely in the fact that they play with death 
sentences. 
The Libéral Liégeois says: "The Government wanted to show its strength, but it has 
merely demonstrated its savagery." 
But then that has always been the lot of the Flemish nation. 
Written by Engels on September 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 93, September 3, 1848 

=====第437页=====
407 
THE CONFLICT BETWEEN MARX 
AND PRUSSIAN CITIZENSHIP268 
Cologne, September 4. As has already been mentioned earlier,3 
Karl Marx, the editor-in-chief of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, has 
become involved in a conflict with Prussian citizenship. This affair is 
a new example of the way in which the attempt is made to conjure 
away the promises of March. How the matter stands emerges from 
the following document that Marx has sent to the Minister of the 
Interior, Herr Kühlwetter: 
Dear Minister, 
Permit me to protest against a decision of the local royal 
administration which affects me personally. 
I left my homeland, Rhenish Prussia, during the year 1843 in 
order to settle for the time being in Paris. In 1844 I learned that the 
royal Oberpräsidium in Koblenz had sent to the respective border 
police authorities an order to arrest me because of my writings. 
This piece of news was also published in the censured Berlin newspa­
pers. 
From that moment on, I regarded myself as a political refugee 
Later on, in January 1845, I was expelled from France at the 
direct instigation of the then Prussian Government and settled in 
Belgium. 
Since here too the Prussian Government applied to the Belgian 
Ministry for my expulsion, I was finally forced to relinquish Prussian 
nationality. I had to use this last expedient in order to escape these 
persecutions. The best proof that I only asked for permission to 
emigrate in self-defence is the fact that I did not accept citizenship in 
See this volume, p.  383.—  Ed. 

=====第438页=====
408 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
any other state even though it was offered to me by members of 
the Provisional Government in France after the February revo­
lution. 
After the March revolution, I returned to my homeland and 
applied for citizenship in Cologne in the month of April. It was 
readily granted to me by the local City Council. Under the law of 
December 31, 1842, the matter was sent for confirmation to the royal 
administration. I then received from the local acting Police Super­
intendent, Herr Geiger, a communication which reads as follows: 
"Dear Sir, 
"I am herewith informing you that in view of your position up to now the 
royal administration has for the present not used in your favour Paragraph 5 of the law 
of December 31, 1842, which authorises it to bestow the status of a Prussian subject 
upon a foreigner. You are therefore still to be regarded as a foreigner. (Paragraphs 15 
and 16 of the cited law.) 
Cologne, August 3, 1848 
acting Police Superintendent 
(signed) Geiger 
To 
Dr. Marx, Esquire, 
No. 2678." 
I regard the decision of the royal administration as unlawful on 
the following grounds: 
Under the decision of the Federal Diet of March 30 of this year, 
political refugees, too, may vote for and be elected to the German 
National Assembly provided they return to Germany and declare 
that they want to resume their German citizenship.26 
The decision of the Preparliament,270 which it is true does not have 
a direct legal force but nevertheless sets the standard of the prospects 
and promises which were held out to the German people immediate­
ly after the revolution, accords the right'to vote and to be elected 
even to all those political refugees who became citizens abroad but 
want to resume their German citizenship. 
In any case, the decision of the Federal Diet and the electoral 
regulations of the Camphausen Government which are based upon 
it, are legally valid in Prussia. 
Since I declared clearly enough my intention to resume my 
German citizenship by virtue of my application to obtain the right to 
reside in Cologne, it is an established fact that I had the right to vote 
for and to be elected to the German National Assembly. Thus I at 
least possess citizenship rights in the German Empire. 
If, however, I possess the greatest right which a German can 

=====第439页=====
The Conflict between Marx and Prussian Citizenship 409 
possess, so much less reason is there for refusing me the lesser right 
of Prussian citizenship. 
The royal administration at Cologne refers to the law of December 
31, 1842. This law, taken together with the above-mentioned 
decision of the Federal Diet, also speaks in my favour. 
Under Paragraph 15, 1 and 3, a subject loses his Prussian 
citizenship if he asks to be relieved of it or if he has resided abroad 
for ten years. After the revolution many political refugees who had 
been abroad for more than ten years returned home and so had lost 
their rights as Prussians under Paragraph 15 of the above-mentioned 
law as much as I have. Some of them, Herr J. Venedey, for example, 
even sit in the German National Assembly. Thus, if they wanted 
to, the Prussian "police authorities" (Paragraph 5 of the law) 
could likewise refuse Prussian citizenship to these German legisla­
tors! 
Finally, I deem it to be thoroughly improper that the local royal 
administration or Police Superintendent Geiger uses the word 
"subject" in the notice sent to me, considering that both the former 
and the present Ministry have barred this designation from all 
official documents and speak instead only of citizens. It is equally 
improper, disregarding for the moment my right to Prussian 
citizenship, to label me, a citizen of the German Empire, as a 
"foreigner". 
Furthermore, if the royal administration "in view of my position 
up to now" refuses to confirm my Prussian citizenship, it cannot 
refer to my material circumstances since, even according to the text 
of the law of December 31, 1842, only the City Council of Cologne 
could decide this issue and has done so in my favour. Thus it can 
only refer to my activities as editor-in-chief of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung and that means in view of my democratic attitude and my 
opposition to the present Government. But even if the local district 
administration or the Ministry of the Interior in Berlin should have 
the authority, which I deny, to withhold from me my Prussian 
citizenship because this is a special case which comes under the 
decision of the Federal Diet of March 30, such tendentious reasons 
could only be employed in the old police state, not however by 
revolutionary Prussia and her responsible Government. 
Finally, I must mention that Police Superintendent Müller, upon 
my comment that I could not transfer my family from Trier to 
Cologne under these uncertain circumstances, assured me that there 
would be no objections to my renaturalisation. 
For all of these reasons I demand that you, Herr Minister, instruct 
the local royal district administration to confirm my right (request) to 

=====第440页=====
410 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
take up residence which was approved by the local City Council, and 
thereby to restore my Prussian citizenship to me. 
Please, Herr Minister, accept the assurances of my perfect esteem. 
Cologne, August 22, 1848 
Karl Marx 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 94, September 5, 1848 _ , ,. , , . _ ,. , . 
Published m English for the first 
time 

=====第441页=====
411 
THE DANISH ARMISTICE 
Cologne, September 7. 
"What will become of Germany if she is no longer led by Prussia, if Prussia's armies 
no longer protect Germany's honour, if Prussia's strength and influence as a great 
power perish in the fanciful might of an imaginary German Central Authority!" 
Thus boasts the Prussian party, the party of the heroes "with God 
for King and Fatherland",3  the counter-revolutionary knighthood of 
Further Pomerania and the Uckermark. 
Well, Prussia has led, Prussia has protected Germany's honour, in 
Schleswig-Holstein . 
And what was the result? After a series of easy, inglorious victories 
over a weak enemy, after a warfare which was paralysed by the most 
pusillanimous diplomacy, after the most disgraceful retreats before a 
beaten army, finally, an armistice which is so dishonourable for 
Germany that even a Prussian generalb found reason not to sign it. 
The hostilities and negotiations began anew. The Imperial 
Regent0  authorised the Prussian Government to conclude an 
armistice. This authorisation had not been countersigned by any of the 
Imperial Ministers and it did not therefore possess any validity 
whatsoever. It recognised the first armistice, but with the following 
modifications: 1. Even before the conclusion of the armistice, the 
members of the new Government of Schleswig-Holstein "are to be 
agreed upon in such a manner that the permanency and the salutary 
a From Frederick William Ill's decree on the formation of an army reserve, issued 
on March 17,  1813.—  Ed. 
Wrangel.— Ed. 
Archduke John of Austria.— Ed. 

=====第442页=====
412 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
effectiveness of the new Government appear safeguarded". 2. All 
the laws and decrees of the Provisional Government issued before 
the conclusion of the armistice are to retain full validity. 3. All the 
troops that remain behind in Schleswig-Holstein are to remain 
under the command of the German commander-in-chief. 
If one compares this directive with the stipulations of the first 
Prussian-Danish project, then its purpose becomes quite evident. It 
certainly does not secure all that victorious Germany could have 
demanded, but by making quite a few concessions for form's sake, it 
saves many matters in effect. 
The first stipulation was intended to guarantee that within the new 
Government the Schleswig-Holstein (German) influence would 
retain predominance over the Danish. And what does Prussia do? It 
agrees that Karl Moltke, the head of the Danish party in Schleswig-
Holstein, becomes the head of the new Government and that 
Denmark obtains three votes in the Government against two for 
Schleswig-Holstein. 
The second stipulation was supposed to accomplish the recogni­
tion although not of the Provisional Government itself which had 
been recognised by the Federal Diet, but of its activity up to now. Its 
decisions were to be maintained. And what does Prussia do? Under 
the pretext that Denmark, too, will drop its illusory decisions issued 
from Copenhagen for the duchies, and which never acquired even 
the shadow of legal force except upon the Island of Alsen,a under 
this pretext, counter-revolutionary Prussia agrees to nullify all 
decisions of the Provisional Government. 
The third stipulation finally was to bring about the provisional 
recognition of the unity of the duchies and their incorporation into 
Germany. By placing all troops remaining in Schleswig and Holstein 
under the German commander-in-chief, it was supposed to thwart 
the attempt of the Danes to smuggle the Schleswigers serving in the 
Danish army back into Schleswig. And Prussia? Prussia agrees to 
separate the Schleswig troops from the Holstein troops, to remove 
them from the supreme command of the German general and to put 
them simply at the disposal of the new Government which is 3/sth 
Danish. 
Besides, Prussia was only authorised to conclude an armistice of 
three months (Article 1 of the original draft) but concluded one of 
seven months on its own authority, i.e. it granted a truce to the Danes 
during the winter months when the chief weapon of the Danes, their 
fleet, became useless for a blockade of the German and Schleswig 
a The Danish name is Als.— Ed 

=====第443页=====
The Danish Armistice 413 
coasts and during a time when the cold would have enabled the 
Germans to cross the ice of the Little Belt, to conquer Fünen a and to 
limit Denmark to Zealand. 
In short, Prussia has spurned its authority in respect of all three 
points. And then why not? After all, it had not  been countersigned]  And 
did not Herr Camphausen, the Prussian envoy to the Central 
Authority, state point-blank in his communication of September 2 to 
"His Excellency"(!!) Herr Heckscher that on the basis of that 
authority the Prussian Government 
"considered itself empowered to negotiate without any restrictions"? 
But that is not all. The Imperial Regent sends "his" Under-
Secretary of State Max Gagern to Berlin and from there to Schleswig 
in order to supervise the negotiations. He sends along with him an 
authorisation which once again is not  countersigned.  Herr Gagern—we 
do not know how he was treated in Berlin—arrives in the duchies. 
The Prussian negotiators are in Malmö. He is not told anything. The 
ratifications are exchanged in Lübeck. Herr Gagern is informed that 
this has taken place and that he can now calmly go home again. 
Naturally there is nothing left to do for the unfortunate Gagern with 
his not countersigned authorisation but to return to Frankfurt and to 
bemoan the shabby role which he has played. 
Thus the glorious armistice was born which ties the Germans' 
hands during the most favourable time for war, which dissolves the 
revolutionary Government and democratic Constituent Assembly of 
Schleswig-Holstein, which destroys all decrees of this Govern­
ment— a Government that the Federal Diet had recognised — which 
delivers the duchies to a Danish Government led by the hated 
Moltke, which pulls the Schleswig troops out of their regiments, 
withdraws them from the German supreme command and delivers 
them up to the Danish Government that may dissolve them at its 
discretion, which forces the German troops to withdraw from 
Königsau b to Hanover and Mecklenburg and which delivers 
Lauenburg into the hands of the old reactionary Danish Govern­
ment.* 
Not just Schleswig-Holstein, but all Germany, with the exception 
of old parts of Prussia, is enraged about this ignominious armistice. 
* This trick was accomplished in the following way: the old Government was 
dissolved. Thereupon Denmark re-elected the first, Prussia the second and both of 
them together the third member of the old Government.— Note by Engels. 
a The Danish name is Fyn.— Ed. 
b The Danish name is Kongeaa.— Ed. 

=====第444页=====
414 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
The Imperial Government, to be sure, trembled at first upon being 
informed about it by Herr Camphausen but in the end it shouldered 
the responsibility for it after all. What else could it have done? Herr 
Camphausen seems to have threatened and official Prussia is still a 
power for the cowardly counter-revolutionary Imperial Govern­
ment. But now it was the turn of the National Assembly. Its approval 
was necessary, and edifying as this Assembly is, "His Excellency" 
Herr Heckscher was nevertheless ashamed to come forward with this 
official document. He read it aloud to the accompaniment of a 
thousand bows and the most humble pleas for calm and moderation. 
The result was a general outburst. Even the Right Centre, indeed a 
part of the Right and Herr Dahlmann himself flew into the most 
violent fit of anger. The committees were ordered to report within 
24 hours. In view of this report, it was decided to discontinue 
immediately the retreat of the troops. No decision has yet been taken 
concerning the armistice  itself. 
The National Assembly for once has finally passed an energetic 
resolution even though the Government declared that it would 
resign, if the resolution is carried. This resolution is not the 
cancellation but a  breach  of the armistice. In the duchies it will create 
not only excitement but open opposition to the execution of the 
armistice and to the new Government and it will bring about new 
complications. 
But we have little hope that the Assembly will repudiate the 
armistice. Herr Radowitz only needs to obtain nine votes from the 
Centre and he has a majority. And should he not be able to do that 
during the few days when the matter rests? 
If the Assembly decides to uphold the armistice, we shall have the 
proclamation of a republic and civil war in Schleswig-Holstein, the 
subjugation of the Central Authority by Prussia, the universal 
contempt of all Europe for the Central Authority and the Assembly 
and yet just enough complications as will suffice to crush any future 
Imperial Government under unsolvable difficulties. 
If it decides to discard the armistice, we shall have another 
European war, a rupture between Prussia and Germany, new 
revolutions, the disintegration of Prussia and the genuine unification 
of Germany.  The Assembly should not let itself be intimidated: at least 
two-thirds of Prussia supports Germany. 
But will the representatives of the bourgeoisie at Frankfurt not 
rather swallow any insult and will they not rather place themselves 
under Prussian servitude than risk a European revolutionary war 
and expose themselves to new storms which would endanger their 
own class rule in Germany? 

=====第445页=====
The Danish Armistice 415 
We believe that they will. Their cowardly bourgeois nature is too 
powerful. We do not have enough confidence in the Frankfurt 
Assembly to believe that it will redeem in Schleswig-Holstein 
Germany's honour which it has already sacrificed in Poland. 
Written by Engels on September 7, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 97, September 8, 1848 time 

=====第446页=====
416 
EDITORIAL NOTE ACCOMPANYING THE ARTICLE 
"THE FINANCIAL PROJECT OF THE LEFT" 272 
We find it hard to understand that deputies on the Left submit 
financial plans for the procurement of the necessary funds to a 
Ministry that they intend to overthrow. The principal and in Herr 
Hansemann's case perhaps the only means of overthrowing a 
Ministry is precisely the refusal of funds. If at least some reforms had 
been included in the financial plan—but no, its aim is to spare the 
Government the hated measure of a compulsory loan. But what 
could be better for the opposition than the Ministry making itself 
hated? 
Written by Engels on September 8, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 98, September 9, 1848 time 

=====第447页=====
417 
THE FALL OF THE GOVERNMENT 
OF ACTION 
Cologne, September 8, 10 p. m. The Government of Action has 
fallen. After it had "stumbled" several times, it was only able to 
stay in office by insolence. Finally, the constantly rising pretensions 
of the Government revealed the secret of its existence to the 
Assembly. 
In yesterday's session of the Agreement Assembly Stein's 
motion273 was debated. The motion reads: 
"It was the urgent duty of the Government to issue without more ado the 
decree which was approved on August 9 to pacify the country and avoid a break 
with the Assembly." 
The Government declared that it would not consider any attempt 
at whitewashing or mediation. 
The Left declared that it would walk out if the Assembly were to 
drop its resolution of August 9. 
After a meaningless speech by the Prime Minister,3  Deputy Unruh 
introduced the following amendment at yesterday's session: 
"Taking into account that the resolutions of August 9 do not constitute any 
investigation into attitudes or any constraint of conscience, but that they merely 
intend to bring about the agreement between the people and the army which is 
necessary in a constitutional state and that it is their purpose to avoid reactionary 
endeavours as well as further conflicts between the citizens who belong to the 
army and those who are civilians", 
the Assembly declares 
"that the Government does not possess the confidence of the country if it 
hesitates any further to issue to the army a decree which corresponds to the 
resolution of August 9." 
Rudolf von Auerswald.— Ed. 

=====第448页=====
418 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
This amendment of the Left Centre was opposed by a second one 
from the Right Centre advanced by Deputy Tamnau. 
It reads: 
"The National Assembly wishes to make the following declaration: by its 
resolution of August 9 of this year, the National Assembly intended to bring 
about a decree to the commanders of the army similar to the one promulgated by 
the Ministries of Finance and of the Interior to the Regierungspräsidenten on July 15. 
It does not intend to oblige the officers of the army to set forth their political 
views or to prescribe to the Minister of War the text of the decree. It regards such 
a decree, in which the officers of the army are warned against reactionary and 
republican endeavours, as necessary in the interest of civil peace and for the 
advancement of the new constitutional state system." 
After the debate had gone on for some time, the "noble" 
Schreckenstein declared on behalf of the Government that he agreed 
with the Tamnau amendment. And this after the proud protestation 
that it would not accept any mediation! 
After the debate had continued again for some time and after even 
Herr Milde had warned the Assembly not to become a revolutionary 
National Convention (Herr Milde's fear is entirely superfluous!) a 
vote is taken with an enormous throng of people pressing towards 
the meeting hall: 
The result of the division: 
The Unruh amendment was rejected by 320 votes to 38. 
The Tamnau amendment was rejected by 210 votes to 156. 
The Stein motion was adopted by 219 votes to 152. The majority 
against the Ministers: 
67 votes. 
One of our Berlin correspondents reports: 
Today the excitement in the city was great. Thousands of people 
surroundçd the meeting house of the Assembly, so that, when the 
President read the quite loyal address of the civic militia, Herr 
Reichensperger moved that the Assembly shift its sessions to another 
town since Berlin was endangered. 
Indescribable rejoicing broke out when news of the Government's 
defeat became known to the assembled crowd, and when the 
deputies of the Left came out, they were accompanied as far as Unter 
den Linden by incessant "Vivats!" But when Deputy Stein (the 
mover of today's vote) was caught sight of, the enthusiasm reached 
its climax. Several men from the people immediately lifted him upon 
their shoulders and carried him thus in a triumphal procession to his 
hotel in the Taubenstrasse. Thousands of people joined this 
procession and to the accompaniment of endless hurrahs the masses 
rolled across the Opera House Square. Never before has such an 

=====第449页=====
The Fall of the Government of Action 419 
expression of joy been seen here. The greater the previous anxiety 
about success, the more surprising the brilliant victory. 
Against the Government voted: the Left, the Left Centre (the 
Rodbertus-Berg party) and the Centre (Unruh, Duncker, Kosch). 
The President 3 voted for the Government on all three issues. 
According to this, a Waldeck-Rodbertus Government will enjoy an 
absolute majority. 
Thus in a few days we shall have the pleasure of seeing the author 
of the compulsory loan, the Minister of action, "His  Excellency"  Herr 
Hansemann, pass through here in order to return to his "bourgeois 8 
past" and to reflect on Duchâtel and Pinto. 
Camphausen fell respectably. Herr Hansemann who brought 
about Camphausen 's fall by his intrigues, Herr Hansemann has met 
with a very sad end! Poor Hansemann-Pinto! 
Written by Engels on September 8, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first 
to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 98, time 
September 9, 1848 
Wilhelm Grabow.— Ed. 
In the original bürgerlich, which can mean "civil" or "bourgeois".— Ed. 

=====第450页=====
420 
HIS SUCCESSORS 
Cologne, September 9. So the prospect is held out of a Waldeck-
Rodbertus Ministry. We do not believe it. The King3 will hardly 
submit to these gentlemen's demands, especially since his journey to 
Cologne.274 Consequently there is no other choice than Radowitz and 
Vincke, an open break with the Assembly, an open break with the 
revolution—and there is no need to say what will follow next. 
Written by Engels on September 9, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 99, September 10, 1848 time 
a Frederick William IV.—Ed. 

=====第451页=====
421 
THE DANISH-PRUSSIAN ARMISTICE 
Cologne, September 9. Again we revert to the Danish armistice—we 
are given time to do this owing to the thoroughness of the National 
Assembly, which, instead of taking prompt and energetic decisions 
and compelling the appointment of new Ministers, allows the 
committees to deliberate in the most leisurely manner and leaves the 
solution of the government crisis to God — a thoroughness which 
barely conceals "our dear friends' lack of courage".3 
The war in Italy was always unpopular with the democratic party , 
and has for a long time been unpopular even with the democrats of 
Vienna. The storm of public indignation over the war of extermina­
tion in Posen could be staved off only for a few weeks by means of 
falsifications and lies on the part of the Prussian Government. The 
street-fighting in Prague, b despite all the efforts of the national 
press,  aroused sympathy among the people only for the defeated, 
but not for the victors. The war in Schleswig-Holstein, however, 
from the outset was popular also among the people. What is the 
reason? 
Whereas in Italy, Posen and Prague the Germans were fighting 
against the revolution, in Schleswig-Holstein they were supporting it. 
The Danish war is the first revolutionary war waged by Germany. We 
therefore advocated a resolute conduct of the Danish war from the 
very beginning, but this does not denote the slightest kinship with 
the sea-girt bourgeois beer-garden enthusiasm. 
It is a sad thing for Germany that her first revolutionary war is the 
most ridiculous war ever waged. 
Heinrich Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput XIX.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 91-93 and 119-20.— Ed. 

=====第452页=====
422 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Let us come to the point. The Danish nation is in commercial, 
industrial, political and literary matters completely dependent on 
Germany. It is well known that the real capital of Denmark is not 
Copenhagen but Hamburg; that for a whole year the Danish 
Government copied all the United Diet experiments conducted by 
the Prussian Government which expired on the barricades; that 
Denmark obtains all her literary as well as material sustenance via 
Germany, and that apart from Holberg, Danish literature is a poor 
imitation of that of Germany. 
Impotent though Germany has been from time immemorial, she 
has the satisfaction of knowing that the Scandinavian nations, and 
especially Denmark, have fallen under her sway, and that compared 
with them she is even revolutionary and progressive. 
Do you require proofs? Then read the polemics carried on by the 
Scandinavian nations against each "other ever since the concept of 
Scandinavianism arose. Scandinavianism is enthusiasm for the 
brutal, sordid, piratical, Old Norse national traits, for that deep-
rooted inner life which is unable to express its exuberant ideas and 
sentiments in words, but can express them only in deeds, namely in 
rudeness towards women, perpetual drunkenness and wild berserk 
frenzy alternating with tearful sentimentality. 
Scandinavianism and the theory of kinship with sea-girt Schles­
wig-Holstein 3 appeared simultaneously in the territories of the King 
of Denmark. The two concepts are correlated; they evoked each 
other and were in conflict with each other, thereby asserting their 
existence. 
Scandinavianism was the form taken by the Danes' appeals for 
Swedish and Norwegian support. But as always happens with the 
Christian-Teutonic nation, a dispute immediately arose as to who 
was .the genuine Christian-Teuton, the true Scandinavian. The 
Swede contended that the Dane had become "Germanised" and 
had degenerated, the Norwegian said the same of the Swede 
and the Dane, and the Icelander of all three. Obviously, the more 
primitive a nation is, the more closely its customs and way of life 
resemble those of the Old Norse people, the more "Scandinavian" 
it must be. 
Morgenbladet from Christiania b for November 18, 1846, is lying in 
front of us. This charming sheet contains the following amusing 
passages in an article on Scandinavianism. 
A paraphrase of the first words of a song written in 1844 by Matthäus Friedrich 
Chemnitz.— Ed. 
h Now called Oslo.— Ed. 

=====第453页=====
The Danish-Prussian Armistice 423 
After stating that the whole concept of Scandinavianism is nothing 
but an attempt by the Danes to create a movement in their own 
interest, the paper writes about the Danes: 
"What have these gay, vivacious people in common with the ancient, gloomy and 
melancholy world of warriors (med den garnie,  alvorlige og vemodsfulde Kjämpeverden)^ 
How can this nation, which—as even a Danish writer admits—has a docile and gentle 
disposition, believe itself to be spiritually related to the tough, lusty and vigorous men 
of a past age? And how can these people with their soft southern accent imagine that 
they speak a northern tongue? Although the main trait of our nation and the Swedes, 
like that of the ancient Northerners, is that our feelings are kept hidden in the 
innermost part of the soul, and not given outward expression, nevertheless these 
sentimental and affectionate people, who can so easily be astonished, moved and 
swayed and who wear their hearts upon their sleeves, nevertheless these people 
believe that they are of a northern cast and that they are akin to the two other 
Scandinavian nations!" 
Morgenbladet attributes the degeneration of the Danes to their 
association with Germany and the spread of German traits in 
Denmark. The Germans have indeed 
"lost their most sacred asset, their national character; but feeble and insipid 
though the German nation is, there is another nation still more feeble and insipid, 
namely the Danes. While the German language is being ousted in Alsace, Vaud and on 
the Slav border" (!! the services of the "Netze brethren" still remained unnoticed at 
the time) "it has made enormous progress along the Danish border." 
The Danes, we are told, now had to oppose their nationality to the 
Germans and fpr this purpose they invented Scandinavianism. The 
Danes were unable to resist, 
"for the Danish nation, as we have said before, was  essentially  Germanised, although 
it did not adopt the German language. The writer of these lines has seen it admitted 
even in a Danish paper that the Danish nation  does  not differ  essentially  from the German 
nation." 
Thus Morgenbladet. 
Of course, it cannot be denied that the Danes are a more or less 
civilised nation. Unfortunate Danes! 
By the same right under which France took Flanders, Lorraine 
and Alsace, and will sooner or later take Belgium—by that same right 
Germany takes over Schleswig; it is the right of civilisation as against 
barbarism, of progress as against stability. Even if the agreements 
were in Denmark's favour—which is very doubtful—this right carries 
more weight than all the agreements, for it is the right of historical 
evolution. 
So long as the Schleswig-Holstein movement remained a purely 
legal philistine agitation of a civic and peaceful nature it evoked 
enthusiasm only among well-meaning petty bourgeois. When, before 
the outbreak of the February revolution, the present King of 

=====第454页=====
424 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Denmark2  at his accession promised a liberal Constitution for all his 
territories, envisaging the same number of deputies for the duchies 
as for Denmark, and the duchies were opposed to this, the 
petty-bourgeois parochial nature of the Schleswig-Holstein move­
ment became distastefully conspicuous. The issue, at that time, was 
not so much union with Germany—did a Germany exist at that 
time?—as separation from Denmark and establishment of a small 
independent parochial state. 
But then came the revolution, which gave the movement a 
different character. The Schleswig-Holstein party was forced either 
to attempt a revolution or to perish. It quite correctly chose the 
revolution. The Danish promises, which were very favourable before 
the revolution, were quite inadequate after the revolution; union 
with Germany—formerly an empty phrase—now acquired meaning. 
Germany made a revolution and as usual Denmark copied it on a 
small provincial scale. 
The Schleswig-Holstein revolution and the Provisional Govern­
ment to which it gave rise behaved at first still in a rather philistine 
way, but the war soon compelled them to adopt a democratic course. 
This Government, whose members are all moderate liberal worthies, 
formerly kindred spirits of Welcker, Gagern and Camphausen, has 
given Schleswig-Holstein laws which are more democratic than those 
of any other German state. The Kiel Provincial Assembly is the only 
German assembly based not only on universal suffrage but on direct 
elections. The draft Constitution which the Government submitted 
to it was the most democratic Constitution ever drawn up in the 
German language. As a result of the revolutionary war, Schleswig-
Holstein, which had always trailed behind Germany in political 
matters, suddenly acquired more progressive institutions than all the 
rest of Germany. 
The war we are waging in Schleswig-Holstein is therefore a truly 
revolutionary war. 
And who, from the outset, supported Denmark? The three most 
counter-revolutionary powers in Europe—Russia, England and the 
Prussian Government. As long as it was possible the Prussian Gov­
ernment merely pretended to be waging a war—this is evidenced 
by Wildenbruch's Note,276 by the alacrity with which the Prussian 
Government, on the representations of England and Russia, ordered 
the withdrawal from Jutland, and finally by the two armistice 
agreements. Prussia, England and Russia are the three powers which 
have greater reason than anyone else to fear the German revolution 
a Frederick VIL— Ed. 

=====第455页=====
The Danish-Prussian Armistice 425 
and its first result—German unity: Prussia because she would 
thereby cease to exist, England because it would deprive her of the 
possibility of exploiting the German market, and Russia "because it 
would spell the advance of democracy not only to the Vistula but 
even as far as the Dvina and the Dnieper. Prussia, England and 
Russia have conspired against Schleswig-Holstein, against Germany 
and against the revolution. 
The war that may now arise from the decisions taken at Frankfurt 
would be a war waged by Germany against Prussia, England and 
Russia. This is just the kind of war that the flagging German 
movement needs—a war against the three great counter­
revolutionary powers, a war which would really cause Prussia to 
merge into Germany, which would make an alliance with Poland an 
indispensable necessity and would lead to the immediate liberation 
of Italy; a war which would be directed against Germany's old 
counter-revolutionary allies of 1792-1815, a war which would 
"imperil the fatherland" and for that very reason save it by making 
the victory of Germany dependent on the victory of democracy. 
The bourgeois and the junkers at Frankfurt should not deceive 
themselves — if they decide to reject the armistice they will be setting 
the seal to their own downfall, just as the Girondists did during the 
first revolution when they took part in the events of August 10 and 
voted for the death of the ex-King,a thereby preparing their own 
downfall on May  31.277  If, on the other hand, they accept the 
armistice, they will still be sealing their own downfall: they will be 
placing themselves under the jurisdiction of Prussia and cease to 
have any say in things. It is up to them to choose. 
The news of Hansemann's downfall probably reached Frankfurt 
before the vote was taken. This may influence the vote significantly, 
especially since it is expected that a Government of Waldeck and 
Rodbertus will follow who, as we know, recognise the sovereignty of 
the National Assembly. 
The future will show. But we repeat—Germany's honour is in bad 
hands! 
Written by Engels on September 9, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 99, September 10, 1848 
a Louis XVI.— Ed. 

=====第456页=====
426 
ARRESTS 
Cologne, September 11. We are addressing the following request 
for information to whichever gentlemen in the Public Prosecutor's 
department it may concern: 
Is it true that at 8 o'clock yesterday evening Herr Salget and Herr 
Blum Jr., from Cologne, who had already formed a workers' 
association in Cassel, were arrested in Wesseling, by the Burgomas­
ter Herr von Geier, on the instigation of the parson? They had 
intended to form a workers' association 3 in Wesseling too, but were 
arrested before they had even spoken a word in public and before 
the meeting had begun. 
Is it true that the only reason for this arrest, which did in fact take 
place, was the pastor's denunciation that the two gentlemen wanted 
(!) to stir up the workers? 
Assuming that this is how matters stand, will the Public Prosecutor 
take steps to deal with this outrageous infringement of the law or—in 
expectation of the Radowitz Ministry and of the speedy abolition of 
the right of free association — will he give Herr von Geier a vote of 
thanks? 
Written by Engels on September 11,1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 100, September 12, 1848 time 
See also this volume, pp. 579-80.— Ed. 

=====第457页=====
427 
THE CRISIS AND THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 100, September 12, 1848] 
Cologne, September 11. Anyone reading the reports from Berlin 
printed below can judge for himself whether we predicted the course 
of the government crisis correctly. The Ministers resigned; it seems 
that the camarilla did not approve of the Government's plan to 
dissolve the Agreement Assembly and to use martial law and guns in 
order to remain in office. The junkers from the Uckermark are 
thirsting for a conflict with the people and a repetition of the 
Parisian June scenes in the streets of Berlin, but they will never fight 
for the Hansemann Government, they will fight for a Government 
of the Prince of Prussia. The choice will fall on Radowitz, Vincke and 
similar reliable men who keep aloof from the Berlin Assembly and 
are in no way committed to it. The Government of the Prince of 
Prussia which is to be bestowed on us will comprise the cream of the 
Prussian and Westphalian knights associated for form's sake with a 
few bourgeois worthies from the extreme Right, such as Beckerath 
and his like, to whom will be assigned the conduct of the prosaic 
commercial side of the business of state. Meanwhile hundreds of 
rumours are being spread, Waldeck or Rodbertus is perhaps 
summoned, and public opinion is misled, while at the same time 
military preparations are being made to come out openly at the 
appropriate moment. 
We are facing a decisive struggle. The simultaneous crises at 
Frankfurt and Berlin and the latest decisions of the two Assemblies 
compel the counter-revolution to wage its last fight. If the 
counter-revolution in Berlin dares to spurn the constitutional 
principle of majority rule, if it confronts the 219 members of the 
majority with twice as many guns, if it dares to defy the majority not 

=====第458页=====
428 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
only in Berlin but also in Frankfurt by presenting to them a 
Government which is quite unacceptable to either of the two 
Assemblies — if it thus provokes a civil war between Prussia and 
Germany, then the democrats know what they have to do. 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 101, September 13, 1848] 
Cologne, September 12. Although already by midday we may 
receive news of the definite formation of a new Government as 
described by us yesterday and confirmed from other quarters, the 
government crisis in Berlin continues. There are only two solutions 
to this crisis: 
Either a Waldeck Government, recognition of the authority of the 
German National Assembly and recognition of popular sovereignty; 
Or a Radowitz-Vincke Government, dissolution of the Berlin 
Assembly, abolition of the revolutionary gains, a sham constitutional­
ism or even the United Diet. 
Don't let us shut our eyes to the fact that the conflict which has 
broken out in Berlin is a conflict not between the agreers and the 
Ministers, but between the Assembly, which for the first time acts as a 
Constituent Assembly, and the Crown. 
The point is whether or not the latter will have the courage to 
dissolve the Assembly. 
But has the Crown the right to dissolve the Assembly? 
True,  in constitutional states the Crown in case of disputes has 
the right to dissolve the legislative chambers convened on the basis 
of the Constitution and to appeal to the people by means of new 
elections. 
Is the Berlin Assembly a constitutional, legislative chamber? 
It is not. It has been convened "to come to an agreement with the 
Crown on the Prussian Constitution", it has been convened not on 
the basis of a Constitution, but on that of a revolution. It received its 
mandate by no means from the Crown or from the Ministers 
answerable to the Crown, but from those who elected it and from the 
Assembly  itself.  The Assembly was sovereign as the legitimate 
expression of the revolution, and the mandate which Herr 
Camphausen jointly with the United Diet prepared for it in the 
shape of the electoral law of April 8 was nothing but a pious wish, in 
regard to which the Assembly had to decide. 
At first the Assembly more or less accepted the theory of 
agreement. It realised that in doing so it had been cheated by the 
Ministers and the camarilla. At last it performed a sovereign act, 

=====第459页=====
The Crisis and the Counter-Revolution 429 
acting for a moment as a constituent assembly and no longer as an 
Assembly of Agreement. 
Being the sovereign Assembly of Prussia, it had a perfect right to 
do this. 
A sovereign assembly, however, cannot be dissolved by anybody, 
and cannot be given orders by anybody. 
Even as a mere Agreement Assembly, even according to Herr 
Camphausen's own theory, it has equal status with the Crown. Both 
parties conclude a political treaty, both parties have an equal share of 
sovereignty—that is the theory of April 8, the Camphausen-
Hansemann theory, the official theory recognised by the Crown 
itself. 
If the Assembly and the Crown have equal rights, then  the Crown has 
no right to dissolve the Assembly. 
Otherwise, to be consistent, the Assembly would also have the right 
to depose the King. 
The dissolution of the Assembly would therefore be a coup d'état. 
And how people reply to a coup d'état was demonstrated on July 29, 
1830,  and February 24, 1848. a 
One may say the Crown could appeal again to the same voters. But 
who does not know that today the voters would elect an entirely 
different assembly, an assembly which would treat the Crown with 
much less ceremony? 
Everyone knows that after the dissolution of this Assembly it will 
only be possible to appeal to voters of an entirely different kind from 
those of April 8, that the only elections possible will be elections 
carried through under the tyranny of the sword. 
Let us have no illusions. 
If the Assembly wins and succeeds in setting up a Left 
Government, then the power of the Crown existing alongside the 
Assembly is broken, then the King is merely a paid servant of the 
people and we return again to the morning of March 19—provided 
the Waldeck Government does not betray us, as did many a 
Government before it. 
If the Crown wins and succeeds in setting up a Government of the 
Prince of Prussia, then the Assembly will be dissolved, the right of 
association abolished, the press muzzled, an electoral law based on 
property qualifications introduced, and, as we have already men­
tioned, even the United Diet may be reinvoked—and all this will be 
done under cover of a military dictatorship, guns and bayonets. 
a The reference is to the overthrow of Charles X in July 1830 and of Louis 
Philippe in February 1848.— Ed. 

=====第460页=====
430 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Which of the two sides will win depends on the attitude of the 
people, especially that of the democratic party. It is up to the 
democrats to choose. 
We have again the situation of July 25. Will they dare to issue the 
decrees being devised in Potsdam? Will the people be provoked to 
make the leap from July 26 to February 24 in a single day? 
The will to do it is certainly there, but what about the courage! 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 102, September 14, 1848] 
Cologne, September 13. The crisis in Berlin has advanced a step 
further. The conflict with the Crown, which yesterday could still be 
described as inevitable, has actually taken place. 
Our readers will find below the King's reply to the resignation of 
the Ministers.280 By this letter the Crown itself comes to the fore, 
sides with the Ministers and opposes the Assembly. 
It goes even further—it forms a Government outside the As­
sembly, it nominates Beckerath, who represents the extreme Right at 
Frankfurt and who, as everyone knows, will never be able to count on 
the support of the majority in Berlin. 
The King's message is countersigned by Herr Auerswald. Let Herr 
Auerswald, if he can, justify the fact that he thus uses the Crown to 
cover up his ignominious retreat, that at one and the same time he 
tries to hide behind the constitutional principle as far as the 
Chamber is concerned and tramples on the constitutional principle 
by compromising the Crown and invoking the republic. 
Constitutional principle! shout the Ministers. Constitutional prin­
ciple! shouts the Right. Constitutional principle! faintly echoes the 
Kölnische Zeitung. 
"Constitutional principle!" Are these gentlemen really so foolish 
as to believe that it is possible to extricate the German people from 
the storms of 1848, and from the imminent threat of collapse of all 
traditional institutions, by means of the Montesquieu-Delolme 
worm-eaten theory of division of powers, by means of worn-out 
phrases and long exploded fictions! 
"Constitutional principle!" But the very gentlemen who want to 
save the constitutional principle at all costs should realise first of all 
that at a provisional stage it can only be saved by energetic action. 
"Constitutional principle!" But the vote of the Berlin Assembly, 
the clashes between Potsdam and Frankfurt, the disturbances, the 
reactionary attempts, the provocations of the brutal soldiery—has all 
this not shown long ago that despite all the empty talk we  are still on a 

=====第461页=====
The Crisis and the Counter-Revolution 431 
revolutionary  basis,  and the pretence that we have already reached the 
basis of an  established,  complete constitutional monarchy only leads to 
collisions, which have already brought the "constitutional principle" 
to the brink of the abyss? 
Every provisional political set-up following a revolution requires a 
dictatorship, and an energetic dictatorship at that. From the very 
beginning we blamed Camphausen for not having acted in a 
dictatorial manner, for not having immediately smashed up and 
removed the remains of the old institutions. While thus Herr 
Camphausen indulged in constitutional dreaming, the defeated 
party strengthened its positions within the bureaucracy and in the 
army, and occasionally even risked an open fight. The Assembly was 
convened for the purpose of agreeing on the terms of the 
Constitution. It existed as an equal party alongside the Crown. Two 
equal powers in a provisional situation! It was this division of powers 
with the aid of which Herr Camphausen sought "to save free­
dom"—it was this very division of powers in a provisional situation 
that was bound to lead to conflicts. The Crown served as a cover for 
the counter-revolutionary aristocratic, military and bureaucratic 
camarilla. The bourgeoisie stood behind the majority of the 
Assembly. The Government tried to mediate. Too weak to act 
resolutely on behalf of the bourgeoisie and the peasants and 
overthrow the power of the nobility, the bureaucracy and the army 
chiefs at one blow, too unskilled to avoid always harming the 
bourgeoisie by its financial measures, the Government merely 
succeeded in compromising itself in the eyes of all the parties and 
bringing about the very clash it sought to avoid. 
In any unconstituted state of affairs it is solely the salut public, the 
public welfare, and not this or that principle that is the decisive 
factor. The only way in which the Government could avoid a conflict 
between the Assembly and the Crown lay in recognising the public 
welfare as the sole principle, even at the risk of the Government  itself 
coming into conflict with the Crown. But it preferred "not to 
compromise" itself in Potsdam. It never hesitated to employ public 
welfare measures (mesures de salut public), dictatorial measures, 
against the democratic forces. What else was the application of the 
old laws to political crimes, even after Herr Märker had recognised 
that these articles of the Prussian Law ought to be repealed? What 
else were the wholesale arrests in all parts of the kingdom? 
But the Government carefully refrained from intervening against 
the counter-revolution in the name of public welfare. 
It was this half-heartedness of the Government in face of the 
counter-revolution, which became more menacing with every day, 
16-3447 

=====第462页=====
432 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
that compelled the Assembly itself to dictate measures of public 
welfare. If the Crown represented by the Ministers was too weak, 
then the Assembly itself had to intervene. It did so by passing the 
resolution of August 9. It did so in a form still rather mild, by merely 
warning the Ministers. The Ministers took no notice of it. 81 
Indeed, how could they have agreed to it? The resolution of 
August 9 flouted the constitutional principle, it is an encroachment 
of the legislative power on the executive power, it destroys the 
division of powers and their mutual control, which are essential in 
the interests of freedom, it turns the Assembly of Agreement into a 
National Convention. 
There follows a running fire of threats, a vociferous appeal to the 
fears of the petty bourgeois and the prospect of a reign of terror with 
guillotines, progressive taxes, confiscations and the red flag. 
To compare the Berlin Assembly with the Convention. What 
irony! 
But these gentlemen were not altogether wrong. If the Govern­
ment continues in the way it has been doing, we shall have a 
Convention before long—not merely for Prussia, but for Germany as 
a whole—a Convention which will have to use all means to cope with 
the civil war in our twenty Vendees and with the inevitable war with 
Russia. At present, however, we merely have a parody of the 
Constituent Assembly.282 
But how have the Ministers who invoke the constitutional principle 
upheld this principle? 
On August 9, they calmly allowed the Assembly to break up in the 
belief that the Ministers would carry out the resolution. They had no 
intention of making known to the Assembly their refusal to do so, 
and still less of resigning their office. 
They ruminated on the matter for a whole month and finally, 
when threatened with a number of parliamentary questions, they 
curtly informed the Assembly that it was self-evident that they would 
not put the resolution into effect. 
When the Assembly thereupon instructs the Ministers, neverthe­
less, to put the resolution into effect, they take refuge behind the 
Crown, and cause a rupture between the Crown and the Assembly, 
thus invoking the republic. 
And these gentlemen still talk about the constitutional principle! 
To sum up: 
The inevitable conflict between two powers having equal rights in 
a provisional situation has broken out. The Ministry was unable to 
govern with sufficient energy; it has failed to take the necessary 
measures of public welfare. The Assembly has merely performed its 

=====第463页=====
The Crisis and the Counter-Revolution 433 
duty in demanding that the Ministry do its duty. The Ministry 
declares this to be an encroachment upon the rights of the Crown 
and discredits the Crown at the very moment of its resignation. The 
Crown and the Assembly confront each other. The "agreement" has 
led to separation, to conflict. It is possible that arms will decide the 
issue. 
The side that has the greater courage and consistency will win. 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 104, September 16, 1848] 
Cologne, September 15. The government crisis has once again 
entered a new phase, due, not to the arrival and vain efforts of the 
impossible Herr Beckerath, but to the army revolt in Potsdam and 
Nauen. 28* The conflict between democracy and aristocracy has 
broken out even within the guard regiments. The soldiers consider that 
the resolution carried by the Assembly on the 7th liberates them 
from the tyranny of their officers; they cheer the Assembly and send 
letters of thanks to it. 
This has wrenched the sword from the hands of the counter­
revolutionaries. They will not dare now to dissolve the Assembly, and 
since this cannot be attempted, they will have to give in, carry out the 
resolution of the Assembly and form a Waldeck Ministry. 
It is quite possible that the soldiers in revolt at Potsdam will save us 
a revolution. 
Written by Marx on September 11, 12, 13 Printed according to the newspaper 
and 15, 1848 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung Nos. 100, 101, 102 and 104, 
September 12, 13, 14 and 16, 1848 

=====第464页=====
434 
ARMY ORDER, ELECTION CANDIDATES, 
SEMI-OFFICIAL COMMENTS ON PRUSSIAN AMBIGUITY 
We have received Danish newspapers up to September 9. An army 
order of September 4 gives the following instructions: General Krogh 
takes over command in Jutland, headquarters Viborg. For the 
duration of the armistice the garrison in Alsena has a special 
command. The corps in the field is quartered as far as possible in its 
recruiting areas and is therefore spread across Jutland and the 
islands. Forty to fifty men per company remain under arms, the rest 
will be sent home on leave, and the brigade commanders are 
instructed to inspect their troops frequently and prepare for a new 
campaign. However, since the Kingb wants to make a personal 
inspection of the troops before they go on leave, these decisions will 
not be carried out until further orders. It is also unlikely that they 
will be, for as the postscript of the Faedreland announced on the 9th, 
news of the decision passed by the National Assembly about 
suspending the withdrawal has just reached Copenhagen in private 
letters. 
The Danes can rely fairly firmly on the troops recruited in North 
Schleswig, this is evident from the fact that it was precisely these 
sections of the army that were moved to the vicinity of the Schleswig 
frontier or Alsen. 
The liberal party in Copenhagen has put forward its list of 
candidates for the approaching elections. The representatives of the 
middle class, the editors of the Faedreland and other "men of the 
people" of the "constitutional monarchy established on a democratic 
a The Danish name is Als.— Ed. 
b Frederick VIL— Ed. 

=====第465页=====
Army Order, Election Candidates, Comments on Prussian Ambiguity 435 
basis"  (note how thoroughly the Danes have plagiarised the 
Germans) have met to draw up the list. It consists of a bank manager, 
a director of a life-insurance institution, two schoolmasters, an 
attorney, a lieutenant-colonel, a naval officer, two artisans and a 
"disvacheur" (!). It can be seen what sort of intellectual forces are at 
the disposal of the " Hovedstad'.a 
The Prussian Government is unfortunate. In the Danish affair too 
it has managed to give Prussia a reputation for ambiguity which 
almost verges on treason against both sides. This ambiguity has 
always been a well-known feature of Prussian policy; we need only 
think of the "Great" Elector's15 betrayal of Poland when he suddenly 
went over to Sweden, of the Basle Peace, of 1805 and more recently 
of the ambiguity through which the Ministry enticed Poland into the 
trap.284  And now, in the Danish affair, the Prussian Government has 
abused the interests of the German people and not even earned a 
word of thanks from Denmark. Let us listen to what the Faedreland 
says: 
"According to the note of the Prussian Prime Minister Auerswald (to the 
Provisional Government in Rendsburg), which we publish below, it is plain that 
Prussia is playing a very ambiguous role. In the first place it is extremely surprising 
that the Prussian Government should have any dealings at all with the rebel 
Government in the duchies. Furthermore, Herr Auerswald has in more than one 
respect completely twisted the meaning of the terms of the armistice. Although the 
armistice was in no way intended to furnish any basis for a final peace, Herr 
Auerswald nonetheless claims that through it conditions are being prepared that will 
bring about a favourable final solution. He talks further of the significance of the 
terms whereby the federal troops are to remain in Schleswig and the Schleswig-
Holstein army corps is to continue at its present strength, even though the armistice 
stipulates that the Schleswig and the Holstein troops should be separated and the 
federal troops remain in Altona. Lastly, he puts forward a similar falsehood when he 
says that the legal situation in the duchies is to continue on its present basis, whereas 
the armistice says that the decrees issued since March 17 both by the King of 
Denmark and by the Provisional Government should be repealed. As regards the 
Central Authority, it has shown such a lack of firmness towards the Assembly in its 
negotiations over Limburg that from that side one can really expect anything." 
Written by Engels on September 14, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 103, September 15, 1848 time 
a Capital.— Ed. 
Frederick William.— Ed. 

=====第466页=====
436 
FREEDOM OF DEBATE IN BERLIN 
Cologne, September 16. Ever since the beginning of the crisis the 
counter-revolutionary press keeps alleging that the deliberations of 
the Berlin Assembly are not free from interference. In particular, 
the well-known correspondent "G" of the Kölnische Zeitung, who also 
discharges his duties only "temporarily pending the appointment of 
a successor", 287 refers with obvious fear to the "8,000 to 10,000 
strong-arm men" in the Kastanienwäldchen who "morally" support 
their friends of the Left. The Vossische, Spenersche and other 
newspapers have set up a similar wail, and on the 7th of this month 
Herr Reichensperger has even tabled a motion frankly demand­
ing that the Assembly be removed from Berlin (to Charlottenburg 
perhaps?). 
The Berliner Zeitungs-Halle publishes a long article 3 in which it tries 
to refute these accusations. It declares that the large majority 
obtained by the Left was by no means inconsistent with the former 
irresolute attitude of the Assembly. It can be shown, it says, 
"that the voting of the 7th could have taken place without conflicting with the 
former attitude even of those members who previously voted always for the 
Government, that it was indeed from their point of view in perfect harmony with their 
former position...." The members who came over from the Centre parties "had 
laboured under a delusion; they imagined that the Ministers carried out the will of the 
people; they had taken the endeavours of the Ministers to restore law and order for an 
expression of their own will, i.e. that of the majority of deputies, and had not  realised 
that the Ministers could accede to the popular will only when it did not run counter to 
the will of the Crown, but not when it was opposed to it". 
"Berlin, 14. September", Berliner Zeitungs-Halle No. 213, September 15, 
1848.—  Ed. 
b September 7, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第467页=====
Freedom of Debate in Berlin 437 
Thus the Zeitungs-Halle "explains" the striking phenomenon of 
the sudden change in the attitude of so many deputies by ascribing it 
to the notions and delusions of these deputies. The thing could not 
be presented in a more innocent way. 
The paper admits, however, that intimidations did occur. But, it 
says, 
"if outside influences did have any effect, it was only that they partially 
counterbalanced the ministerial misrepresentations and artful temptation, thus 
enabling the many weak and irresolute deputies to follow their natural vital instinct...." 
The reasons which induced the Zeitungs-Halle thus morally to 
justify the vacillating members of the Centre parties in the eyes of 
the public are obvious. The article is written for these gentlemen of 
the Centre parties rather than for the general public. For us, 
however, these reasons do not exist, since we are privileged to speak 
plainly, and since we support the representatives of a party only as 
long and insofar as they act in a revolutionary manner. 
Why should we not say it? The Centre parties certainly were 
intimidated by the masses on September 7a; we leave it open whether 
their fear was well founded or not. 
The right of the democratic popular masses, by their presence, to 
exert a moral influence on the attitude of constituent assemblies is an 
old revolutionary right of the people which could not be dispensed 
with in all stormy periods ever since the English and French 
revolutions. History owes to this right almost all the energetic steps 
taken by such assemblies. The only reason why people dwelling on 
the "legal basis" and the timorous and philistine friends of "freedom 
of debate" lament about this right, is that they do not want any 
energetic decisions at all. 
"Freedom of debate"—there is no emptier phrase than this. The 
"freedom of debate" is, on the one hand, impaired by the freedom 
of the press, by the freedom of assembly and of speech, and by the 
right of the people to take up arms. It is impaired by the existing 
state power in the hands of the Crown and its Ministers—the army, 
the police and the so-called independent judges, who depend, 
however, on every promotion and every political change. 
The freedom of debate is always a phrase denoting simply 
independence of all influences that are not recognised in law. It is 
only the recognised influences, such as bribery, promotion, private 
interests and fear of a dissolution of the Assembly, that make the 
debates really "free". In times of revolution, however, this phrase 
a See this volume, pp. 417-19.— Ed. 

=====第468页=====
438 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
becomes entirely meaningless. When two forces, two parties in arms 
confront each other, when a fight may start at any moment, the 
deputies have only this choice: 
Either they place themselves under the protection of the people, in 
which case they will put up occasionally with a small lecture; 
Or they place themselves under the protection of the Crown, move to 
some small town, deliberate under the protection of bayonets and 
guns or even a state of siege, in which case they will raise no objec­
tions when the Crown and the bayonets dictate their decisions to 
them. 
Intimidation by the unarmed people or intimidation by an armed 
soldiery—that is the choice before the Assembly. 
The French Constituent Assembly transferred its sessions from 
Versailles to Paris. It would be quite in character with the German 
revolution if the Assembly of Agreement were to move from Berlin to 
Charlottenburg. 
Written on September 16, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 105, September 17, 1848 

=====第469页=====
439 
RATIFICATION OF THE ARMISTICE 1 
Cologne, September 19. The German National Assembly has 
ratified the armistice. We were not mistaken: "Germany's honour 
has fallen into bad hands."3 
The vote was taken amidst uproar and complete darkness, when 
the benches of the deputies were thronged with strangers, diplomats 
etc. A majority of two forced the Assembly to vote simultaneously on 
two entirely different questions. The armistice was carried, Schles­
wig-Holstein sacrificed, "Germany's honour" trampled under foot 
and the merging of Germany in Prussia decided by a majority of 21 
votes. 
On no other issue has there been such a clear expression of public 
opinion. On no other issue have the gentlemen of the Right so 
openly admitted that they uphold a cause which is indefensible. In no 
other issue were Germany's interests so indubitable and so obvious as 
in this. The National Assembly has made its decision—it has 
pronounced the death sentence upon itself and upon the so-called 
Central Authority created by it. If Germany had a Cromwell it would 
not be long before he would say: "You are no Parliament.... Depart, I 
say.... In the name of God,—go!"b 
There is talk of the impending withdrawal of the Left. If it had 
courage, this poor derided Left, which has been attacked with fists by 
the majority and in addition called to order by the noble Gagera! 
Never has a minority been so insolently and consistently maltreated 
a See this volume, p.  425.—  Ed. 
The words Cromwell used when dissolving the Rump Parliament on April 20, 
1653.—  Ed. 

=====第470页=====
440 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
as has been the Frankfurt Left by the noble Gagern and his 250 
champions of the majority. If only it had courage! 
Lack of courage is ruining the entire German movement. The 
counter-revolution just as much as the revolutionary party lacks the 
courage for decisive blows. All Germans, whether on the Right or on 
the Left, know now that the present movement must lead to terrible 
clashes, to bloody battles, fought either to suppress it or to carry it 
through. But instead of courageously facing these unavoidable 
battles, instead of fighting them out with a few rapid and decisive 
blows, the two parties—the party of the counter-revolution and that 
of the movement—virtually conspire to put them off as long as 
possible. It is due to this constant resort to petty expedients, to trivial 
concessions and palliatives, to these attempts at mediation, that the 
unbearable and uncertain political situation has led everywhere to 
numerous isolated uprisings, which can only be liquidated by 
bloodshed and the curtailment of rights already won. It is this fear of 
struggle that gives rise to thousands of minor clashes making the 
year 1848 exceptionally sanguinary and so complicating the position 
of the contending parties that in the end the struggle is bound to 
become the more violent and destructive. But "our dear friends' lack 
of courage"!3 
The crucial struggle for Germany's centralisation and democratic 
organisation cannot possibly be avoided. Every day brings it nearer 
despite all attempts to gloss over it and compromise. The complex 
situation in Vienna, Berlin and Frankfurt demands a decision, and if 
everything should fail because of German timidity and indecision, we 
shall be saved by France. The consequences of the June victory are 
now taking shape in Paris—the royalists are getting the better of 
Cavaignac and his "pure republicans" in the National Assembly, in 
the press and in the clubs; a general uprising is threatening to break 
out in the legitimist South; Cavaignac has to resort to Ledru-Rollin's 
revolutionary remedies, i.e. to departmental commissioners invest­
ed with extraordinary powers; it was with the greatest difficulty 
that he managed to defend himself and his Government in Parlia­
ment last Saturday. Another such division, and Thiers, Barrot and 
company, the men in whose interests the June victory was won, 
will possess a majority, Cavaignac will be thrown into the arms of 
the red republic, and the struggle for the republic's existence will 
begin. 
If Germany's irresoluteness should persist, this new phase of the 
French revolution will also be a signal for a fresh outbreak of open 
Heinrich Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput XIX.— Ed. 

=====第471页=====
Ratification of the Armistice -441 
struggle in Germany, a struggle which we hope will take us a little 
further and will at least free Germany from the traditional fetters of 
her past. 
Written by Engels on September 19, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 107, September 20, 1848 

=====第472页=====
442 
THE UPRISING IN FRANKFURT 
[Neue  Rheinische Zeitung  No. 107 (supplement), 
September 20, 1848] 
Cologne, September 19, 7 p.m. The German-Danish armistice has 
raised a storm. A sanguinary revolt has begun in Frankfurt. The 
workers of Frankfurt, Offenbach and Hanau, and the peasants of 
the surrounding districts, are defending with their lives Germany's 
honour betrayed by the National Assembly to a Prussian Govern­
ment which has ignominiously resigned. 
The outcome of the struggle is still uncertain. Until yesterday 
evening the soldiers apparently made little progress. In Frankfurt, 
apart from the Zeil and perhaps a few other streets and squares, 
artillery is of little use, and cavalry of almost no use at all. In this 
respect the people are in an advantageous position. Citizens of 
Hanau, armed with weapons from the arsenal they had stormed, 
have come to their assistance, as have also peasants from numerous 
villages in the vicinity. Yesterday evening the military probably 
numbered about 10,000 men and very little artillery. Large 
reinforcements of peasants must have arrived during the night, and 
considerably smaller ones of soldiers, the immediate vicinity being 
denuded of troops. The revolutionary temper of the peasants in the 
Odenwald, Nassau and the Electorate of Hesse precluded further 
withdrawals; it is likely that communications have been interrupted. 
If today the insurgents are still holding out, then the whole of the 
Odenwald, Nassau, the Electorate of Hesse and Rhenish Hesse will 
take up arms, the entire population between Fulda, Koblenz, 
Mannheim and Aschaffenburg will be in arms, and there are 
insufficient troops available to crush the uprising. And who will 
answer for Mainz, Mannheim, Marburg, Cassel and Wiesba­
den—towns in which hatred of the brutal soldiery has reached its 

=====第473页=====
The Uprising in Frankfurt 443 
highest pitch as a result of the bloody excesses of the so-called federal 
troops? Who will answer for the peasants on the Rhine, who can 
easily prevent troops being sent along the river? 
We admit, nevertheless, that we have little hope of the courageous 
insurgents being able to win the day. Frankfurt is too small a town, 
the number of troops is disproportionately large, and the well-
known counter-revolutionary sentiments of the local petty bourgeoi­
sie are too great to allow us to be very hopeful. 
But even if the insurgents are defeated, this will settle nothing. 
The counter-revolution will become arrogant, it will enslave us for a 
time by introducing martial law, by suppressing freedom of the 
press,  and banning the clubs and public meetings; but before long 
the crowing of the Gallic cocka will announce the hour of liberation, 
the hour of revenge. 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 108, September 21, 1848] 
Cologne, September 20. The news from Frankfurt is beginning to 
gradually confirm our fears of yesterday. It seems certain that the 
insurgents have been ejected from Frankfurt, and that now they are 
holding only Sachsenhausen, where they are said to be strongly 
entrenched. A state of siege has been declared in Frankfurt; anyone 
caught carrying weapons or resisting the "federal authority" is to be 
court -martialled. 
Thus the gentlemen in St. Paul's Church are now on an equal 
footing with their colleagues in Paris. They can now at their leisure 
and under the rule of martial law reduce the fundamental rights of 
the German people to a "minimum". 
The railway line to Mainz is torn up in many places, and the post 
arrives either late or not at all. 
It appears that artillery decided the outcome of the fight in the 
wide streets and enabled the army to attack the fighters on the 
barricades from the rear. Additional factors were the zeal with which 
the petty bourgeois of Frankfurt opened their houses to the soldiers, 
thus giving them every advantage in the street-fighting, and the 
superior strength of the troops, swiftly brought up by rail, over the 
peasant contingents, which arrived showly on foot. 
But even if the fight has not been renewed in Frankfurt  itself,  it 
certainly does not mean that the uprising has been crushed. The 
a Heinrich Heine, "Kahldorf über den Adel, in Briefen an den Grafen M. von 
Moltke". Einleitung. — Ed. 

=====第474页=====
444 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
angry peasants are not likely to put their weapons down forthwith. 
Though they may not be able to break up the National Assembly, 
they still have enough at home that has to be cleared away. The 
storm that was repelled outside St. Paul's Church can spread to six or 
eight petty princely residences and to hundreds of manorial estates. 
The peasant war begun this spring will not come to an end until 
its goal, the liberation of the peasants from feudalism, has been 
achieved. 
What is the reason for the persistent victory of "order" 
throughout Europe and for the numerous recurrent defeats of the 
revolutionary party from Naples, Prague and Paris to Milan, Vienna 
and Frankfurt? 
It is because all parties know that the struggle impending in all 
civilised countries is quite different from, infinitely more significant 
than, all previous revolutions; in Vienna and Paris, in Berlin and 
Frankfurt, in London and Milan the point at issue is the overthrow of 
the political rule of the bourgeoisie, an upheaval whose immediate 
consequences are enough to terrify all portly, stockjobbing bour­
geois. 
Is there a revolutionary centre anywhere in the world where the 
red flag, the battle emblem of the united proletariat of Europe, has 
not been found flying on the barricades during the last five months? 
In Frankfurt, too, the fight against the Parliament of the combined 
landowners and bourgeois was waged under the red flag. 
The reason for all these defeats is that every uprising that now 
takes place is a direct threat to the political existence of the 
bourgeoisie, and an indirect threat to its social existence. The people, 
mostly unarmed, have to fight not only the organised power of the 
bureaucratic and military state which the bourgeoisie has taken over, 
they have to fight the armed bourgeoisie  itself.  The people, who are 
unorganised and poorly armed, are confronted by all the other social 
classes, who are well organised and fully armed. That is the reason 
why up to now the people have been defeated and will continue to be 
defeated until their opponents are weakened either through 
dissension, or because the army is engaged in war—or until some 
important event impels the people to begin a desperate fight and 
demoralises their opponents. 
Such a great event is impending in France. 
Hence we need not give up hope, even though during the last four 
months the barricades everywhere have been defeated by grape-
shot. On the contrary, every victory of our opponents was at the 
same time a defeat for them, for it divided them and, ultimately, 
gave control not to the conservative party that was victorious in 

=====第475页=====
The Uprising in Frankfurt 445 
February and March, but in each case to the party that had been 
overthrown in February and March. Only for a short time did the 
victory won in Paris in June establish the rule of the petty bour­
geoisie, the pure republicans; hardly three months have passed and 
the big bourgeoisie, the constitutional party, is threatening to 
overthrow Cavaignac and drive the "pure ones" into the arms of the 
"reds".  This will happen in Frankfurt too — the victory will benefit, 
not the respectable gentlemen from the Centre parties, but those of 
the Right. The bourgeoisie will have to give pride of place to the 
gendemen representing the military, bureaucratic and junker state 
and will very soon taste the bitter fruits of its victory. 
May these bitter fruits do it good! Meanwhile we shall await the 
moment when the hour of liberation for Europe will have struck in 
Paris. 
Written by Engels on September 19 and Printed according to the newspaper 
20, 1848 
First published in the supplement to the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 107 and 
in No. 108, September 20 and 
21, 1848 

=====第476页=====
446 
THE FAEDRELAND ON THE ARMISTICE 
Cologne, September 21. It is common knowledge that the so-called 
National Assembly in Frankfurt approved of the armistice on 
Prussia's assurance that the Danish Government has officially given 
notice of its readiness to agree to modifications. 
It is well known, however, what intrigues went on during the 
voting on the preliminary question. The intrigues over the main 
question took place outside the Assembly. 
Listen to what the Faedreland of September 16 says: 
After explaining the disadvantages of the armistice that was 
actually signed as compared with the first draft, the newspaper 
comes to the advantages for Denmark. England and Russia would 
intervene if the war broke out again; German unity, held together 
with difficulty by the Danish war, would immediately disintegrate; 
the population of Jutland could be trained as an army reserve and 
the army doubled in size: 
"and 60,000 troops on the narrow peninsula, backed up by the fleet, are a 
Dannevirke which big, united Germany would think twice about storming". 
"But whatever the terms of the armistice, it is plain that once it is signed, ratified 
and guaranteed, it would be irresponsible if we neglected to fulfil its terms, or 
tolerated their infringement by our enemies. There is no question of our Government 
doing such a thing, there can and must be no doubts about this, and for this reason it 
would be wrong to get alarmed at all the rumours hawked around in Schleswig-
Holstein publications about changes in the terms once they have been  accepted.  We are 
fully aware that Prussian generals and officials and the Germans in general, with a few 
honourable exceptions, do not take their commitments and their vows, their bona fides 
so very seriously; we are quite ready to believe that General Wrangel had the 
effrontery to put proposals to the Danish Commissioner, Mr. Reedtz, suggesting a 
breach of the terms in order to make them more acceptable to his friends in 
Schleswig-Holstein; we are quite ready to believe that both the Frankfurt Assembly 
and the Prussian Ministry consider it quite in order to urge us to agree to arbitrary 

=====第477页=====
The Faedreland on the Armistice 447 
changes in a matter that has already been signed and sealed in due form. But we also 
believe that the worst thing our Government could do would be to permit them to 
alter even one jot or tittle of the treaty, for then "German honesty" would have no 
qualms about trampling the whole thing under foot. If Karl Moltke cannot find any 
co-regents, since it has been laid down how these are to be appointed, the Danish 
Government can proceed to choose two whose agreement is certain in advance, and it 
is then up to Prussia to find two of its own. If the people of Schleswig-Holstein are not 
willing to obey, it is up  to Prussia to  force  them to. And if on the last appointed date, that 
is tomorrow, September 17, there is anything essential missing in the execution of the 
treaty after we for our part have conscientiously fulfilled all our obligations, then it is 
up to the Danish Government to set a final deadline, and if this also expires without any 
further developments, then it is the right and duty of  the Danish Government to move the 
army to Schleswig and have it  occupied.  We will then see what Europe has to say and what 
guarantees and obligations actually mean. We certainly have no need to fear the 
consequences; whatever they are, it is easier to endure them than to disgrace ourselves 
in our own eyes and in the eyes of the whole world, than to allow ourselves to be 
treated as the bondsman (Traet) of German arrogance and German dishonesty. 
"We are pleased to say that as we lay down our pen we can give the positive 
assurance that as far as Danish Government is concerned any modification of the 
armistice convention which has been concluded is out of the question. 
Thus the semi-official organ of the Danish Cabinet. 
And now? Who is the deceiver now, who the deceived, who the 
deceived deceiver3? 
Written by Engels on September 21, 1848 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 109, September 22, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a G. E. Lessing, Nathan der Weise, Act III, Scene 7.— Ed. 

=====第478页=====
448 
THE GOVERNMENT 
OF THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 
Cologne, September 22. It has happened after all! The Govern­
ment of the Prince of Prussia is in being and the counter-revolution 
intends to risk the final decisive blow.290 
Read the following letter by a deputy: 
"Berlin, September 20, 10 p.m. We have just learned beyond doubt that an entirely 
counter-revolutionary Government has been formed, namely" (then follows the list of 
Ministers which we gave yesterday in accordance with the special edition of the 
Zeitungs-Halle). "At tomorrow's session this same Government will read out a royal 
message wherein the prospect of the disbandment of the Assembly will be held out. The 
result of this is a declaration of permanence which will probably lead to a new and very 
bloody revolution. All parties of the National Assembly are consulting permanently in 
their usual premises. The population is very excited. Wrangel has held a military 
review today. Everything seems to be in question!" 
It has happened after all! The Crown seeks the protection of the 
Uckermark grandees and the Uckermark grandees oppose the 
revolutionary movement of the year 1848. The Don Quixotes of 
Further Pomerania, these old warriors and debt-encumbered landed 
proprietors, will finally have their opportunity to cleanse their rusty 
blades in the blood of the agitators. 291 The guards, crowned with the 
cheap glory of Schleswig, are supposed to strike the decisive blow 
against the revolution which intrudes upon the rights of the Crown, 
which wants to prohibit the officers from plotting secretly and which 
intends, by the implacable hand of Hansemann's financial measures, 
to take a terribly "bold dip" 3 into the already limp purse of the 
Brandenburg junkers. The guards will take revenge for the 
An expression first used by Karl Mathy and Heinrich von Gagern in the 
Frankfurt National Assembly in 1848; it became quickly popular.— Ed. 

=====第479页=====
The Government of the Counter-Revolution 449 
humiliation of March 18, disperse the Berlin Assembly and the 
officers will ride down Unter den Linden over the corpses of the 
revolutionaries. 
Go on! Forward with God for King and Fatherland!3 
Written on September 22, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 110, September 23, 1848 time 
a From Frederick William Ill's decree on the formation of an army reserve issued 
on March 17,  1813.—  Ed. 

=====第480页=====
450 
[THE COLOGNE COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC 
SAFETY] 292 
Cologne, September 23. As already announced in this newspaper, 
the Committee of Public Safety has notified the authorities here that 
it has undertaken 1) to co-operate in the preservation of peace and 
2) to watch over the gains of the revolution.2  Herr von Wittgenstein 
has passed on this news to Public Prosecutor Hecker just as he 
received it, together with an official request to investigate whether 
the Committee's plans in any way constitute a punishable offence. 
Poor Herr Hecker! Already overburdened with the duties of his 
office, he now has also to take over the capacity for judging from the 
administrative officials!!! 
Written about September 23, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the supplement to the Published in English for the first 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 112, time 
September 26, 1848 
a See this volume, pp. 586-87.— Ed. 

=====第481页=====
451 
[PUBLIC PROSECUTOR HECKER QUESTIONS 
PEOPLE WHO HAD ATTENDED THE WORRINGEN 
MEETING] 
Cologne, September 24. The Public Prosecutor, Herr Hecker, is the 
most harassed man in Cologne. For several days now he has been 
personally questioning witnesses in an attempt to find out what sort 
of sins against the Holy Spirit of penal law were committed at the 
public meeting at Worringen. 293 Up to now the results of his inquiries 
are said to have been extremely meagre, 1) because nothing illegal 
happened and 2) because it is unlikely that witnesses still remember 
what each individual said and especially in what context he said it. As 
regards 2), we think it better to refer Herr Hecker to the band of 
disguised policemen and mouchards who were wandering around the 
meadow taking notes in shorthand. But there again, if some of these 
pillars of the state are unable to give any evidence, we should not be 
surprised. One of them in particular was so drunk even at midday 
that he made his way in tears from one bar to the next gratefully 
accepting the drinks offered him and telling people "in confidence" 
that it is true he was here as a spy, but apart from this he was a decent 
fellow. 
Written on September 24, 1848, or later Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the supplement to the Published in English for the first 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 112, time 
September 26, 1848 

=====第482页=====
452 
[COUNTER-REVOLUTION IN COLOGNE] 
Cologne, September 25. Scarcely had the official news of the 
formation of the counter-revolutionary Government2 reached the 
Rhine when the Public Prosecutor's office here suddenly developed 
not only an almighty appetite for arrests but a zeal for activity such as 
was not encountered even in the old police state. 
The counter-revolutionary campaign started this morning. Its 
heroes have won victories in some fields and suffered defeats in 
others—a fate that has befallen even greater generals. The intention 
was to lead away a few dozen Cologne democrats as early morning 
spoils and to delight the local wailers294  over their breakfasts with the 
news.  However, part of the prey was wrested from these gendemen. 
For example, Wächter, captain of the 9th Company of the civic 
militia, was snatched by the people from the clutches of the Holy 
Hermandad. 295 Six guardians of the law forced their way into the 
house of our fellow citizen Moll. The crowd that quickly gathered 
around the house and its threatening attitude caused two of these 
gendemen to flee into the attic and a third into the cellar. Un­
fortunately the house has only one exit. Moll acceded to the 
wishes of these terrified gentlemen and asked the people to allow the 
brigade of six men to withdraw in safety. 
Becker and Schapper, on the other hand, were led off to gaol in the 
early hours of the morning. There are reports that in addition to 
Bürgers several other members of the editorial staff of our 
newspaper are on the proscribed list and that attempts have been 
made to arrest them. 
a See this volume, pp. 448-49.—Ed. 

=====第483页=====
Counter-Revolution in Cologne 453 
If these gentlemen go ahead with their plans, it will soon be a 
mystery how the editorial work of our newspaper is to be carried out. 
But we believe we can declare that all the manoeuvres directed 
against us will fail in their main aim and that our readers will 
continue as usual to receive the newspaper regularly. It is merely a 
question of who will first lose their sense of humour: the gentlemen 
from the Public Prosecutor's office or the editors of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. 
We would add that even now some policemen etc. are on their 
way to Mülheim to punish several hated democrats there with arrest 
and imprisonment. 
Written on September 25, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 112, September 26, 1848 time 

=====第484页=====
454 
[AN ATTEMPT TO ARREST MOLL] 
Cologne, 11 a. m. This morning a detachment of the 29th Regiment 
was sent into the Kranz to carry out Moll's arrest. The soldiers were 
driven back and with the aid of the workers Moll got away safely. 
Written on September 25, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 113, September 27, 1848 time 

=====第485页=====
455 
[STATE OF SIEGE; IN COLOGNE] 2 
Cologne, September 26. Today we are also omitting the synopsis. 
We are hurrying to print the paper. We are being informed by a 
reliable source that the city will be placed in a state of siege within 
an hour or two, that the civic militia will be dissolved and 
disarmed, that the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, the Neue Kölnische 
Zeitung, the Arbeiter-Zeitung and the Wächter am Rhein will be 
suspended, that courts martial will be instituted and that all the 
rights gained in March are to be suppressed. It is reported that the 
civic militia is not inclined to let itself be disarmed. 
Written on September 26, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 113, September 27, 1848 time 

=====第486页=====
456 
[EDITORIAL STATEMENT CONCERNING 
THE REAPPEARANCE OF THE NEUE RHEINISCHE 
ZEITUNG] 
Due to the interest shown, particularly in Cologne, for the 
preservation of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, we have been able to 
overcome the financial difficulties brought about by the state of 
siege and to let the paper reappear. The editorial board remains the 
same. Ferdinand Freiligrath has newly joined it. 
Karl Marx 
Editor-in-Chief of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Written by Marx on October 11, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 114, October 12, 1848 time 

=====第487页=====
457 
REVOLUTION IN VIENNA ; 
Cologne, October 11. In its first issue (for June 1) the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung wrote of a revolution (on May 25) in Vienna. 
Today, when we resume publication for the first time after the break 
caused by the declaration of a state of siege in Cologne, we bring 
news of the much more important Viennese revolution of October 6 
and 7. Detailed reports on the events in Vienna compel us today to 
omit all analytical articles. Only a few words of comment, therefore, 
on the revolution in Vienna. Our readers will see from the reports of 
our Vienna correspondent 3 that the bourgeoisie's distrust of the 
working class threatens, if not to wreck the revolution, at least to 
hamper its development. However that may be, the repercussions of 
this revolution in Hungary, Italy and Germany foiled the entire plan 
of campaign devised by the counter-revolution. The flight from 
Vienna of the Emperor and of the Czech deputies298 compels the 
Viennese bourgeoisie to continue the fight unless it is prepared to 
surrender unconditionally. The Frankfurt Assembly, which is just 
now engaged in presenting us Germans with 
a national gaol 
and a common whip,b 
has been rudely awakened from its day-dreaming by the events in 
Vienna, and the Government at Berlin is beginning to doubt the 
efficacy of the state of  siege  as a panacea. The state of siege, like the 
revolution, is making a round-the-world tour. A large-scale experi­
ment has just been made to impose a state of siege on a whole 
a Müller-Tellering.— Ed. 
b Heinrich Heine, "Der Tannhäuser", Caput  3.—Ed. 

=====第488页=====
458 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
country, Hungary. This attempt has called forth a revolution in 
Vienna instead of a counter-revolution in Hungary. The state of 
siege will not recover from this setback. Its reputation has been 
permanendy ruined. By an irony of fate, simultaneously with 
Jellachich, Cavaignac, the hero of the state of siege in the West, has 
been singled out for attack by all the factions who were saved in June 
by his grape-shot. Only by resolutely going over to the revolution will 
he be able to hold out for some time. 
Following the latest news from Vienna, we publish several reports 
sent on October 5, because they reflect the hopes and fears current 
in Vienna about the fate of Hungary. 
Written by Marx on October 11, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 114, October 12, 1848 

=====第489页=====
459 
THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE ««MODEL STATE 
Brussels, October 8. La Nation yesterday led off with the following 
article about two members of the editorial staff of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, Herr Frederick Engels and Herr Ernst Dronke: 
"The expulsions are succeeding one another and are unfortunately all too similar. 
While we are still awaiting a few words of explanation about the expulsion of Herr 
Adam, a similar measure is taken against two German citizens who were foolish 
enough to rely on the protection which the Belgian Constitution grants every 
foreigner. Yes, this protection exists in the wording of the Constitution; until a few 
days ago it even beamed down from one of the façades of that charming little 
constitutional monument with which the courtyard of the Palais de Nation was graced; 
but as soon as the intoxication of the national holidays is over, the liberals who rule 
over us hurriedly stuff away the slogans with which they so gallandy regaled the 
inquisitive citizens of the city and the provinces. Brussels has returned to normal and 
the police is fulfilling exactly as before its lofty mission of compensating by its brutal 
manners for the generosity of our ill-advised constitutional theories. 
"Herr Engels and Herr Dronke had been staying in our city for a few days. Both 
members of the editorial staff of a democratic journal, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 
they left Cologne to avoid the consequences of warrants issued for their arrest because 
of a few speeches made at public meetings. They made their way to Belgium not in 
order to abuse that Belgian hospitality which on account of its rarity can be so 
valuable, but only to wait for the money they needed to continue their journey to 
Paris.  The unhappy events that occurred in Cologne after their departure strengthened 
them in their intention. The Prussian Government has been blessed with good fortune 
since it followed the Belgian example and set out on the broad constitutional 
path—after finding a general 3 who decreed a state of siege and the suspension of the 
press à la Cavaignac, it also managed to find a public prosecutor-general who agreed 
to employ the concept of moral complicity à la Hébert and à la de Bavay. But Herr 
Engels and Herr Dronke had forgotten that though the traveller proposes the police 
disposes. 
Kaiser.— Ed. 
Zweiffel.— Ed. 

=====第490页=====
460 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
"Scarcely had the news of their arrival in Brussels the day before yesterday become 
public when an inspector with his retinue turned up in their hotel. They were having 
their dinner. The inspector took them to the Town Hall and from there to 
the prison of the Petits-Carmes, whence after an hour or two they were transported in 
a sealed carriage to the Southern Railway Station. The police were merely using their 
powers in relation to "vagabonds" and, as it happened, the papers of our political 
refugees were not in order. It is true that they had on them a safe-conduct issued by 
the Cologne authorities stating that they were members of the civic militia of that city; 
moreover as a result of their stay in Brussels before March, they had friends who 
could prove their identity. But the police, only  too well informed about them, preferred to 
treat them as vagabonds before any proof to the contrary could be obtained. 
"If this is obstinacy, at least it is not blind obstinacy. 
"Judging from the way in which the arrests are at present taking place, we believe 
that this article will probably have its sequels in future issues, unless the friends of 
liberty of all countries become convinced that it is better 'to refrain under all 
circumstances from dropping in on us during their travels through this world'." 
It is clear from this that the Belgian Government is increasingly 
learning to recognise its position. The Belgians gradually become 
policemen for all their neighbours, and are overjoyed when they are 
complimented on their quiet and submissive behaviour. Neverthe­
less, there is something ridiculous about the good Belgian policeman. 
Even the earnest Times only jestingly acknowledged the Belgian 
desire to please. Recently it advised the Belgian nation, after it had 
got rid of all the clubs, to turn itself into one big club with the motto: 
"Ne risquez rien!" 3 
It goes without saying that the official Belgian press, in its 
cretinism, also reprinted this piece of flattery and welcomed it 
jubilantly. The fact that in its very first issue the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung quite properly ridiculed any illusions about the Belgian 
"model" state makes it easier to understand, moreover, why the 
Belgian Government meted out such brutal treatment to two 
members of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung's editorial  staff. b 
The Belgian press itself reveals to us how the Belgian Government 
seeks to perpetuate these illusions. The following report is printed 
word for word in the Messager de  Gand: 
"We now know of what this Germany consists that cherishes such great admiration 
for us. This Germany consists of Herr Wolfers from Lou vain, whom M. Rogier pays to 
produce enthusiastic articles about Belgium in German for the Kölnische Zeitung. In 
view of the search for all possible ways to economise, it seems to us that we could easily 
abolish the fund of admiration which we are paying to all the journalists in Europe. In 
Brussels, in the provinces, in Paris, in London and even as far as Bucharest we are 
buying their compliments at a very high price. Savings in this field could add up to a 
a "London, Monday, October 2, 1848", The Times No. 19383, October 2, 
1848.—  Ed. 
b "Brüssel, 30. Mai", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 1, June 1, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第491页=====
The Latest News from the "Model State" 461 
sum not to be despised. In London, for example, the Belgian who writes admiring 
articles about Belgium for the Times and for the Daily News* has to be paid out of the 
80,000 francs allocated to our embassy. As soon as the Prince Ligne is installed we shall 
have to pay for the admiration of a Roman journalist as well." 
Are these revelations not delightful? But I have not finished yet. 
La Nation carries the following small item in its issue of October 10. 
"We have often noticed that the 'private correspondent's' column in the In­
dépendance,  dated Frankfurt and Berlin, is as like the articles in the  Kölnische  Zeitung (to 
which Wolfers contributes) as two drops of dirty water. This newspaper does not 
appear on Sundays; and the  Indépendance,  too, has no private correspondent's column 
on Mondays." 
We need not add much. To show its gratitude to the Indépendance 
for copying its German news from the Kölnische Zeitung, the Kölnische 
Zeitung in turn obtains its views on Belgium and France from the 
Indépendance. 
But as everyone knows, the Indépendance is the organ of the same 
M. Rogier who buys admiration for Belgium, who had the Belgian 
patriots of 1830, and the eighty-year-old General Mellinet, con­
demned to death b and who has political refugees conveyed across the 
frontier in sealed carriages. 
Written between October 8 and 11, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the supplement to the Published in English for the first 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 114, October time 
12, 1848 
a The Neue Rheinische Zeitung has "New England".— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 405-06.— Ed. 

=====第492页=====
462 
THE "REVOLUTION OF COLOGNE"300 
Cologne, October 12. The Kölnische Zeitung tells us that the 
"revolution of Cologne" of September 25 was a Shrovetide farce and 
the Kölnische Zeitung is right. 3 The "Garrison Headquarters of 
Cologne" plays Cavaignac on September 26. And the Kölnische 
Zeitung admires the wisdom and moderation of the "Garrison 
Headquarters of Cologne". Who, however, is more comical—the 
workers who practised barricade building on September 25, or the 
Cavaignac who most solemnly proclaimed a state of siege on 
September 26, suspended the newspapers, disarmed the civic militia 
and prohibited the associations? 
Thé poor Kölnische Zeitungl The Cavaignac of the "revolution of 
Cologne" cannot be an inch taller than the "revolution of Cologne" 
itself.  The poor Kölnische Zeitungl It must regard the "revolution" as 
a joke and has to take seriously the "Cavaignac" of this merry 
revolution. What a vexatious, ungrateful and contradictory topic! 
We will not waste a word on the competence of the Garrison 
Headquarters. D'Ester has exhausted that subject. 301 We regard, 
moreover, the Garrison Headquarters as a subordinate tool. The real 
authors of this peculiar tragedy were the "loyal citizens", the Dumonts 
and their associates. Thus it was no wonder that Herr Dumont had 
the address against d'Ester, Borchardt and Kyll disseminated by his 
newspapers. 302 What these "loyal ones" had to defend was not the 
action of the Garrison Headquarters but their own action. 
a "Köln, 29. September. Die Barrikaden in Köln", Kölnische Zeitung No. 268, 
September 30, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第493页=====
The "Revolution of Cologne" 463 
The event at Cologne wandered through the Sahara Desert of the 
German press in the form given to it by the Journal des Débats of 
Cologne. That is sufficient reason to revert to it. 
Moll, one of the most popular leaders of the Workers' Associa­
tion,303 was to have been arrested. Schapper and Becker had already 
been arrested. A Monday had been selected for the execution of this 
measure, a day on which, as is well known, the majority of workers 
are not working. Thus it must have been known beforehand that the 
arrests might arouse a great deal of ferment among the workers and 
that they might even give rise to violent resistance. It was a strange 
accident that these arrests were planned to take place on a Monday! 
It was the more easy to foresee the excitement since on the occasion 
of Stein's Army Order, after Wrangel's proclamation304  and Pfuel's 
appointment as Prime Minister, a decisive counter-revolutionary 
blow and thus a revolution emanating from Berlin was expected at 
any moment. The workers, therefore, had to regard the arrests not 
as legal but as political measures. They viewed the Public Prosecutor's 
office only as a counter-revolutionary authority. They believed that it 
was the intention to rob them of their leaders on the eve of important 
events. They decided to prevent Moll's arrest at all costs and they left 
the scene of action only after they had accomplished their purpose. 
The barricades were not built until the workers, who had assembled 
on the Altenmarkt, learned that the army was advancing to attack 
from all sides. They were not attacked; hence they did not have to 
defend themselves either. They had learned, moreover, that no 
important news at all had arrived from Berlin. Hence they withdrew 
after they had spent the greater part of the night waiting in vain for 
the enemy. 
Nothing is more ridiculous, therefore, than the reproach of 
cowardice which has been levelled against the workers of Cologne. 
One has reproached them on yet other scores in order to justify 
the state of siege and to fashion the events in Cologne into a small 
June revolution. Their actual plan is supposed to have been the 
looting of the good city of Cologne. This accusation is based upon 
the alleged looting of one drapery shop. As if not every city has its 
contingent of thieves who naturally take advantage of days of public 
excitement. Or does one mean by looting the plundering of gun­
smith's shops? If this is the case, the Cologne Public Prosecutor's 
office should be sent to Berlin to prepare the case against the March 
revolution. Without the looted gunsmith's shops, we would perhaps 
never have had the satisfaction of witnessing the transformation of 
Herr Hansemann into a bank President and of Herr Müller into a 
Secretary of State. 
17-344" 

=====第494页=====
464 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
But enough of the workers of Cologne. Let us discuss the so-called 
democrats. What do the Kölnische Zeitung, the Deutsche Zeitung, thé 
Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung and whatever the other "loyal" papers 
may be called, accuse them of? 
The heroic Brüggemanns, Bassermanns etc. demanded blood and 
the tender-hearted democrats have out of cowardice not allowed the 
blood to flow. 
The facts are simply these: the democrats declared to the workers 
in the Kranz (on the Altenmarkt), in the Eiser Hall 305 and upon the 
barricades that they did not want a "putsch" under any cir­
cumstances. At this moment, however, when no large issue would 
drive the entire people into combat, and any rising would be bound 
to fail, such a rising would be the more senseless since tremendous 
events might occur within the next few days and one would thus 
render oneself unfit to fight before the day of decision. Once 
the Government in Berlin dares a counter-revolution, the day 
will have arrived for the people to dare a revolution. The judicial 
investigation will confirm our statement. Instead of standing 
in "nocturnal darkness" in front of the barricades with "folded 
arms and ominous glances" and "contemplating the future of 
their people",3  the gentlemen of the Kölnische Zeitung would have 
done better to stand on the barricades haranguing the deluded 
crowd with their words of wisdom. What good is wisdom post 
festum h7 
On the occasion of the events in Cologne, the respectable press 
reserved its worst treatment for the civic militia. Let us distinguish. 
That the civic militia refused to degrade itself by becoming the 
docile servant of the police, was its duty. That it turned over its 
weapons voluntarily can only be excused by one fact: the liberal 
section of it knew that the illiberal section would jubilantly take the 
opportunity to rid itself of the weapons. Partial resistance, however, 
would have been useless. 
The "revolution of Cologne" has had one result. It has revealed 
the existence of a phalanx of more than 2,000 saints' whose "satiated 
virtue and solvent morale"0 leads a "free life"d only in a state of siege. 
Perhaps one day the occasion will arise to write an "acta sanctorum", 
the biographies of these saints. Our readers will then find out how 
"Köln, 29. September. Die Barrikaden in Köln", Kölnische Zeitung No. 268, 
September 30, 1848.— Ed. 
After the event.— Ed. 
c Heinrich Heine, "Anno 1829" (modified).— Ed. 
d Schiller, Die Räuber, Act IV, Scene 5.— Ed. 

=====第495页=====
The "Revolution of Cologne" 465 
the "treasures" are obtained that neither "moths nor rust" doth 
corrupt3 and they will learn in which way the economic background 
of the "loyal way of thinking" is acquired. 
Written by Marx on October 12, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 115, October 13, 1848 
a Matthew 6:20.— Ed. 

=====第496页=====
466 
THE PFUEL GOVERNMENT 
Cologne, October 13. When the Camphausen Government fell we 
said: 
"The Camphausen Government has covered the counter­
revolution with its liberal-bourgeois cloak. The counter-revolution 
now feels strong enough to shake off this irksome mask. It is possible 
that the Government of March 30 will be followed for a few days by 
some untenable Government of the Left  Centre  (Hansemann). Its real 
successor will be the Government of the Prince of Prussia." (Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung No. 23, June 23.) a 
And in fact the Government of Pfuel (of Neufchâtel) followed the 
Hansemann Government. 
The Pfuel Government handles constitutional phrases in the same 
way as the Frankfurt Central Authority treats "German unification". 
If we compare the corpus delicti, the real body of the Government, 
with its echo, its constitutional declarations, appeasings, mediations 
and agreements in the Berlin Assembly, we can only use Falstaff's 
phrase: 
"Lord,  lord,  how subject we old men are to this vice of lying!" 
The Pfuel Government can only be followed by a Government of  the 
revolution. 
Written by Marx on October 13, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 116, October 14, 1848 time 
a See this volume, p. 107.— Ed. 
b Shakespeare, King Henry IV, Part Two, Act III, Scene 2.— Ed. 

=====第497页=====
467 
THIERS'  SPEECH 
CONCERNING A GENERAL MORTGAGE BANK 
WITH A LEGAL RATE 
M. Thiers is publishing in the Constitutionnel a pamphlet about 
Property.* 06 We shall take up this classically written triviality more 
thoroughly as soon as the publication has appeared in its entirety. 
M. Thiers has suddenly discontinued it. For the time being it is 
enough for us to observe that the "great" Belgian newspapers, the 
Observateur and the Indépendance, rave about M. Thiers' work. Today 
we shall follow up for a moment the speech dealing with mortgage 
debentures 307 which M. Thiers delivered on October 10 in the 
French National Assembly, a speech which according to the Belgian 
Indépendance has dealt the "coup de grâce" to paper money. But 
M. Thiers is also, as the Indépendance says, an orator who handles 
political, financial and social questions equally well. 
This speech interests us only because it illustrates the tactic of the 
knights of the old state of affairs, a tactic with which they correctly 
confront the Don Quixotes of the new state of affairs. 
If you demand a partial reform of the industrial and commercial 
conditions as was done by M. Turck whom Thiers was answering, 
they will confront you with the concatenation and interaction of the 
organisation as a whole. If you demand the transformation of the 
organisation as a whole, then you are destructive, revolutionary, 
unscrupulous, Utopian and you overlook partial reforms. Hence the 
result: leave everything as it is. 
M. Turck for example wants to make it easier for the peasants to 
turn their landed property to account by means of official mortgage 
banks.  He wants to bring their property into circulation without it 
having to pass through the hands of usurers. For in France, as 
generally in the countries where the land is divided into lots, the 

=====第498页=====
468 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
power of the feudal lords has been transformed into the power of 
the capitalists and the feudal obligations of the peasants have been 
transformed into bourgeois mortgage obligations. 
What does M. Thiers reply to begin with? 
If you want to help the peasant by means of public banks you will 
encroach upon the small tradesman. You cannot aid one without 
hurting the other. 
Consequently we have to transform the entire system of credit? 
By no means! That is a Utopia. Thus M. Turck is dismissed without 
ceremony. 
The small tradesman for whom M. Thiers cares so tenderly is the 
big Bank of France. 
The competition of paper bills for two thousand million mortgages 
would ruin its monopoly and dividends and perhaps still something 
more.3 Behind M. Thiers' argument therefore stands Rothschild in 
the background. 
Let us take up another of M. Thiers' arguments. The mortgage 
proposal, M. Thiers states, does not actually concern agriculture 
at all. 
M. Thiers remarks that it lies in the "nature" of things that landed 
property can be put into circulation only under onerous conditions, 
that it can be turned to account only with difficulty and that capital 
shuns it, so to speak. For, he says, it yields only a small profit. But on 
the other hand, M. Thiers cannot deny that it lies in the "nature" of 
modern industrial organisation that all industries, hence agriculture 
as well, only prosper if their products and their instruments can 
easily be turned to account, put into circulation and mobilised. This 
is not the case with land. Hence the conclusion would be: agriculture 
cannot prosper within the existing civilised conditions. Therefore 
the existing conditions must be changed and M. Turck's proposal 
is a small, even if inconsistent, beginning. By no means! exclaims 
M. Thiers. "Nature", i.e. the present social conditions, condemns 
agriculture to its present state. The present social conditions are 
"nature", i.e. they are unalterable. The assertion of their immutabili­
ty is, of course, the most irrefutable proof against proposals for any 
change. If "monarchy" is nature then any republican attempt is a 
rebellion against nature. According to M. Thiers, it is also obvious 
that landed property naturally always yields the same small profits 
whether the capital is advanced to the landowner at 3 per cent by the 
state or at 10 per cent by the usurer. Thus it is by virtue of "nature". 
Marx uses the English words "something more".— Ed. 

=====第499页=====
Thiers' Speech Concerning a General Mortgage Bank with a Legal Rate 469 
By identifying industrial profit with the rent yielded by agricul­
ture,  M. Thiers also makes an assertion which plainly contradicts the 
present social conditions which he calls "nature". 
Whereas industrial profit in general falls constantly, rent of land, 
i.e. the value of the soil, rises constantly. Thus M. Thiers ought to 
explain the phenomenon that the peasant is constantly becoming 
more impoverished in spite of it. Of course, he does not want to 
discuss that subject. 
Furthermore Thiers' comments on the difference between French 
and English agriculture are really of a remarkable superficiality. 
Thiers instructs us that the entire difference consists of the land 
tax. We pay a very high land tax, the Englishmen none. Apart from 
the inaccuracy of the latter assertion, M. Thiers certainly knows that 
in England agriculture is burdened with the poor-rate as well 
as a mass of other taxes which do not exist in France. M. Thiers' 
argument is used in its inverted meaning by English adherents of 
small-scale agriculture. Do you know, they ask, why English corn is 
more expensive than the French? Because we pay a rent and a high 
rent at that, something that the French do not do since on the 
average they are not tenants but small proprietors. Therefore, long 
live small property! 
It takes the entire insolent triviality of Thiers to reduce the English 
concentration of [ownership of] land, the instrument of labour, 
whereby the use of machinery and the division of labour is made 
possible on a large scale in agriculture, and the interaction of English 
industry and English trade with agriculture—to reduce all these 
highly complex relations to the meaningless phrase that the English 
pay no land tax. 
We shall contrast M. Thiers' opinion that the present mortgage 
procedure in France is a matter of indifference to agriculture with 
the opinion of the greatest French agricultural chemist.  Dombasle  has 
proved conclusively that French agriculture will become an impossi­
bility if the present mortgage system in France continues to develop 
according to "nature"  .* 
What insolent shallowness it takes anyway to assert that landed 
property relations are immaterial to agriculture, in other words that 
the social relations under which production takes place are imma­
terial to production! 
By the way, there is hardly any need to add that M. Thiers, who 
a C.-J.-A. Mathieu de Dombasle, Annales agricoles de Roville, ou mélanges 
d'agriculture, d'économie rurale, et de législation  agricole. — Ed. 

=====第500页=====
470 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
wants to retain credits for the big capitalists, cannot give any credit to 
the small ones. It is precisely the credit of the big capitalists which 
spells lack of credit for the small ones. We deny, to be sure, that 
within the present system it is possible to aid the small landed 
proprietors by some clever financial trick. Thiers, however, had to 
maintain this view since he regards the present world as the best of 
all possible worlds. 
In regard to this part of Thiers' speech we want to make just 
one further observation: by opposing the mobilisation of landed 
property and on the other hand praising English conditions, he 
forgets that it is exactly in England that agriculture possesses in the 
highest degree the advantage of being run like a factory and that the 
rent of land, i.e. landed property, is a movable, transferable security 
quoted on the Stock Exchange just like any other. Factory-type 
agriculture, i.e. the management of agriculture in the manner of big 
industry, on its part requires the mobilisation and exchangeability of 
landed property with commercial facility. 
The second part of M. Thiers' speech consists of attacks on paper 
money  in general. He labels the issuing of paper money on the whole 
as counterfeiting. He reveals to us the great truth that if one throws 
too large a quantity of the means of circulation, i.e. money, on the 
market, one devalues money itself and thus cheats doubly: the 
individual and the state. Allegedly this is especially the case with 
mortgage banks. 
All these discoveries can be found in the worst catechisms of 
political economy. 
Let us distinguish. It is clear that we do not increase production, 
i.e. real wealth, by arbitrarily increasing money, be it paper or metal 
currency. We do not double our tricks in a card game by doubling 
the chips. 
On the other hand it is just as clear that if production is inhibited 
by a lack of chips, of means of exchange, of money, every increase of 
the means of exchange, every decrease in the difficulty of obtaining 
the means of exchange, implies at the same time an increase in 
production. Bills of exchange, banks etc. owe their origin to these 
needs of production. In this way mortgage banks can lead to the 
improvement of agriculture. 
M. Thiers, however, does not fight for metal currency as opposed 
to paper money. He has speculated too much on the Stock Exchange 
to be swayed by the prejudices of the old mercantilists. What he 
opposes is the regulation of credit by society as represented by the 
state as against the regulation of credit by monopoly. Thus Turck's 
proposal for a general mortgage bank whose bills would have a legal 

=====第501页=====
Thiers' Speech Concerning a General Mortgage Bank with a Legal Rate 471 
rate of exchange was the beginning of a regulation of credit in the 
general interest of society, even though this proposal in isolation 
means little. 
Written by Marx on October 13, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 116, October 14, 1848 time 

=====第502页=====
472 
THE FRANKFURTER OBERPOSTAMTS-ZEITUNG 
AND THE VIENNESE REVOLUTION 
Cologne, October 18. 
"A peculiar destiny seems to hold sway over Germany. When one believes that one 
has reached the point where it is possible to help with the reconstruction of the 
common fatherland, when one raises one's  eyes  gratefully towards heaven for this blessing, 
then the thunderclouds which are still hanging over Europe, discharge new and 
mighty claps and make the hands tremble which have dedicated themselves to the 
drawing up_ of a Constitution for Germany. We have just experienced such a 
thunderclap again in Vienna." 
Thus complains the Frankfurter Oberpostamts-Zeitung, the Moniteur 
of the Imperial Administration. This worthy paper, whose recent 
editor 3 appeared on the list of Guizot's paid creatures, took itself au 
sérieux for a moment. The Central Authority with its parliamentary 
framework, the Council of Frankfurt, appeared to it as a serious 
power. Instead of issuing their counter-revolutionary orders directly 
to their subjects, the 38 German governments let the Central 
Authority in Frankfurt issue to them the order to carry out 
their own decisions. Everything was running smoothly just as at the 
time of the Direct Commission of Mainz. 30 The Central Authority 
was able to imagine that it was a power and its Moniteur was able to 
imagine that it was a Moniteur. It sang "Now thank ye all our God, 
your hands raised up to heaven". 
And now we "experience" a thunderclap from Vienna. The 
"hands" of our Lycurguses "tremble" in spite of the army in spiked 
helmets which are so many lightning-conductors of the revolution; in 
spite of the decrees which declare criticism of black-red-golden 
Karl Peter Berly.— Ed. 

=====第503页=====
Frankfurter Oberpostamts-Zeitung and Viennese Revolution 473 
persons and gestae to be a criminal offence309 ; and in spite of the 
strong language of those gigantic figures, Schmerling, Mohl and 
Gagern. The revolutionary monster roars anew — and in Frankfurt 
they "tremble". The Frankfurter Oberpostamts-Zeitung is frightened out 
of its thanksgiving prayer. It tragically grumbles at its iron fate. 
In Paris the party of Thiers is in control, in Berlin the Pfuel 
Government with Wrangels in all the provinces; in Frankfurt a 
central gendarmerie; in all Germany a more or less hidden state of 
siege; Italy pacified by the gentle Ferdinand and Radetzky; after the 
annihilation of the Magyars Jellachich, the commander of Hungary, 
proclaiming together with Windischgrätz "Croatian freedom and 
order" in Vienna; in Bucharest the revolution drowned in blood; the 
Danube principalities blessed by the good deeds of the Russian 
regime; in England all the Chartist leaders arrested and deported; 
Ireland too starved to be able to move — tell me, what more do you 
want? b 
The Viennese revolution has not yet won. Its first summer 
lightning suffices, however, to illuminate all the positions of the 
counter-revolution in Europe and thus to render inevitable a 
universal fight to the death. 
The counter-revolution is not yet destroyed but it has made a fool 
of itself.  With the hero Jellachich all its heroes are transformed into 
comical figures, and with Fuad Effendi's proclamation after the blood 
bath of Bucharest,310 all proclamations of the friends of "constitu­
tional freedom and order", from the proclamations of the Imperial 
Diet down to the most insignificant statement of the wailers, are 
parodied to death. 
Tomorrow we shall discuss at length the immediate situation in 
Vienna and the Austrian situation in general. 
Written by Marx on October 18, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 120, October 19, 1848 time 
Deeds.— Ed. 
From Heinrich Heine's poem "Du hast Diamanten und Perlen". In Die 
Heimkehr. — Ed. 

=====第504页=====
474 
REPLY OF THE KING OF PRUSSIA 
TO THE DELEGATION OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
Cologne, October 18. The King is consistent at any rate. His 
Majesty never contradicts  himself.  On the occasion of the festival 
celebrating the building of Cologne's cathedral, he told the 
delegation of the Frankfurt National Assembly: 
"Gentlemen, I fully understand the significance of your Assembly. I realise very 
well how important your Assembly is!" The voice of His Majesty then assumed a very 
solemn and biting tone: "But please do not forget that there are still sovereigns in 
Germany"—at this point His Majesty placed his hand upon his heart and spoke with 
uncommon emphasis—"and do not forget that I am one of them!" 
A similar reply was also given to the delegation of the Berlin 
Assembly when it visited His Majesty at Bellevue Castle on October 
15a in order to congratulate him. The King said: 
"We are in the process of constructing an edifice which is to last for centuries. But, 
gentlemen, I would like to call your attention to one matter. We still possess an 
hereditary authority by the grace of God"—these words were spoken by the King with 
great emphasis—"which is surely envied in many places and which is still endowed 
with full powers. It is the only foundation upon which that edifice can be constructed 
if it is to last for as long as I have indicated." 
The King is consistent. He would always have been consistent had 
it not been for the unfortunate fact that the March days interposed 
that fateful scrap of paper between His Majesty and his people.311 
At this moment, His Majesty, just as he did before the March days, 
seems again to believe in Slavdom's "legs of irori,h. Perhaps the 
Birthday of Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
b Cf. Daniel  2:33.—Ed, 

=====第505页=====
Reply of King of Prussia to Delegation of the National Assembly 475 
people in Vienna will turn out to be the magician who will transform 
the iron into clay. 
Written by Marx on October 18, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 120, October 19, 1848 time 

=====第506页=====
476 
REPLY OF FREDERICK WILLIAM IV 
TO THE DELEGATION OF THE CIVIC MILITIA 
Cologne, October 18. Frederick William IV replied to Rimpler, the 
commander of the civic militia of Berlin, in response to the latter's 
congratulations on the occasion of October 15a: 
"I know that a heroic and brave people is also a  loyal  one. But do not forget that you 
obtained the weapons from me and that I demand that you stand up dutifully for the 
preservation of order, law and freedom." 
Constitutional kings are not  responsible,  on the understanding that 
they are not answerable, in the constitutional sense, of course. Their 
actions, their words, their countenances do not belong to them, they 
belong to the responsible Ministers. 
Hansemann, for example, on the occasion of his exit, had the King 
say that he considered the execution of Stein's Army Order 312 
incompatible with constitutional monarchy. Pfuel carried it out, that 
is in the parliamentary sense. Hansemann was compromised, in the 
constitutional sense. The King had not contradicted  himself,  because 
he had not spoken, always in the constitutional sense. 
Thus the above declaration of the King is nothing but a ministerial 
declaration and as such is subject to criticism. 
If Pfuel claims that the King has created the civic militia on his own 
accord, then he claims that the King is the originator of the March 
revolution which is nonsense, even in the constitutional sense. 
Apart from this. 
After God had created the world and the kings by the grace of 
God, he relinquished the smaller industry to human beings. Even 
"weapons" and lieutenants' uniforms are manufactured by profane 
Birthday of Frederick William IV.— Ed. 

=====第507页=====
Reply of Frederick William IV to Delegation of the Civil Militia 477 
methods and the profane method of manufacturing does not create 
from nothing as the heavenly industry does. It needs raw materials, 
the tools of labour and wages, all items which are summed up by the 
unpretentious term: production costs. These production costs are 
defrayed for the state by  taxes  and the taxes are raised by the work of 
the nation. Thus in an economic sense it remains an enigma how any 
king can give anything to a nation. First of all, the people have to 
produce weapons and give the weapons to the king, in order to 
obtain weapons from the king. In all cases, the king can only give 
what is given to him. That is the position in an economic  sense.  It so 
happens, however, that constitutional kings arise exactly at those 
moments when people find the clue to this  economic  secret.  Therefore 
the initial causes for the overthrow of the kings by the grace of God 
have always been questions of taxation. It is the same in Prussia. Even 
the immaterial goods, the privileges, which the nations allowed the 
kings to grant to them, were not only bestowed by them upon the 
kings in the first place but in order to get them back the people 
always had to pay in cash—in blood and ringing coin. Trace, for 
example, English history since the eleventh century and you will be 
able to calculate pretty accurately how many crushed skulls and how 
many pound sterling every constitutional privilege cost. Herr Pfuel 
apparently wants to take us back to the good old times of the 
Davenant Economic  Chart.*  In this chart concerning English produc­
tion we read among other items: 
Section 1. Productive workers: kings, officers, lords, country 
clergymen etc. 
Section 2. Unproductive  workers:  sailors, peasants, weavers, spinners 
etc. 
According to this chart section 1 produces and section 2 receives. 
It is in this sense that Herr Pfuel says the king gives. 
Pfuel's declaration shows what one expects in Berlin from the hero 
of "Croatian order and freedom".15 
The most recent incidents in Berlin remind one of the conflicts in 
Vienna on August 23 between the civic militia and the people, 
conflicts which were also provoked by the camarilla. That August 23 
was followed by October 5.3  3 
Written by Marx on October 18, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 121, October 20, 1848 time 
a [Ch. Davenant,] An  Essay  upon  the Probable  Methods of making  a People  Gainers in the 
Ballance of Trade, pp. 23,  50.—Ed. 
b Jellachich.— Ed. 

=====第508页=====
478 
THE RÉFORME ON THE JUNE INSURRECTION 
Paris. When on June 29 the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was the only 
European newspaper, with the exception of the English Northern 
Star, which had the courage and the discernment to give a true 
appreciation of the June revolution, 3 it was not refuted but 
denounced. 
The facts have subsequently confirmed our interpretation even 
for the weakest eye as long as interest has not entirely destroyed the 
eyesight. 
At that time the French press, too, disgraced  itself.  The resolute 
Paris newspapers were suppressed. The Réforme, the only radical 
newspaper which Cavaignac allowed to continue to exist, stammered 
excuses for the magnanimous June fighters and begged the victor to 
treat the conquered with some humanity as an act of charity. The 
beggar, of course, was not listened to. It took first the complete 
course of the June victory, the months-long diatribes of the 
provincial newspapers which were not fettered by the state of siege 
and the obvious resurrection of the Thiers party 314 to bring the 
Réforme to its senses. 
On the occasion of the amnesty project of the extreme Left, it 
remarked in its issue of October 18: 
"The people did not punish anybody when they descended from the barricades. 
The people! In those days it was the ruler, the sovereign and the victor. One kissed its 
feet and hands, saluted its tunic and acclaimed its noble sentiments. And rightly so. It 
was magnanimous. 
"Today the people has its children and brothers in the dungeons, on the galleys 
and before courts martial. After hunger had exhausted its patience, after it had seen a 
a See this volume, pp. 144 and 147-49.—Ed. 

=====第509页=====
The Réforme on the June Insurrection 479 
whole crowd of ambitious people whom it had picked out of the gutter, calmly walk by 
and ascend to palaces, after it had for three long months put its trust in the republic, it 
finally lost its head in the midst of its starving children and slowly dying fathers and 
plunged into battle. 
"It has paid dearly. Its sons have dropped under a hail of bullets and those who 
remained were divided into two parts. One part was thrown to the courts martial, the 
other was packed up for deportation without investigation, without the right of 
defence and without a verdict! This method is strange for any land, even for the land 
of the Kabyles. 
"Never during its twenty years' existence did the monarchy dare to do anything 
similar. 
"In those days the journals that speculate in dynasties arrived inebriated by the 
corpses' smell, boldly and immediately ready to insult the dead" (cf. the Kölnische 
Zeitung of June 29) "spewing forth calumnies of odious malice, drawing and 
quartering the honour of the people before the judicial investigation and dragging the 
vanquished, the dead and the living, before special courts. They denounced them to 
the destructive fury of the national guard and the army and turned themselves into 
agents for the hangmen and servants of the pillory. These lackeys of insane desires for 
vengeance invented crimes; they exacerbated our misfortune and they perfected the 
insult and the lie!" (Cf. the Neue Rheinische Zeitung of July 1 concerning the French 
Constitutionnel, the Belgian Indépendance and the Kölnische Zeitung. 3) 
"The Constitutionnel openly displayed gruesome mutilations and despicable 
atrocities. It knew very well that it was lying but that suited its business and its politics, 
and being businessman and diplomatist all at the same time, it sold 'by the crime' as 
elsewhere one sells 'by the yard'. This beautiful speculation had to end some time or 
other. The contradictions poured out: not a single name of a galley convict could be 
found in the documents of the courts martial or the bulletins of transportation. There 
were no longer any means to degrade the despair, and one kept silence, having cashed 
in on the profit." 
Written by Marx about October 20, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 123, October 22, 1848 time 
a See this volume, pp. 150-56.—Ed. 

=====第510页=====
480 
ENGLISH-FRENCH MEDIATION IN ITALY 
Cologne, October 21. The English-French mediation in Italy has been 
given up. The death's head of diplomacy grins after every revolution 
and particularly after the reactions which follow every revolution. 
Diplomacy hides itself in its perfumed charnel-house as often as the 
thunder of a new revolution rumbles. The Viennese revolution has 
blown away French-English diplomacy. 
Palmerston has admitted his impotence and so has Bastide. The 
Viennese revolution, as they explain, has put an end to the boring 
correspondence of these gentlemen. Bastide has officially notified of 
this fact Marquis Ricci, the Sardinian envoy. 
When the latter asked "whether France would under certain 
circumstances take up arms in favour of Sardinia"3  the farouche 
republican Bastide (of the National) made a curtsy once, twice, thrice 
and sang: 
Put trust in me and help yourselves 
Then God will help you, brothers. 
France, he said, abides by the principle of non-intervention, that 
same principle which was fought by Bastide and the other gentlemen 
of the National for years during Guizot's times. 
The "respectable" French Republic would have made a deadly fool 
of itself in regard to this Italian question were it not above all 
disgrace since the portentous June. 
Rien pour la gloire!0  say the friends of business in all circumstances. 
Rien pour la gloire! is the motto of the virtuous, the moderate, the 
a "Question italienne. Dernière phase de la médiation anglo-française (Communi­
cation)", La Presse No. 4499, October 19, 1848.— Ed. 
Heinrich Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput XII.— Ed. 
c Mere honour is worth nothing.—Ed. 

=====第511页=====
English-French Mediation in Italy 481 
decent, the sedate, the respectable, in a word, the bourgeois republic. 
Rien pour la gloire! 
Lamartine was the imaginary picture which the bourgeois republic 
had of  itself,  the exuberant, fantastic, visionary conception which it 
had formed of  itself,  the dream of its own splendour. It is quite 
remarkable what one can imagine! As Aeolus unleashed all the winds 
from his bag, so Lamartine set free all spirits of the air, all the 
phrases of the bourgeois republic, and he blew them towards the east 
and the west, empty words of the fraternity of all nations, of the 
impending emancipation of all the nations by France and of France's 
sacrifice for all the nations. 
He did—nothing. 
It was Cavaignac who undertook to supply the deeds correspond­
ing to Lamartine's phrases and Bastide, his outward turned organ. 
They calmly allowed the shocking scenes in Naples, the shocking 
scenes in Messina and the shocking scenes in the Milan region to take 
place before their very eyes.315 
And so that not the least bit of doubt should remain as to the fact 
that the same class as well as the same foreign policy prevail in the 
"respectable" republic as under the constitutional monarchy, under 
Cavaignac as well as under Louis Philippe, in case of strife between 
nations, one has recourse to the old and eternally new means, the 
entente cordiale with England, 316 with the England of Palmerston and 
with the England of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. 
History could not, however, omit the climax, the point. Bastide, an 
editor of the National, had to grasp England's hand frantically. And 
the entente cordiale has been the main trump which the poor 
Anglophobe National played off against Guizot all life long. 
On the gravestone of the "respectable" republic,* will be inscribed: 
Bastide- Palmerston. 
But even Guizot's entente cordiale has been surpassed by the 
"respectable" republicans. The officers of the French fleet let 
themselves be treated to a banquet by the Neapolitan officers and 
cheered the health of the King of Naples, the idiotic tiger Ferdinand, 
on the still smoking ruins of Messina. Above their heads, however, 
the phrases of Lamartine were evaporating. 
Written by Marx on October 21, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 123, October 22, 1848 time 

=====第512页=====
482 
THE "MODEL CONSTITUTIONAL STATE" 
Cologne, October 21. We always revert again, and always with 
renewed satisfaction, to Belgium, our "model constitutional state". 
We proved in a previous number of our newspaper that "pau­
perism"  is "Leopold's greatest vassal". We showed that if the crimes 
of just the boys and girls under 18 years of age were to continue to 
develop spontaneously at the same ratio as in 1845-47, "by 1856 all 
Belgium would be in gaol, the unborn children included". We 
proved in the same article that the drying up of Belgium's industrial 
sources of income keeps in step with the growth of pauperism 
and crime (No. 68 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung). 3 
Today we will look at the financial situation of the "model state". 
Francs 
The regular budget of 1848 119,000,000 
The first compulsory loan 12,000,000 
The second compulsory loan 25,000,000 
Banknotes with a fixed rate of exchange 12,000,000 
Total sum: 168,000,000 
In addition banknotes with a fixed rate 
of exchange guaranteed by the state ........ 40,000,000 
Total: 208,000,000 
a See this volume, pp. 333-36.—Ed. 

=====第513页=====
The "Model Constitutional State" 483 
Belgium, so Rogier tells us, stands like a rock amid world-historic 
tempests, but is not affected by them. It stands on the bed-rock of its 
broad institutions. The 208,000,000 francs are the prosaic transla­
tion of the miraculous power of those model institutions. Constitu­
tional Belgium will not be brought down by revolutionary develop­
ment. It will perish ignominiously through bankruptcy. 
The liberal Belgian Government, the Rogier Government, like all 
liberal governments, is nothing but a Government of capitalists, 
bankers and the big bourgeoisie. We shall see right away how in spite 
of growing pauperism and declining industry, it does not disdain the 
most cunning means to exploit ever anew the entire nation for the 
benefit of the bank barons. 
The second loan listed in the above compilation, has been chiefly 
wrested from the Parliament by the assurance that government bonds 
were to be redeemed. These government bonds had been issued 
under the Catholic de Theux Government by the Catholic Finance 
Minister Malou These were the government bonds issued against 
voluntary loans made to the state by a few financial barons. They 
constituted the main theme, the inexhaustible theme of the howling 
diatribes which our Rogier and his liberal accomplices directed 
against the de Theux Government. 
And what does the liberal Government proceed to do? It 
announces in the Moniteur —Belgium has its Moniteur—a new issue of 
government bonds at 5 per cent. 
What shamelessness to issue government bonds after a compulsory 
loan of 25,000,000 francs has been obtained surreptitiously solely 
under the pretext that the so much maligned government bonds 
issued by Malou were to be redeemed! But that is not all. 
The government bonds are issued at 5 per cent. Belgian securities, 
which are also guaranteed by the state, yield an interest of 7 and 8 
per cent. Who then will put his money into government bonds? And 
besides, the situation of the country in general and the compulsory 
loans have left few who are able to make voluntary loans to the 
state. 
What then is the purpose of this new issue of government bonds? 
The banks have not yet been able by far to put into circulation all 
the notes with a legally fixed rate of exchange which the liberal 
Government had authorised them to issue. There are in their 
portfolios still several million of these useless securities which 
naturally yield nothing as long as they remain hermetically sealed in 
the portfolios. Is there a better way of putting these securities into 
circulation than to give them to the state in exchange for government 
bonds which yield 5 per cent? 

=====第514页=====
484 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Thus the bank draws 5 per cent on several million scraps of paper 
which have not cost it anything and which only have an exchange 
value at all because the state has given them an exchange value. The 
taxable Belgian masses will find in the next budget a deficit of an 
additional several hundred thousand francs which they will be in 
duty bound to raise, all for the benefit of the poor. bank. 
Is it surprising that the Belgian financial barons find the con­
stitutional monarchy more lucrative than the republic? The Cath­
olic Government cherished and protected primarily the holiest, 
i.e. the material, interests of the landlords. The liberal Government 
looks with equally tender care after the interests of the landlords, the 
financial barons and the court lackeys. Is it any wonder that under its 
skilful direction these so-called parties, which equally voraciously 
pounce upon the national wealth, or rather in the case of Belgium, 
upon the national poverty, and which on such occasions sometimes 
quarrel amongst themselves, now, fully reconciliated, fall into each 
other's arms and form only one big party: the "national party"? 
Written by Marx on October 21,1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 123, October 22, 1848 time 

=====第515页=====
485 
PUBLIC PROSECUTOR "HECKER" 
AND THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 317 
Cologne, October 28. No. 116 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung car­
ried in the feuilleton section, i.e. outside the political part of the 
newspaper, "A Word to the German People" signed "Hecker". This 
"historical document' was printed by a number of German newspa­
pers before the Neue Rheinische Zeitung printed it. Other German 
newspapers, Rhenish-Prussian and old-Prussian not excluded, car­
ried it later. Even the Kölnische Zeitung possessed enough historical 
sense to print the proclamation of Struve and likewise that of 
Fuad Effendi. 318 
We do not know whether the laurels of the republican Hecker did 
not let Public Prosecutor Hecker sleep in peace. Was the astonished 
world to learn that the German revolution had been twice beaten by 
the flight of the republican Hecker to New York and the presence of 
the Public Prosecutor Hecker in Cologne? It cannot be denied. 
Posterity will see in these two giant figures the dramatic synopsis of 
the contradictions of the modern movement. A future Goethe will 
unite them in a Faust. We shall leave it to him to which Hecker he 
wants to assign the role of Faust and to which that of Wagner. 
In short. The fantastic farewell address of the republican Hecker 
was followed by the no less fantastic case of Public Prosecutor 
Hecker. 
Or are we mistaken? Does Hecker, the Public Prosecutor, believe 
that "the word to the German people" is the product of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung  itself,  that this newspaper with its inventive 
maliciousness has signed its own proclamation "Hecker" in order to 
make the German people believe that Hecker, the Public Prosecutor, 
is emigrating to New York, that Hecker, the Public Prosecutor, 
proclaims the German republic, that Hecker, the Public Prosecutor, 
officially sanctions pious revolutionary wishes? 

=====第516页=====
486 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Such a trick was credible because the document reproduced in the 
supplement to No. 116 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung is not signed 
Friedrich Hecker but tout bonnement "Hecker". A Hecker without 
flourishes, a simple Hecker! And does not Germany possess a 
twofold Hecker? 
And who of the two is the "simple Hecker"? In any case, this 
simplicity remains ambiguous and, in our opinion, embarrassing for 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Be that as it may, Herr Hecker, the Public Prosecutor, apparently 
viewed the "word to the German people" as a product of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. He saw in it a direct appeal to overthrow the 
Government, high treason in its most developed form or at the very 
least complicity in high treason which according to the Code pénal 319 
constitutes "simple" high treason. 
Thus Herr Hecker requested the examining magistrate to "as­
sume" not that the undersigned responsible publisher, 3 but that the 
editor-in-chief, Karl Marx, is guilty of high treason. But to "assume" 
somebody guilty of high  treason  means in other words to put him into 
prison for the time being and to punish him until further notice with 
detention pending investigation. We are dealing here with the 
"imposition" of solitary confinement. The examining magistrate 
refused to do this. Once Herr Hecker has conceived of an idea, he 
pursues his idea. To "constitute" the editor-in-chief of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung became a fixed idea for him just as the name of 
"Hecker" underneath the "farewell address" was for him fictitious. 
Hence he turned to the Council Chamber. The Council Chamber 
declined. He went from the Council Chamber to the Senate of 
Appeal. The Senate of Appeal refused to become involved. Herr 
Hecker, the Public Prosecutor, however, did not give up his fixed 
idea to "constitute", always in the above sense, the editor-in-chief of 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Karl Marx. As one can see, the ideas of 
the Public Prosecutor's office are not speculative ideas in the 
Hegelian sense. They are ideas in the Kantian sense, notions of 
"practical" reason. 
Karl Marx could never be directly "accused" of high treason, 
even if the printing of revolutionary facts or proclamations 
constituted a newspaper guilty of high treason. In the first place, one 
had to charge the  one who had signedthe newspaper, especially in this 
case,  where the document in question appeared in the feuilleton 
section. What else could one do? One idea leads to another. One 
could cite Karl Marx, under Article 60 of the Code pénal, as an 
a Korff.—  Ed. 

=====第517页=====
Public Prosecutor "Hecker" and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 487 
accomplice to the crime allegedly committed by the responsible 
publisher. One can also cite him, if one wants to, as an accomplice of 
that declaration even if it was printed in the Kölnische Zeitung. Hence 
Karl Marx received a summons from the examining magistrate. He 
appeared and his evidence was taken down. The compositors were, 
as far as we know, summoned as witnesses, the proof-reader was 
summoned as a witness and the owner of the printshop was 
summoned as a witness. Finally, though, the  responsible  publisher was 
invited as a witness. We do not understand the last summons. 
Is the alleged author supposed to bear witness against his 
accomplice? 
So that nothing is omitted from our narrative: a police raid was 
conducted against the office of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Hecker, the Public Prosecutor, has surpassed Hecker, the 
republican. The one accomplishes rebellious facts and issues 
rebellious proclamations. The other, despite every reluctance, erases 
facts from the memoirs of contemporary history, from the 
newspapers. He makes what has happened not to have happened. If 
the "bad press" reports revolutionary facts and proclamations, it 
commits twofold high treason. It is a moral accomplice since it only 
reports the rebellious facts because it is inwardly titillated by them. It 
is an accomplice in the ordinary juridical sense; by reporting, it 
disseminates, and by disseminating, it turns itself into a tool of the 
rebellion. It will, therefore, be "constituted" on both counts and will 
thus enjoy the fruits of the "constitution". The "good press", by 
contrast, will have the monopoly to report or not to report, to falsify 
or not to falsify revolutionary documents and facts. Radetzky has 
made use of this theory by prohibiting the Milanese newspapers to 
report the Viennese facts and proclamations. The Milanese News­
paper, 3 on the other hand, reported in place of the great 
Viennese "revolution" a small Viennese riot especially composed by 
Radetzky. It is rumoured that an insurrection has nonetheless 
broken out in Milan. 
Herr Hecker, the Public Prosecutor, is, as everybody knows, a 
contributor to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. b As our contributor we 
forgive him much except the sin against the unholy "spirit" of our 
newspaper. And he commits this sin by transforming, with a lack of 
critical faculty unheard of in a contributor to the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, the proclamation of Hecker the fugitive into the proclama­
tion of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Friedrich Hecker adopts a 
Gazzetta di Milano. —Ed. 
b See this volume, p.  186.— Ed. 

=====第518页=====
488 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
passionate attitude and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung a critical attitude 
towards the movement. Friedrich Hecker expects everything from 
the magic influence of single  personalities.  We expect everything from 
the collisions which arise from the economic conditions. Friedrich 
Hecker travels to the United States in order to study the "republic". 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung finds that the grandiose class struggles 
which are taking place in the French Republic are more interesting 
subjects of study than those in a republic in which in the west class 
struggles do not yet exist and in the east move only within the old 
quiet English forms. For Friedrich Hecker social questions are 
consequences of political struggles, for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
political struggles are merely the manifestations of social collisions. 
Friedrich Hecker could be a good tricolour republican. The actual 
opposition of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung only begins with the 
tricolour republic. 
How, for example, could the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, without 
completely repudiating its past, have called upon the German 
people to 
"rally around the men who hold high the banner of popular sovereignty and who 
guard it faithfully, the men of the extreme Left in Frankfurt am Main; join firmly by 
word and deed the brave leaders of the republican rising". 
We have repeatedly declared that we are not a "parliamentary" 
newspaper and that we do not hesitate, therefore, from time to time 
to draw the wrath of even the extreme Left of Berlin and Frankfurt 
upon our heads. We have called upon the gentlemen of Frankfurt to 
join the people, we have never called upon the people to join the 
gentlemen of Frankfurt. And "the brave leaders of the republican 
rising", where are they and who are they? Hecker is, as is well 
known, in America, Struve is in prison. Is it Herwegh? The editors of 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, in particular Karl Marx, have at public 
meetings decisively opposed Herwegh's initiative 320 in Paris without 
fearing the ill favour of the excited masses. They were, therefore, 
duly mistrusted at that time (compare the Deutsche  Volkszeitunff 21 
among others) by Utopians who mistook themselves for revolutionaries. 
Are we supposed to join the people of the opposite opinion now that 
events have repeatedly confirmed our predictions? 
But let us be just. Herr Hecker, the Public Prosecutor, is still a 
young contributor to our newspaper. The novice in politics just as 
the novice in natural science resembles that painter who knows only 
two colours, white and black, or, if you prefer, black-white and red. 
The finer differences within each espèce reveal themselves only to the 
skilled and experienced eye. And besides, was Herr Hecker not 
dominated by the fixed idea to "constitute" Karl Marx, the 

=====第519页=====
Public Prosecutor "Hecker" and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 489 
editor-in-chief of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, a fixed idea which 
melted in the purgatory neither of the Investigating Court, nor of 
the Council Chamber, nor of the Senate of Appeal; hence it must be 
a fire-proof fixed idea. 
The greatest achievement of the March revolution is unquestion­
ably, to use the words of Brutus Bassermann, the "rule of the most 
noble and best" and their rapid rise on the scale of power. We hope 
therefore that the merits of Public Prosecutor Hecker, our esteemed 
contributor, will also carry him to the heights of the state's Olympus, 
as the snow-white doves which were harnessed to the chariot of 
Aphrodite, carried her with lightning speed to Olympus. As 
everybody knows, our Government is constitutional. Pfuel is full of 
enthusiasm for constitutionalism. It is the custom in constitutional 
states to pay close attention to the recommendations of opposition 
newspapers. We are therefore moving on constitutional grounds 
when we advise the Government to award to our Hecker the vacant 
position of Chief Public  Prosecutor  of Düsseldorf. Public Prosecutor 
Amnion of Düsseldorf, who, as far as we know, has not yet earned a 
life-saving medal for his services to the fatherland, will not hesitate 
for one moment to dictate reverential silence to his own possible 
claims in view of the higher merits. If, however, Herr Heimsoeth 
should become Minister of Justice, as we hope he will, we will 
recommend Herr Hecker as Attorney General. We expect still bigger 
things for Herr Hecker. Herr Hecker is still young. And as the 
Russians say: the Tsar is great, God is greater still, but the Tsar is still 
young. 
Written by Marx on October 28, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 129, October 29, 1848 time 

=====第520页=====
490 
"APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC CONGRESS 
TO THE GERMAN PEOPLE" 322 
Cologne, November 2. We give below the appeal of the "Democra­
tic Congress"323: 
TO THE GERMAN  PEOPLE! 
During long humiliating years, the German people groaned under the yoke of 
despotism. The bloody deeds of Vienna and Berlin justified the hope that its freedom 
and unity would be realised at one blow. The diabolical cunning of an execrable 
reaction balked this development, thus cheating the heroic people of the fruits of its 
grandiose insurrection. Vienna, a main bulwark of German freedom, finds itself at the 
moment in the greatest danger. Sacrificed by the intrigues of a still powerful camarilla, 
it was to be delivered again to the fetters of despotism. But its noble population rose as 
one man and opposes the armed hordes of its oppressors resolute unto death. The 
cause of Vienna is the cause of Germany and the cause of freedom. With the fall of 
Vienna, the old tyranny will raise its banner higher than ever, Vienna's victory would 
mean its destruction. It is up to us, German brothers, not to allow Vienna's freedom to 
perish and not to sacrifice it to the fortune of war of barbaric hordes. It is the most 
sacred duty of the German governments to rush to the aid of their hard pressed sister 
city with all their influence. It is, however, at the same time also the most sacred duty 
of the German people—in the interest of its freedom and in the interest of its 
self-preservation—to make every sacrifice for the salvation of Vienna. The German 
people must never draw upon itself the humiliation of blunt indifference when the 
most precious things, when everything is at stake. Therefore we ask you, brothers, to 
contribute, each according to his strength, to save Vienna from perdition. What we are 
doing for Vienna, we are doing for Germany. It is up to you to help! The men whom 
you have sent to Frankfurt in order to establish freedom have rejected the request to 
help Vienna with derision. It is up to you now to act! With your powerful and 
unshakeable energy, demand from your governments that they submit to your 
majority and save the German cause and the cause of freedom in Vienna. Hurry! You 
are the power, your will is law! Arise, ye men of freedom, arise in all German lands 
and wherever else the thought of freedom and humanity inflames noble hearts! Arise, 

=====第521页=====
"Appeal of the Democratic Congress to the German People" 491 
before it is too late! Save the freedom of Vienna. Save the freedom of Germany. The 
present generation will admire you, posterity will reward you with immortal glory! 
October 29, 1848 
The Democratic Congress in Berlin 
In this appeal lack of revolutionary energy is replaced by 
sermonising, wailing and ranting324 behind which hides the most 
decided lack of thought and passion. 
Just a few samples! 
The appeal expected of the Vienna and Berlin March revolutions 
"the realisation of the unity and freedom" of the German people "at 
one blow". In other words: the appeal dreamed of "one blow" which 
would render the "development" of the German people towards 
"unity and freedom" superfluous. 
Immediately thereafter, however, the fantastic "one blow" which 
replaces the development is transformed into a "development"which 
was balkedhy the reaction. A phrase which reduces itself to nothing! 
We are disregarding the monotonous repetition of the basic 
theme: Vienna is in danger and with Vienna Germany's freedom. 
Help Vienna and you will help yourselves! This thought has not been 
given flesh and blood. This one phrase is wrapped around itself so 
many times until it has been extended into a piece of oratory. We 
merely observe that artificial, insincere ranting always lapses into this 
clumsy rhetoric. 
"It is up to us, German brothers, not to allow Vienna's freedom to perish and 
not to sacrifice it to the fortune of war of barbaric hordes." 
And how are we to do this? 
First of all, by an appeal to the sense of duty of the "German 
governments".  C'est  incroyable! 3 
"It is the most sacred duty of the German governments to rush to the aid of their 
hard pressed sister city with all their influence." 
Is the Prussian Government supposed to send Wrangel or Colomb 
or the Prince of Prussia against Auersperg, Jellachich and Win-
dischgrätz? Did the "Democratic" Congress have the right to assume 
for one moment this childish and conservative attitude to the 
German governments? Did it have the right to separate for one 
moment the cause and the "most sacred interests" of the German 
governments from the cause and the interests of "Croatian order 
and freedom"? The governments will smile in self-satisfaction at this 
virginal enthusiasm. 
That is incredible!—Ed. 

=====第522页=====
492 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
And the people? 
The people are exhorted in general "to make every sacrifice for 
the salvation of Vienna". Fine! The "people", however, expect 
particular demands of the Democratic Congress. Whoever demands 
everything, demands nothing and obtains nothing. Thus the 
particular demand, the whole point is: 
"With your powerful and unshakeable energy, demand from your governments 
that they submit to your majority and save the German cause and the cause of 
freedom in Vienna. Hurry! You are the power, your will is law! Arise!" 
Let us assume that great popular demonstrations succeed in 
compelling the governments to take steps in a semi-official way for 
the salvation of Vienna; we would be blessed with a second edition of 
"Stein's Army Order". The very idea of using the present "German 
governments" as "saviours of freedom"—as if in carrying out 
imperial punitive measures they were not fulfilling their true calling 
and their "most sacred duties" as the Gabriels of "constitutional 
freedom". The "Democratic Congress" had to be silent about the 
German governments or it had to reveal unsparingly their 
conspiracy with Olmütz 3 and Petersburg. 
Even though the appeal recommends  "speed"  and there is indeed 
no time to lose, the humanistic phraseology carries it beyond the 
borders of Germany and beyond every geographical boundary into 
the cosmopolitan, misty land of "noble hearts" in general. 
"Hurry! Arise, ye men of freedom, arise in all German lands and wherever else 
the thought of freedom and humanity inflames noble hearts!" 
We do not doubt that there are such "hearts" even in Lapland. 
In Germany and wherever  elsel  By evaporating into this pure and 
indefinite phrase the "appeal" has gained its true expression. 
It remains unforgivable that the "Democratic Congress" counter­
signed such a document. Neither will "the present generation 
admire it for this" nor will "posterity reward it with immortal glory". 
Let us hope that the people, in spite of the "appeal of the 
Democratic Congress", will awaken from its lethargy and that it will 
aid the Viennese in the only way it is still able to do at this moment, 
by defeating the counter-revolution at home. 
Written by Marx on November 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
ZeitungNo. 133, November 3, 1848 
The Austrian Emperor and his Ministers fled to Olmütz (Olomouc) during the 
uprising in Vienna.— Ed. 

=====第523页=====
493 
THE PARIS RÉFORME ON THE SITUATION 
IN FRANCE 325 
Cologne, November 2. Even  before  the June uprising we repeatedly 
exposed the illusions of the republicans who cling to the traditions of 
1793,  the republicans of the Réforme (of "Paris"). The June revo­
lution and the movement to which it gave rise are compelling the 
Utopian republicans gradually to open their eyes. 
A leading article in the Réforme for October 29 reveals the 
struggle going on within the party between its old delusions and 
the new facts. 
The Réforme says: 
"In our country the fights waged to seize the reins of government have long been 
class wars, struggles of the bourgeoisie and the people against the nobility when the 
First Republic came into being; the sacrifices of the armed people without, and rule of 
the bourgeoisie within during the Empire; the attempts to restore feudalism under the 
older branch of the Bourbons; finally, in 1830, the triumph and rule of the bour­
geoisie—that is our history." 
The Réforme adds with a sigh: 
"We certainly regret that we have to speak of classes, of ungodly and hateful 
divergences, but these divergences exist and we cannot overlook this fact." 
That is to say: up to now the Réforme in its republican optimism 
saw only "citoyens", but it has been so hard pressed by history that the 
splitting up of the "citoyens "into "bourgeois" and "prolétaires" can no 
longer be dismissed by any effort of imagination. 
The Réforme continues: 
"The despotism of the bourgeoisie was broken in February. What did the people 
demand? Justice for all and equality. That was its primary slogan, its primary 
desire. The wishes of the bourgeoisie, whose eyes had been opened by the flash of 
lightning, were at first the same as those of the people." 

=====第524页=====
494 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
The Réforme still judges the February revolution by the speeches 
made during that month. The despotism of the bourgeoisie, far 
from having been broken during the February revolution, was 
completed by it. The Crown, the last feudal halo, which concealed 
the rule of the bourgeoisie, was cast aside. The rule of capital 
emerged undisguised. Bourgeoisie and proletariat fought against a 
common enemy during the February revolution. As soon as the 
common enemy was eliminated, the two hostile classes held the field 
of battle alone and the decisive struggle between them was bound to 
begin. People may ask, why did the bourgeoisie fall back into 
royalism, if the February revolution brought bourgeois rule to its 
completion? The explanation is quite simple. The bourgeoisie would 
have liked to return to the period when it ruled without being 
responsible for its rule; when a puppet authority standing between 
the bourgeoisie and the people had to act for it and to serve it as a 
cloak. A period when it had, as it were, a crowned scapegoat, which 
the proletariat hit whenever it aimed at the bourgeoisie, and against 
which the bourgeoisie could join forces with the proletariat 
whenever that scapegoat became troublesome and attempted to 
establish itself as an authority in its own right. The bourgeoisie could 
use the King as a kind of lightning-conductor protecting it from the 
people, and the people as a lightning-conductor protecting it from 
the King. 
Since the illusions, some of them hypocritical, some honestly held, 
which became widespread immediately after the defeat of Louis 
Philippe, are mistakenly accepted by the Réforme as facts, the 
developments following those days in February appear to it as a series 
of errors, awkward accidents, that a great man adequate to the needs 
of the moment could have avoided. As though Lamartine, that 
delusive light, had not been the true man of the moment! 
The Réforme bemoans the fact that the true man, the great man, 
has not yet appeared, and the situation gets worse every day. 
"On the one hand the industrial and commercial crisis grows; on the other hand 
hatred grows and all strive towards contradictory goals. Those who were oppressed 
before February 24 seek their ideal of happiness and freedom in the conception of an 
entirely new society. The only concern of those who governed under the monarchy is 
to regain their realm in order to exploit it with redoubled harshness." 
Now what is the attitude of the Réforme towards these sharply 
antagonistic classes? Does it realise even vaguely that class contradic­
tions and class struggle will disappear only with the disappearance of 
classes? 
No. Just now it admitted that class contradictions exist. But class 
contradictions are based on economic foundations, on the existing 

=====第525页=====
The Paris Réforme on the Situation in France 495 
mode of material production and the conditions of commerce 
resulting from it. The Réforme knows no better way of changing and 
abolishing these contradictions than to disregard their real basis, that 
is these very material conditions, and to withdraw into the hazy blue 
heaven of republican ideology, in other words, into the poetic 
February period, from which it was violently ejected by the June 
events. It writes: 
"The saddest aspect of these internal dissensions is the obliteration, the loss of 
patriotic, national sentiments," 
i.e. of just that patriotic and national enthusiasm which enabled both 
classes to veil their distinct interests, their conditions of life. When 
they did that in 1789, their real contradictions were not yet 
developed. What at that time was an adequate expression of the real 
position, is today merely an escape from the existing situation. What 
had substance then, is today just a relic. 
"France," concludes the Réforme, "evidendy suffers from a deep-seated malady, 
but it is curable. It is caused by a confusion of ideas and morals, by a neglect of justice 
and equality in social relations, and by depravity resulting from egoistical teaching. 
The means for reorganisation must be sought in this sphere. Instead people have 
recourse to material means." 
The Réforme presents the whole case as a matter of "conscience", 
and moral twaddle is then used as a means to solve everything. The 
antithesis of bourgeoisie and proletariat accordingly derives from 
the ideas of these two classes. And where do these ideas derive from? 
From the social relations. And where do these relations derive from? 
From the material, economic conditions of life of the hostile classes. 
According to the Réforme, if the two classes are no longer conscious 
of their real position and their real contradictions, and become 
intoxicated with the opium of the "patriotic" sentiments and phrases 
of 1793, then their difficulties will be solved. What an admission of 
helplessness! 
Written by Marx on November 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 133, November 3, 1848 
18-3447 

=====第526页=====
496 
[THE VIENNESE REVOLUTION 
AND THE KÖLNISCHE ZEITUNG] 
Cologne, November 3. Our readers have never indulged in Utopian 
hopes in regard to Vienna. After the June revolution, we believed in 
every baseness of the bourgeoisie. We said immediately in the first 
issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitungvthen it reappeared after the state 
of siege: "The bourgeoisie's distrust of the working class threatens, if 
not to wreck the revolution, at least to hamper its development. 
However that may be, the repercussions of this revolution in 
Hungary, Italy and Germany foiled the entire plan of campaign 
devised by the counter-revolution." 3 
We would therefore not be surprised by a defeat of Vienna. We 
would only find ourselves called upon to break off any negotiation 
with the bourgeoisie which measures freedom by the freedom to trade 
and we would without conciliation and without accommodation 
oppose the miserable German middle class which gladly relinquishes 
its own rule on condition that it may continue to trade without a fight. 
The English and French bourgeoisie is ambitious; the infamy of the 
German bourgeoisie would be confirmed by Vienna's defeat. 
Thus:  at no time have we vouched for the victory of the Viennese. 
Their defeat would not come as a surprise to us. It would only 
convince us that no peace with the  bourgeoisie  is possible, not even for 
the period of transition, and that the people must remain indifferent 
in the battles between the bourgeoisie and the Government and must 
wait for their victories or defeats in order to exploit them. Once 
again: our readers have only to consult our back issues in order to 
satisfy themselves that neither the victory nor the defeat of the 
Viennese can surprise us. 
a See this volume, p.  457.—Ed. 

=====第527页=====
The Viennese Revolution and the Kölnische Zeitung 497 
What does surprise us, however, is the latest special edition of the 
Kölnische Zeitung. Does the Government deliberately spread false 
rumours about Vienna in order to calm the excitement in Berlin and 
the provinces? Does Dumont pay the Prussian state  telegraph  so that he, 
Dumont, receives news from the "Berlin" and "Breslau" morning 
papers which do not reach the "bad press"? And whence did 
Dumont get his "telegraphic dispatch" this morning, which we did 
not receive? Has Birk from Trier, a mere cipher who has replaced 
Wittgenstein, been engaged as editor by Dumont? We do not believe 
it. For even a Brüggemann, a Wolfers, a Schwanbeck, all that is still 
no Birk.  We doubt that Dumont has engaged such a nonentity. 
Today at 6 p. m., Dumont, who lied away the February and March 
revolutions, carries among his first reports once again a "tele­
graphic" report according to which Vienna has surrendered to the 
"Wendish itch", the "Windischgrätz". 3 
It is possible. But the possibilities of the once blood-dripping 
"Brüggemann", 326 the ex-correspondent of the  old Rheinische Zeitung, 
this worthy whose views always go hand in hand with the "  exchange 
value" of views in general, his possibilities are based upon the 
Preussische Staats-Anzeiger and the Breslauer Zeitung. The tales of 
" Brüggemann" or of the Kölnische Zeitung concerning the February, 
March and October revolutions will offer their peculiar contribution 
to history. 
Now we shall give the reports which report nothing.327 
Written by Marx on November 3, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the second supplement Published in English for the first 
to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 133, time 
November 3, 1848 
a A play on the words wendische Krätze —Wendish itch — and the name 
Windischgrätz. — Ed. 

=====第528页=====
498 
THE LATEST NEWS FROM VIENNA, 
BERLIN  AND  PARIS328 
Cologne, November  4. The  outlook brightens. 
There  is no  direct news  yet from Vienna.  But  even according  to the 
official Prussian newspapers,  it is  clear that Vienna  has not  surren­
dered  and  that Windischgrätz deliberately  or as a  result  of a  misunder­
standing issued  to the  world  a false  telegram.  The  "good" press, like  an 
orthodox, multilingual echo, willingly repeated  the  message  al­
though  it tried hard  to mask  its malicious glee behind hypocritical 
mournful phrases. Stripped  of all  their fantastic  and self-
contradictory trash,  the reports from Silesia  and  Berlin bring  out the 
following facts.  By October  29 the  imperial bandits  had  obtained 
control only  of a few  suburbs.  The  reports received  up till now do not 
show that they have gained  a foothold  in Vienna  itself. The  whole 
story  of Vienna's surrender boils down  to a few  treasonable  procla­
mations  of the Vienna Town Council  The  advanced guard  of the  Hun­
garian army attacked Windischgrätz  on October  30, and was  said 
to have been driven back.  On October 31 Windischgrätz resumed  the 
bombardment  of Vienna—without result.  His  army  is now  between 
the Viennese  and the  over 80,000-strong Hungarian army.  Win-
dischgrätz's infamous manifestos evoked uprisings  or at  least very 
threatening movements  in all  provinces. Even  the Czech fanatics  in 
Prague,  the neophytes  of the  Slovanskâ Lîpa, 329 have awakened from 
their wild dreams  and  declared  for  Vienna against  the  imperial 
Schinderhannes. 3 Never before  has the  counter-revolution dared  to 
proclaim  its plans with such foolish brazenness. Even  at Olmiitz, h that 
Jack the Skinner,  a name given  to Johann Bückler,  a German robber  chief.— Ed. 
The Czech name  is Olomouc.—  Ed. 

=====第529页=====
The Latest News from Vienna, Berlin and Paris 499 
Austrian Koblenz,330 the crowned idiota can feel the ground shaking 
beneath his feet. The fact that the troops are led by the world-famed 
Sipehsalarb Jellachich—whose name is so great that "  at the flash of his 
sabre the frightened moon hides behind the clouds" and "the roar of 
cannon" always "points the way" in which he must hurriedly 
decamp—leaves no doubt that the people of Hungary and Vienna 
Horsewhip that scum into the Danube River, 
Go castigate that overweening rabble, 
Those starveling beggars, all so tired of living, 
That horde of miscreants, rogues and vagabonds, 
Croatian  riff-raff,  abject peasant hirelings, 
That vomit, spewed up by a glutted homeland 
For desperate ventures and for certain doom. 
Later reports will give appalling details of the crimes perpetrated 
by Croats and other knights of "law and order and constitutional 
freedom". The European bourgeoisie ensconced in stock exchanges 
and other convenient observation posts loudly acclaims the gory 
spectacle; the same wretched bourgeoisie that broke into screams of 
moral indignation because of a few harsh acts of popular justice and 
with a thousand voices unanimously anathemised the "murderers" 
of honest Latour and noble Lichnowski. 
The Poles, avenging the Galician murders,331 are once more 
advancing at the head of the liberators of Vienna, just as they march 
at the head of the Italian people and everywhere act as high-minded 
generals of the revolution. Three cheers for the Polesl 
The Berlin camarilla, intoxicated with the blood of Vienna, blinded 
by the pillars of smoke rising from the burning suburbs, stunned by 
the Croats' and haiduks' shouts of victory, has dropped its cloak. 
"Peace has been restored in Berlin." Nous verrons.c 
Finally, from Paris come the first subterranean rumbles announc­
ing the earthquake that will bury the respectable republic under its 
own ruins. 
The outlook brightens. 
Written by Marx on November 4, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 135, November 5, 1848 
a Ferdinand  I.—Ed. 
Commander-in-chief.—Ed. 
c We shall see.—Ed 

=====第530页=====
500 
OUR BOURGEOISIE AND DR. NÜCKEL 
Cologne, November 4. The news of the victory of the Croats and 
Wends in Vienna so enraptured our Cologne bourgeoisie that they 
celebrated with bottles of champagne and through Dr. Niickel 
proposed the following fundamental motion at the evening session 
of the Town Council on November 3: 
"That the Town Council is not obliged to give the workers work. That this is 
nothing but relief and that the daily wages of workers employed by the city should 
consequently be fixed at a lower rate than the daily wages of workers employed by 
private masters." 
An additional reason given by Dr. Nuckel was that it was necessary 
by means of this differential to stem the rush of workers to municipal 
employment. 
Herr Böker managed with difficulty to get this question adjourned. 
Dr. Nuckel has proclaimed the dogma of the local bourgeoisie. For 
this, the workers owe Dr. Nuckel their heartfelt thanks. 
It was quite consistent that our men of property, who so joyfully 
welcomed the declaration of a state of  siege  in Cologne,  celebrated the 
bombardment of Vienna and the restoration of Croatian freedom as a 
victory, just as they had celebrated the refined cruelty of the June 
victors. 
Written by Marx on November 4, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 135, November 5, 1848 time 

=====第531页=====
501 
NEWS FROM VIENNA 
Cologne, November 5. Letters and  newspapers  from Vienna failed to 
arrive. The newspapers from Breslau* which we have received, the 
Allgemeine Oderzeitung, the Schlesische Zeitung and the Breslauer 
Zeitung, contain, properly speaking, nothing. 
Several Berlin morning papers of November 3 carry the following 
news item, one newspaper having received it from Hietzing, the 
others from Vienna: 
"The city of Vienna is entirely occupied by imperial troops." 
The Kölnische Zeitung prints this report, which it received from 
Breslau and which "is described as reliable", and it confirms this 
report by a "telegram" from Berlin, which "in  itself"  is of course 
reliable. 
Let us leave aside the anonymous note from Breslaub  and proceed 
to the telegram printed in big letters in the Kölnische Zeitung. 0 
The telegram was dispatched from Vienna at noon on Novem­
ber 1. 
The letter to Dumont, if he received the news in writing, was sent 
at 8 a.m. on November 3, with the Berlin mail. 
On the evening of November 3, this news was circulating merely as 
a rumour throughout Berlin, and the newspapers of November 4 
published on the evening of November 3 deny it. 
a Wroclaw.—Ed. 
"Breslau, 2. Nov." and "Berlin, 3. Nov.", Kölnische Zeitung No. 299 (second 
edition), November 5, 1848.— Ed. 
c Kölnische Zeitung No. 299 (second edition), November 5, 1848, p. 1.— Ed. 

=====第532页=====
502 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Hence we have no news from Vienna. Dumont, who reported the 
burning and capture of Vienna since October 6, could by way of 
exception have got hold of the right fact on one day in the month. 
Written by Marx on November 5, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the second edition of the Published in English for the first 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 135, time 
November 5, 1848 

=====第533页=====
503 
THE VICTORY OF THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 
IN VIENNA332 
Cologne, November 6. Croatian freedom and order won the day and 
celebrated this victory with arson, rape, looting and other atrocities. 
Vienna is in the hands of Windischgrätz, Jellachich and Auersperg. Heca­
tombs of human victims are sacrificed on the grave of the aged trai­
tor Latour. 
The gloomy forecasts of our Vienna correspondent3 have come 
true,  and by now he himself may have become a victim of the 
butchery. 
For a while we hoped Vienna could be liberated by Hungarian 
reinforcements, and we are still in the dark regarding the move­
ments of the Hungarian army. 
Treachery of every kind prepared the way for Vienna's fall. The 
entire history of the Imperial Diet and the Town Council since Octo­
ber 6 is a tale of continuous treachery. Who are the people repre­
sented in the Imperial Diet and the Town Council? 
The bourgeoisie. 
A part of the Viennese national guard openly sided with the 
camarilla from the very beginning of the October revolution. 
Towards the end of the October revolution another part of the 
national guard in collusion with the imperial bandits fought against 
the proletariat and the Academic Legion.333 To which strata do these 
groups of the national guard belong? 
To the bourgeoisie. 
a [Eduard von Müller-Tellering], "Wien, 21. October", Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
No. 127, October 27, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第534页=====
504 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
The bourgeoisie in France, however, headed the counter-revolution 
only after it had broken down all obstacles to the rule of its own class. 
The bourgeoisie in Germany meekly joins the retinue of the absolute 
monarchy and of feudalism before securing even the first conditions 
of existence necessary for its own civic freedom and its rule. In 
France it played the part of a tyrant and made its own counter­
revolution. In Germany it acts like a slave and carries out the 
counter-revolution for its own tyrants. In France it won its victory in 
order to humble the people. In Germany it humbled itself to prevent 
the victory of the people. History presents no more shameful and 
pitiful  spectacle  than that of the German bourgeoisie. 
Who fled from Vienna in large numbers leaving their wealth to be 
watched over by the magnanimous people, the people whom, in 
reward for their watchman's duties, they maligned while away and 
whose massacre they witnessed on their return? 
Thé bourgeoisie. 
Whose innermost secrets were revealed by the thermometer which 
dropped whenever the people of Vienna showed signs of life, and 
rose whenever the people were in the throes of death? Who used the 
runic language of the stock exchange quotations? 
The bourgeoisie. 
The "German National Assembly" and its "Central Authority" 
have betrayed Vienna. Whom do they represent? 
Mainly the bourgeoisie. 
The victory of "Croatian order and freedom" in Vienna de­
pended on the victory of the "respectable" republic in Paris. Who 
won the day in June? 
The bourgeoisie. 
European counter-revolution began its orgies with its victory in 
Paris. 
In February and March armed force was beaten everywhere. 
Why? Because it represented only the governments. After June it was 
everywhere victorious because the  bourgeoisie  everywhere had come 
to a secret understanding with it, while retaining official leadership 
of the revolutionary movement and introducing all those half meas­
ures which by the very nature of things were bound to miscarry. 
The national fanaticism of the Czechs was the most powerful 
instrument of the Viennese camarilla. The allies are already at 
loggerheads. In this issue our readers will find the protest of the 
Prague delegation against the insolent rudeness with which it was 
greeted in Olmiitz.3 
The Czech name is Olomouc.— Ed. 

=====第535页=====
The Victory of the Counter-Revolution in Vienna 505 
This is the first symptom of  the struggle which will  break  out between  the 
Slav party and its  hero  Jellachich on the one  hand,  and the party of nothing 
but the camarilla, which stands above all nationality, and its hero 
Windischgrätz on the other. Moreover the German peasants in Austria 
are not yet pacified. Their voice will be loudly heard above the 
caterwauling of the Austrian nationalities. And from a third quarter 
the voice of the Tsar, the friend of the people, 3 reaches as far as Pest; 
his executioners are waiting for the word of command in the 
Danube principalities. 
Finally, the last decision of the German National Assembly at 
Frankfurt, which incorporates German Austria into the German 
Empire, should lead to a gigantic conflict, unless the German Central 
Authority and the German National Assembly see it as their task to 
enter the arena in order to be hissed off the stage by the European 
public. For all their pious resignation the struggle in Austria will 
assume gigantic dimensions such as world history has never yet 
witnessed. 
The second act of the drama has just been performed in Vienna, 
its first act having been staged in Paris under the title of The June 
Days. In Paris the mobile guard,334 in Vienna "Croats"—in both cases 
lazzaroni, lumpenproletariat hired and armed — were used against 
the working and thinking proletarians. We shall soon see the third 
act performed in Berlin. 
Assuming that arms will enable the counter-revolution to establish 
itself in the whole of Europe, money would then kill it in the whole of 
Europe. European bankruptcy, national bankruptcy would be the fate 
nullifying the victory. Bayonets crumble like tinder when they come 
into contact with the salient "economic" facts. 
But developments will not wait for the expiry of the bills of 
exchange drawn by the European states on European society. The 
crushing counterblow of the June revolution will be struck in Paris. 
With the victory of the "red republic" in Paris, armies will be rushed 
from the interior of their countries to the frontiers and across them, 
and the real strength of the fighting parties will become evident. We 
shall then remember this June and this October and we too shall 
exclaim: 
Vae victis! 
The purposeless massacres perpetrated since the June and 
October events, the tedious offering of sacrifices since February and 
March, the very cannibalism of the counter-revolution will convince 
a Nicholas  I.—Ed. 

=====第536页=====
506 Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
the nations that there is only one means by which the murderous 
death agonies of the old society and the bloody birth throes of the 
new society can be  shortened,  simplified and concentrated—and that is 
by revolutionary terror. 
Written by Marx on November 6, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 136, November 7, 1848 

=====第537页=====
Frederick Engels 
FROM PARIS TO BERNE 335 

=====第538页=====
Written at the end of October and in Printed according to the manu-
Novernber 1848 script 
First published in the Neue Zeit, Bd. I, Published in English for the first 
Nos.  1 and 2, 1898-99 time 

=====第539页=====
.-' •'%•"• !S/' v^'#%^ "' 
•MSCM"'  • :'~"%iâêl$ 
'ism? AST-  „ 
»•v;*^i^f  ;r 
'"'•p^f'jmp fyg,:.-1 
First page of Engels' travel notes "From Paris to Berne' 

=====第540页=====

=====第541页=====
511 
I 
SEINE AND LOIRE 
La belle  France! The French certainly have a beautiful country and 
they are right to be proud of it. 
What country in Europe can compare with France in wealth, in the 
variety of its gifts of nature and products, in its universality? 
Spain? But neglect or nature has turned two-thirds of its area 
into a hot, stony desert, and the Atlantic side of the peninsula, 
Portugal, does not belong to it. 
Italy? But ever since world trade has been routed across the ocean, 
ever since steamships have plied the Mediterranean, Italy has lain 
isolated. 
England? But for the last eighty years England has been reduced 
to trade and industry, coal-smoke and cattle-raising, and England 
has a fearfully leaden sky, and no wine. 
And Germany? In the north, a flat, sandy plain, cut off from 
Southern Europe by the granite wall of the Alps, poor in wine, a land 
of beer, schnaps and rye bread, ot rivers and revolutions that have 
dried up! 
But France! Washed by three seas, traversed in three directions by 
five great rivers, in the north an almost German and Belgian climate, 
in the south almost Italian; wheat in the north, maize and rice in the 
south;  colza 3 in the north, olives in the south; flax in the north, silk in 
the south, and wine nearly everywhere. 
And what wine! What a diversity, from Bordeaux to Burgundy, 
from Burgundy to the heavy St. Georges, Lünel and Frontignan of 
the south, and from that to sparkling champagne! What variety of 
white and of red, from Petit Mâcon or Chablis to Chambertin, 
Château Larose, Sauterne, Roussillon and Ai Mousseux! And 
Rape.— Ed. 

=====第542页=====
512 Frederick Engels 
furthermore each of these wines intoxicates in its own way, with a 
few bottles one can experience every intermediate state from a 
Musard quadrille to the Marseillaise, from the exultation of the 
cancan to the tempestuous fever heat of revolution, and then finally 
with a bottle of champagne one can again drift into the merriest 
carnival mood in the world! 
And only France has a Paris, a city in which European civilisation 
has its finest flowering, in which all the nerve-fibres of European 
history unite and from which emanate at measured intervals those 
electric shocks which can shake a whole world; a city whose 
population combines a passion for pleasure with a passion for 
historical action like no other people, whose populace know how to 
live like the most refined Epicurean of Athens and to die like the 
most intrepid Spartan, Alcibiades and Leonidas in one person; a 
city which really is, as Louis Blanc3 says, the heart and mind of the 
world. 
If one looks across Paris from a high point in the city or from 
Montmartre or the terrace of Saint-Cloud, if one strolls through its 
environs, one concludes that France knows what it possesses in Paris, 
that France has been prodigal of its best in tenderly fostering Paris. 
Like an odalisque on a glittering, bronze-coloured divan, this proud 
city lies beside the warm, vine-covered hills of the winding Seine 
valley. Where in the whole world is there a view like that from the 
two Versailles railways down over the green valley with its countless 
villages and little towns, and where are there such delightfully 
situated, such smartly and trimly constructed, such tastefully 
laid-out villages and little towns as Suresnes, Saint-Cloud, Sèvres, 
Montmorency, Enghien and countless others? By whichever gate one 
may leave, though one choose one's route at random, everywhere 
one encounters the same fine surroundings, the same taste in the use 
of the topography, the same elegance and cleanliness. And yet again 
it is only the Queen of Cities itself which has created this splendid 
setting for  itself. 
But of course you need a France as well, to make a Paris, and only 
when one has become acquainted with the abundant wealth of this 
magnificent country does one understand how this radiant, sump­
tuous,  incomparable Paris could come about. One does not 
understand it, of course, if one comes from the north, speeding by 
train across the plains of Flanders and Artois and the hills of Picardy 
Evidently a slip of the pen for the words quoted are taken from a draft address to 
the Government of the French Republic submitted by Auguste Blanqui in March 
1848.—  Ed. 

=====第543页=====
From Paris to Berne 513 
with neither forest nor vineyard. There one sees only corn-fields and 
pasture, whose uniformity is interrupted only by marshy river valleys 
and distant scrubby hills; and only when one enters within range of 
the atmosphere of Paris, at Pontoise, does one see something of 
"beautiful France". One begins to understand Paris a little more if 
one approaches the capital through the fertile vales of Lorraine, the 
vine-garlanded chalk hills of Champagne and along the beautiful 
Marne valley; one understands it better still if one travels through 
Normandy, now following and now cutting across the meanders of 
the Seine on the railway from Rouen to Paris. The Seine seems to 
exhale the air of Paris right down to its mouth; the villages, the 
towns, the hills, everything reminds one of the countryside near 
Paris,  except that everything becomes finer, more sumptuous, more 
tasteful as one approaches the centre of France. But I did not fully 
understand how Paris was possible until I went along the Loire and 
from there turned across the hills to the vineyard valleys of 
Burgundy. 
I had known Paris in the last two years of the monarchy, when the 
bourgeoisie was revelling in the full enjoyment of its dominance, 
when trade and industry were faring passably, when the bourgeois 
and petty-bourgeois youth still had money for its pleasures and for 
squandering it away, and when even some of the workers were 
still well enough placed to be able to participate in the general high 
spirits and light-heartedness. I had seen Paris again in March and 
April, in that brief intoxication of the republican honeymoon, when 
the workers, optimistic fools3 that they were, cheerfully and without 
any hesitation "decided to endure three months of misery"b  for the 
republic's sake, when they ate dry bread and potatoes by day and 
when evening came, planted liberty-trees along the boulevards, let 
off fire-crackers and sang the Marseillaise for all they were worth, 
and when the bourgeoisie, hiding in their houses all day, attempted 
to appease the wrath of the people with coloured lanterns. I 
returned — much against my will, by Hecker! —in October. Between 
the Paris of those days and now there lay the 15th May and the 25th 
June,  there lay the most fearful struggle the world had ever seen, 
there lay a sea of blood and fifteen thousand dead. Cavaignac's shells 
had blown Paris's irrepressible gaiety sky-high; the sound of the 
Marseillaise and the Chant du départ had ceased, only the bour­
geoisie was still humming its Mourir pour la patrie 336 between its 
teeth; the workers, who had neither bread nor arms, ground their 
Hoffnungsvolle Toren (optimistic fools) from Goethe's poem "Prometheus".— Ed. 
b See this volume, p.  148.—Ed. 

=====第544页=====
514 Frederick Engels 
teeth in suppressed resentment; in the school of the state of siege, 
the exuberant republic had very soon become respectable, tame, 
well-behaved, and moderate (sage et  modérée).  But Paris was dead, it 
was no longer Paris. On the boulevards, no one but the bourgeoisie 
and police spies; the dance-halls and theatres deserted; the gamins 
engulfed in mobile guard jackets, bought for 30 sous a day by the 
respectable republic, and the stupider they became the more the 
bourgeoisie celebrated them — in  brief,  it was the Paris of 1847 
again, but without the spirit, without the life, without the fire and the 
ferment which the workers brought to everything in those days. Paris 
was dead, and this beautiful corpse was all the more uncanny for 
being so beautiful. 
I could endure it no longer in this dead Paris. I had to leave it, no 
matter whither. So first of all to Switzerland. I had not much money, 
that meant going on foot. Nor was I set on taking the shortest route; 
one does not readily part from France. 
Thus one fine morning I set out and without any fixed plan 
marched due south. I lost my way among the villages once I had left 
the city's outskirts behind me; there was nothing strange in that. 
Eventually I found myself on the highroad to Lyons. I followed it for 
some distance, leaving it from time to time to climb the hills. From 
the top one has splendid views up and down the Seine, to Paris and 
to Fontainebleau. One sees the river meandering far, far away in the 
broad valley, vineyards on the hills on both sides, further away the 
blue hills beyond which flows the Marne. 
But I did not wish to enter Burgundy by so direct a route; I wanted 
to reach the Loire first. So on the second day I left the highroad and 
went over the hills towards Orléans. I lost my way among the villages 
again of course, as my only guides were the sun and the peasants, cut 
off from the whole world and unable to tell right from left. I spent 
the night in some village whose name I was never able to make out in 
the peasant patois, fifteen leagues from Paris, on the watershed 
between Seine and Loire. 
This watershed is formed by a broad ridge which extends from 
south-east to north-west. On either side it is intersected by numerous 
valleys, watered by small streams or rivers. Up on the wind-swept 
summit only corn, buckwheat, clover and vegetables do well; but 
vines grow everywhere on the valley sides. The eastward-facing 
slopes are nearly all covered with great masses of those limestone 
rocks which the English geologists call bolderstones3 and which one 
This form of the English word is used in the manuscript.— Ed. 

=====第545页=====
From Paris to Berne 515 
often finds in secondary and tertiary hill-country. The huge blue 
rocks,  between which green shrubs and saplings grow, provide a 
pleasant contrast to the meadows of the valley and the vineyards of 
the opposite slope. 
Gradually I came down into one of these little river valleys and 
followed it for a while. Eventually I came upon a highway with 
people on it from whom I was able to discover where in fact I was. I 
was not far from Malesherbes, midway between Orléans and Paris. 
Orléans itself lay too far to the west for my purpose; Nevers was my 
next goal, and so I once more went up over the nearest hill, heading 
due south. A very pretty view from the top: the pleasant little town of 
Malesherbes between wooded hills, numerous villages on the slopes, 
and up on a hill-top Castle Chateaubriand. And what was even more 
to my liking: opposite, on the far side of a narrow ravine, a depart­
mental road leading due south. 
There are three kinds of road in France: the state roads, formerly 
called royal roads, now national, fine broad highways connecting the 
most important towns with each other. These national roads, which 
in the region of Paris are not merely excellently made but true 
luxury roads, magnificent elm-lined avenues sixty feet wide and 
more, and paved in the middle, become poorer, narrower and less 
tree-lined the further one proceeds from Paris and the less 
important the road is. In some places they are then so bad that they 
are scarcely passable for pedestrians after two hours of moderate 
rain. The second class consists of the departmental roads, providing 
secondary communications, financed from departmental funds, 
narrower and less resplendent than the national roads. The third 
class,  finally, is made up of the major vicinal routes (chemins  de grande 
communication), maintained from canton resources, narrow unas­
suming roads, but in some places in better condition than the big­
ger highways. 
I struck uphill straight across country in the direction of my 
departmental road and found to my extreme delight that it went due 
south in an absolutely straight line. Villages and inns were few and 
far between; after marching for several hours I eventually came 
upon a large farm where I was served most hospitably with some 
refreshments, for which I drew some grotesque faces on a piece of 
paper for the farmer's children and declared with all gravity: this 
one was a speaking likeness of General Cavaignac and that one of 
Louis Napoleon, these of Armand Marrast, Ledru-Rollin etc. The 
farm-folk stared at these distorted faces in great awe, thanked me in 
their delight and at once fixed these strikingly life-like portraits on 
the wall. These good people also told me that I was on the road from 

=====第546页=====
516 Frederick Engels 
Malesherbes to Châteauneuf on the Loire, to which I had still some 
twelve leagues to go. 
I trampled through Puiseaux and another small town whose name 
I have forgotten, and late in the evening arrived in Bellegarde, an 
attractive fair-sized place, where I spent the night. The route over 
the plateau, which incidentally here produces wine in many places, 
was rather monotonous. 
Next morning I set off for Châteauneuf, another five leagues, and 
from there along the Loire on the national road from Orléans to 
Nevers. 
Under almond trees in blossom 
On the verdant banks of Loire, 
To lie dreaming, oh how pleasant, 
Of the place I found my lovea— 
so sings many an enthusiastic German youth and many a tender 
Teutonic maiden in the melting words of Helmina von Chezy and 
the molten melody of Carl Maria von Weber. But anyone who goes 
looking for almond trees and gentle, sweet romance on the Loire, 
as was the fashion in Dresden back in the twenties, is the victim 
of the kind of appalling delusion which is really permissible 
only in Germany amongst congenital bluestockings of the third gene­
ration. 
From Châteauneuf via les Bordes to Dampierre one scarcely 
catches a glimpse of this romantic Loire. The road goes over the 
hill-tops at a distance of two or three leagues from the river, and only 
rarely does one see the water of the Loire glinting in the sun far 
away. The district is rich in wine, cereals and fruit; down by the river 
there are luxuriant pastures; the view of the valley, which has no 
woods and is surrounded only by undulating hills, is however rather 
monotonous. 
In the middle of the road, near some farm-houses, I came across a 
caravan of four men, three women and several children, accompa­
nied by three heavily-laden donkey-carts, cooking their midday-meal 
at a big fire on the open highway. I stopped for a moment: I was not 
mistaken, they were speaking German, in the broadest South 
German dialect. I spoke to them; they were delighted to hear their 
native tongue in the middle of France. They were as it happened 
from the Strasbourg area of Alsace, and travelled into the interior of 
France in this way every summer, earning their keep by basket-
weaving. When I asked whether this gave them enough to live on, 
Carl Maria von Weber's opera Euryanthe (libretto by Helmina von Chezy), Act I, 
Scene 2.— Ed. 

=====第547页=====
From Paris to Berne 517 
they said: "Hardly, if we had to, buy everything; mostly we're 
begging." Slowly, another man, of advanced age, crawled out of one 
of the donkey-carts, in which he had a complete bed. There was 
something very gypsy-like about the whole band with the ill-assorted 
garments they had scrounged. For all that they had an easy-going air 
about them and chattered interminably to me about their journeys, 
and in the middle of the merriest gossiping the mother and the 
daughter, a gentle, blue-eyed creature, almost came to pulling each 
other's tousled red hair. I couldn't but admire the irrepressible force 
with which the easy-going and emotional German character would 
come out, even from beneath the most gypsy-like pattern of life 
and attire; I wished them good day and continued my journey, 
accompanied for some distance by one of the gypsies, who before 
eating permitted himself the pleasure of an amble on the sharp-
boned crupper of a lean donkey. 
That evening I reached Dampierre, a small village not far from the 
Loire. Here the Government was employing three or four hundred 
workers from Paris, the remnants of the former national work­
shops, 337 to build a dyke to prevent flooding. They were workers of 
every kind, goldsmiths, butchers, cobblers, carpenters, right down to 
the rag-and-bone man of the Paris boulevards. I found some twenty 
of them at the inn where I spent the night. A hefty butcher, who had 
already been promoted to a kind of supervisory position, spoke of 
the undertaking with great enthusiasm: they were earning between 
30 and 100 sous a day, according to how they worked, it was easy to 
make 40 to 60 sous, if one showed any aptitude. He wanted to enrol 
me in his brigade there and then; I would soon get into the swing 
and certainly be earning 50 sous a day by the second week, I could 
make my fortune, and there was enough work for another six 
months at least. I would not have minded exchanging my pen for a 
spade for a month or two for a change; but I had no papers, and that 
would have landed me in a nice pickle. 
These workers from Paris had not lost any of their old gaiety. 
They pursued their work, ten hours a day, amid laughter and jokes, 
entertained themselves in their leisure hours with outrageous pranks 
and in the evenings amused themselves by "deniaising"3 the peasant 
girls.  But apart from this they were quite demoralised as a result of 
being isolated in a small village. Not a trace of concern with the 
interests of their class, and with current political issues which touch 
the workers so closely. They appeared not to read any papers any 
more. Their political activity went no further than giving nicknames; 
Initiating, seducing.— Ed. 

=====第548页=====
518 Frederick Engels 
one of them, a big, strong lout, they called Caussidière, another, a 
bad worker and utter drunkard, responded to the name of Guizot, 
etc. The exhausting work, their relatively good living conditions and 
especially the separation from Paris and transfer to a remote, quiet 
corner of France had reduced their horizon remarkably. They were 
already on the point of turning into rustics, and they had only been 
there for two months. 
The next morning I reached Gien and thus at last the Loire valley 
itself.  Gien is a little town with crooked streets, a fine embankment 
and a bridge over the Loire, which here barely equals the Main at 
Frankfurt in breadth. It is altogether very shallow and full of 
sandbanks. • 
From Gien to Briare the road goes along the valley at a distance 
of about a quarter of a mile3 from the Loire. It proceeds in 
a south-easterly direction, and the country gradually assumes a 
southerly character. The avenue is lined with elms, ashes, acacias or 
chestnuts; the valley floor comprises luxuriant pastures and fertile 
fields,  amongst whose stubble a second harvest of the richest clover 
was sprouting, and which are bordered by long lines of poplars; on 
the other side of the Loire, in the hazy distance, a line of hills, on this 
side,  right by the highroad, a second chain of hillocks, planted with 
vines in its entirety. The valley of the Loire is not at all strikingly 
beautiful or romantic here, as people tend to say it is, but it does 
create a most agreeable impression; all this rich vegetation testifies to 
the mild climate without which it could not flourish. Even in the most 
fertile areas of Germany I have nowhere found plants growing in 
such profusion as on the road between Gien and Briare. 
Before I leave the Loire, a few words as to the inhabitants of the 
area I passed through and their way of life. 
The villages within four or five hours travel from Paris cannot be 
taken as the measure for villages in the rest of France. Their 
disposition, the architecture of the houses, the mores of the 
inhabitants are far too much dominated by the spirit of the great 
metropolis from which they live. Only at a distance of ten leagues 
from Paris, in remote upland areas, does the countryside proper 
begin, does one see real farm-houses. A characteristic of the whole 
region as far as the Loire and into Burgundy is that the 
peasant-farmer conceals the entrance to his house as far as possible 
from the highroad. In the upland areas every farmyard is 
surrounded by a wall; one enters by a gate and then in the yard itself 
Engels uses the German word Meile, a linear measure which at that time differed 
in length in different German states but can be regarded as roughly Ai miles.—  F.d. 

=====第549页=====
From Paris to Berne 519 
one must look for the door to the house which is usually situated 
towards the rear. In this area, where most of the peasants have cows 
and horses, the farm-houses are fairly big; on the Loire, on the other 
hand, where there is much market-gardening and even well-to-do 
peasants own few catde or none at all and catde-raising is a separate 
branch of husbandry left to the larger landowners or tenant farmers, 
the farm-houses become smaller and smaller, often so small that one 
cannot conceive how there is room within for a peasant family with 
its equipment and stores. But here too the entrance is on the side 
facing away from the road, and in the villages the public houses and 
shops are almost alone in having doors facing the street. 
The peasants of this area for the most part enjoy a really good life, 
despite their poverty. The wine, at least in the valleys, is mostly their 
own produce, good and cheap (this year two or three sous a bottle), 
the bread is everywhere, except in the highest places, good, wheaten 
bread and there is in addition excellent cheese and magnificent fruit, 
which people in France eat of course always with the bread. Like all 
country-people they eat little meat, but a lot of milk, vegetable soups 
and in general a vegetable diet of outstanding quality. The living 
standard of the French peasant between the Seine and the Loire is 
three times higher than that of the North-German peasant, even if he 
is significantly better off. 
These peasants are good-natured, hospitable, light-hearted folk, 
helpful and obliging to the stranger in every possible way, and even 
when speaking the broadest patois, still true, courteous Frenchmen. 
Despite their exceedingly highly developed sense of property 
towards the land which their fathers won from the nobility and the 
clergy, they still possess many of the patriarchal virtues, especially in 
the villages set back from the main roads. 
But peasants will be peasants, and the conditions of life of the 
peasants do not for one moment cease to assert themselves. Despite 
all the private virtues of the French peasant, despite the more 
advanced conditions of life he enjoys in comparison with the peasant 
to the east of the Rhine, the peasant in France, as in Germany, is a 
barbarian in the midst of civilisation. 
The isolation of the peasant in a remote village with a rather small 
population which changes only with the generations, the hard, 
monotonous work, which ties him more than any serfdom to the soil 
and which remains always the same from father to son, the stability 
and monotony of all his conditions of life, the restricted circum­
stances in which the family becomes the most important, most 
decisive social relationship for him — all this reduces the peasant's 
horizon to the narrowest bounds which are possible in modern 

=====第550页=====
520 Frederick Engels 
society. The great movements of history pass him by, from time to 
time sweep him along with them, but he has no inkling of the nature 
of the motive force of these movements, of their origin and their 
goal. 
In the Middle Ages and in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries there was alongside the movement of the middle class in 
the towns a peasant movement, which, however, constantly put up 
reactionary demands and, without producing any significant results 
for the peasants themselves, only succeeded in assisting the towns in 
their struggles for emancipation. 
In the first French revolution the peasants acted in a revolutionary 
manner just so long as was required by their most immediate, most 
tangible private interests; until they had secured the right of 
ownership to their land which had hitherto been farmed on a feudal 
basis,  until feudal relations were irrevocably abolished and the 
foreign armies ejected from their district. Once this was achieved, 
they turned with all the fury of blind avarice against the movement 
of the big towns which they failed to understand, and especially 
against the movement in Paris. Coundess proclamations by the 
Committee of Public Safety, countless decrees by the Convention, 
above all those concerning the maximum and the profiteers,338 
mobile columns and travelling guillotines had to be directed against 
the obdurate peasants. And yet no class benefited more from the 
Terror which drove out the foreign armies and put down the civil 
war than these same peasants. 
When Napoleon overthrew the bourgeois regime of the Directory, 
restored calm, consolidated the new property relations of the 
peasants and sanctioned them in his Code civil and drove the foreign 
armies ever further from the frontiers, the peasants rallied to him 
with enthusiasm and became his chief support. For the French 
peasant is nationalistic to a fanatical degree; la France has come to 
mean a great deal to him now that he has become hereditary 
proprietor of a piece of France; foreigners he only knows in the form 
of devastating invading armies which inflict a maximum of damage 
on him. Hence the French peasant's unbounded nationalism, hence 
his equally unbounded hatred of l'étranger. Hence the passion with 
which he went to war in 1814 and 1815. 
When the Bourbons returned in 1815, when the exiled aristocracy 
once more raised claims to the landed property they had lost in the 
revolution, the peasants saw all their revolutionary conquests 
threatened. Hence their hatred of Bourbon rule and their jubilation 
a Of 1830.— Ed. 

=====第551页=====
From Paris to Berne 521 
when the July revolution3 restored to them security of possession 
and the tricolour. 
From the July revolution onwards, the peasants' participation in 
the general interests of their country came once more to an end. 
Their wishes had been fulfilled, the land they owned was no longer 
threatened, at the village Mairie the same flag was once more flying 
which had meant victory to them and their fathers for a quarter of a 
century. 
But as always the fruits they enjoyed from their victory were few. 
The bourgeoisie began at once to exploit its rural allies to the utmost 
extent. The fruits of fragmentation and of the divisibility of the land, 
the impoverishment of the peasants and the mortgaging of their 
land, had already begun to ripen under the Restoration; after 1830 
their manifestations became ever more widespread and ever more 
menacing. But the pressure which big capital exerted on the peasant 
remained for him simply a private relationship between himself and 
his creditor; he did not see and could not see that these private 
relationships, which were becoming increasingly widespread and 
increasingly the rule, were gradually developing into a class 
relationship between the class of big capitalists and that of small 
landowners. It was not the same situation as it had been with feudal 
burdens, whose origin had been long since forgotten, whose 
significance had long since fallen into oblivion, which were no longer 
payment for services rendered, and which had long ago become 
nothing but a burden oppressing one party. In the present case, with 
a mortgage debt, the peasant or at least his father has had the money 
paid out to him in solid five-franc pieces; the debt-certificate and the 
mortgage-repayment book remind him if necessary of the origin 
of the burden; the interest he has to pay, even the oppressive, 
constantly renewed subsidiary payments to the usurer are modern, 
bourgeois liabilities which apply in similar form to all debtors; the 
oppression operates in a quite modern, up-to-date guise, and the 
peasant is bled white and ruined in accordance with precisely the 
same principles of law which alone guarantee him his property. His 
own code  civil, his modern-day bible, becomes a rod for his own back. 
The peasant can see no class relationship in the usurious mortgage 
terms,  he cannot demand their abolition without simultaneously 
endangering his own property. The pressure of usury, instead of 
propelling him into the movement, utterly confuses him. The only 
way in which he can imagine relief is in a reduction of taxes. 
When, in February of this year, a revolution took place in which 
the proletariat appeared for the first time with demands of its own, 
the peasants showed not the faintest comprehension. If the republic 

=====第552页=====
522 Frederick Engels 
had any meaning for them, it was merely: reduction of taxes and 
maybe occasionally something about national honour, war of 
conquest and the Rhine frontier. But when on the morning after 
Louis Philippe's.fall the war between the proletariat and bourgeoisie 
broke out in Paris, when the stagnation of trade and industry had 
repercussions in the countryside and the peasant's produce, already 
devalued in a year of good harvests, fell yet further in price and 
became unsaleable, when to crown it all the battle of June spread fear 
and terror to the furthermost corners of France, a universal cry of 
the most fanatical fury arose amongst the peasants against revolu­
tionary Paris and the eternally dissatisfied Parisians. Of course! For 
what did the stubborn, narrow-minded peasant know of proletariat 
and bourgeoisie, of a democratic social republic, of the organisation 
of labour, of matters whose fundamental conditions and causes 
could never exist within the narrow confines of his village! And when 
occasionally, through the murky channels of the bourgeois journals, 
he acquired a vague notion of what was at issue in Paris, when the 
bourgeoisie had tossed him the great slogan they aimed against the 
workers of Paris: ce sont les partageux, they are people who want to 
share all property and all the land, the peasants' indignation knew no 
bounds, their cry of fury was redoubled. I have spoken to hundreds 
of peasants in the most diverse regions of France, and all were in the 
grip of this fanatical hatred of Paris and especially the workers of 
Paris.  "I wish that cursed Paris would be blown sky-high during the 
day tomorrow"—and that was the most charitable of benedictions. 
It goes without saying that the peasants' age-old contempt for 
town-dwellers was merely increased and vindicated by this year's 
events. The peasants, the countryside must save France; the 
countryside produces everything, the towns live off our corn, dress 
in our flax and our wool, we must restore the proper order of things; 
we peasants must take charge of affairs ourselves — this was the 
eternal refrain that sounded, more or less clearly, more or less 
deliberately, through all the peasants' confused talk. 
And how do they hope to save France, how do they hope to take 
charge of affairs themselves? By electing Louis Napoleon Bonaparte 
as President of the Republic, a great name borne by a confused, vain, 
diminutive fool! Every peasant I spoke to was just as enthusiastic 
about Louis Napoleon as he was full of hatred for Paris. These two 
passions and the most unthinking, bovine amazement at the whole 
European upheaval are the sum total of the French peasant's politics. 
And the peasants have over six million votes, more than two-thirds of 
all the votes in the elections in France. 
It is true that the Provisional Government did not manage to bind 

=====第553页=====
From Paris to Berne 523 
the interests of the peasants to the revolution; with the increase of 45 
centimes in the land tax, which chiefly hit the peasants, it made an 
unforgivable, irreparable mistake. But even if it had won over the 
peasants to the revolution for a few months, they would have 
deserted it in the summer. The present attitude of the peasants 
towards the revolution of 1848 is not the consequence of any 
mistakes or chance blunders; it is in the nature of things, it is based 
upon the conditions of life, the social position of the small 
landowner. The French proletariat, before it enforces its demands, 
will first have to put down a general peasants' war, a war which even 
the writing-off of all mortgage debts can only postpone for a short 
time. 
One must have spent a fortnight in the almost exclusive company 
of peasants, peasants from the most diverse regions, one must have 
had the opportunity of encountering everywhere this same obtuse 
narrow-mindedness, this same total ignorance of all urban, industrial 
and commercial conditions, this same blindness in politics, this same 
wildly uninformed surmising about everything beyond the village, 
this same application of the standards of peasant life to the mightiest 
factors of history — in short, one must have come to know the French 
peasant especially in 1848 in order to experience the utterly 
disheartening effect which this refractory stupidity engenders. 

=====第554页=====
524 Frederick Engels 
II 
BURGUNDY 
Briare is a quaint little old town at the mouth of the canal which 
joins the Loire to the Seine. Here I took stock of the route and 
decided it would be better to go to Switzerland via Auxerre instead of 
via Nevers. I therefore left the Loire and turned across the hills 
towards Burgundy. 
The fertility of the Loire valley declines gradually but fairly slowly. 
One climbs imperceptibly, and only five or six miles from Briare, 
in the region of Saint-Sauveur and Saint-Fargeau, does one reach the 
beginnings of the forested, cattle-raising uplands. The ridge between 
the Yonne and the Loire is higher even here, and the whole of this 
western part of the Department of the Yonne is generally fairly hilly. 
It was in the region of Toucy, six leagues from Auxerre, that I first 
heard the peculiar, naively-broad dialect of Burgundy, a patois 
which here and throughout Burgundy proper remains pleasant and 
attractive, whereas in the higher regions of the Franche Comté it 
takes on a ponderous, clumsy, almost didactic tone. It is like the naive 
dialect of Austria, which gradually changes into the coarse Upper 
Bavarian. In a remarkably un-French way the Burgundian patois 
constantly stresses the syllable preceding that which takes the main 
emphasis in good French, it turns iambic French into trochaic and 
in so doing strangely distorts the subtle accentuation which the 
educated Frenchman manages to impart to his speech. But, as I said, 
in Burgundy proper, it continues to sound rather nice and from the 
lips of a pretty girl even charming: Mais, ma foi, monsieur, je vous 
demande un peu....* 
But indeed, sir, I ask you ... (the accents. indicate the syllables stressed in the 
Burgundian patois).—Ed. 

=====第555页=====
Frorrl Paris to Berne 525 
If one can draw comparisons, the Burgundian is on the whole the 
Austrian of France. Naive, good-natured, confiding in the highest 
degree, having a great deal of native wit within their familiar social 
surroundings, full of naively odd ideas about everything that 
transcends them, comically clumsy in unfamiliar circumstances, for 
ever indestructibly good-humoured — in this these good people are 
almost one and all alike. The amiable, good-hearted Burgundian 
peasant is the first one forgives for his complete political vacuity and 
his starry-eyed enthusiasm for Louis Napoleon. 
Incidentally, the Burgundians undeniably have a stronger admix­
ture of German blood than the French who live further to the west; 
their hair and complexion are lighter, their physique a little bigger, 
especially in the women, there is already a marked decrease in that 
sharp critical intelligence and incisive wit, in place of which there is a 
more straightforward sense of humour and sometimes a faint touch 
of geniality. But the gaiety of the French is still markedly to the 
fore,  and in carefree light-heartedness the Burgundian is second to 
none. 
The hilly western part of the Department of the Yonne derives its 
living chiefly from cattle-raising. But Frenchmen everywhere are 
poor cattle-farmers, and these Burgundian cattle appear thin and 
small. However alongside cattle-raising a great deal of corn is grown 
and fine wheaten bread is eaten everywhere. 
The farm-houses here also begin to resemble those in Germany; 
they are again larger and combine dwelling, barn and stables under 
one roof;  but here too the door is still mostly sideways from the road 
or turned completely away from it. 
On the long descent that takes one down to Auxerre, I saw the first 
Burgundy vines, for the most part still weighed down with the 
fantastically rich grape-harvest of 1848. On many vines the leaves 
were almost completely concealed by grapes. 
Auxerre is a small, rugged township, rather unimpressive from 
within, with a pretty embankment by the Yonne and in places the 
beginnings of those boulevards which no French departmental 
capital can be without. In normal times it must indeed be quiet and 
dead, and the Prefect of the Yonne cannot have needed to spend 
much on organising the obligatory balls and dinners which under 
Louis Philippe he had to offer to the local notabilities. But now 
Auxerre was full of life, such as only occurs once a year. If Citizen 
Denjoy, the representative of the people who got so worked up in the 
National Assembly because the premises where the democratic social 
banquet in Toulouse took place were decorated in red, if this worthy 
Citizen Denjoy had accompanied me to Auxerre, he would have 

=====第556页=====
526 Frederick Engels 
thrown a fit in sheer horror. It was not just one hall here but the 
whole town which was decorated in red. And what a red! The walls 
and staircases of the houses, the blouses and shirts of the people were 
coloured with the most unambiguous, the most blatant blood-red; 
dark-red streams filled even the gutters and bespattered the paving 
stones, and a sinister-looking blackish, foaming-red liquid was being 
carried about the streets in great tubs by sinister bearded men. The 
red republic with all its horrors appeared to be holding sway, the 
guillotine, the steam guillotine appeared to be working continuously, 
the buveurs de sang* of which such fearful tales are recounted in the 
Journal des Débats, were obviously celebrating their cannibalistic 
orgies here. But the red republic of Auxerre was most innocent, it 
was the red republic of the Burgundian wine-harvest, and the 
drinkers of blood who consume the noblest produce of this red 
republic with such intense pleasure, are none other than the most 
respectable republicans, the bourgeoisie, big and small, of Paris. And 
in this context that honourable Citizen Denjoy also has a certain 
weakness for things red, despite the best intentions. 
If only one could have had one's pockets full of money in that red 
republic! The 1848 harvest was so infinitely rich that not enough 
barrels could be found to take all the wine. And what is more, of such 
quality—better than '46, perhaps even better than '34! The peasants 
came pouring in from all sides to buy up what was still left of the '47 
at bargain prices — at 2 francs per cask of 140 litres of good wine; 
cart after cart came in by every gate with empty barrels, and yet they 
could not cope. I saw with my own eyes a wine-merchant in Auxerre 
pouring out several barrels of '47, quite good wine,, into the street, 
simply in order to accommodate the new wine, which offered very 
different prospects to the speculator of course. I was assured that 
this wine-merchant had poured away as many as forty large barrels 
(fûts) in this way in a few weeks. 
Having consumed several pints of both the old and the new, I 
crossed the Yonne in the direction of the hills on the right bank. The 
highroad follows the valley; however I took the old, shorter road 
across the hills. The sky was overcast, the weather gloomy, I was 
myself rather tired, and I therefore spent the night in the first 
village, a few kilometres from Auxerre. 
Next morning I set out very early in the most magnificent 
sunshine imaginable. The route passed with never a break between 
vineyards over a fairly high ridge. But on top, I was rewarded for the 
exertion of the climb by a most splendid panorama. Before me, the 
Drinkers of blood.— Ed. 

=====第557页=====
From Paris to Berne 527 
hilly downward slope all the way to the Yonne, then the green 
valley of the Yonne, rich in meadows and planted with poplars, 
with its many villages and farms; beyond it the grey stone Auxerre, 
nestling against the scarp on the far side; villages everywhere, 
and everywhere, as far as the eye could see, vines, nothing but 
vines,  and the most brilliant warm sunshine, attenuated only in the 
distance by a touch of autumn in the air, beating down over this 
great cauldron in which the August sun brews one of the noblest 
of wines. 
I do not know what the reason is for the peculiar charm of these 
French landscapes which are not distinguished by any particularly 
attractive contours. It is of course not this detail or that, it is the 
whole, the ensemble, which invests them with the stamp of 
satisfaction such as is rarely found elsewhere. The Rhine and the 
Moselle have more beautiful combinations of crags, Switzerland has 
greater contrasts, Italy a fuller palette of colours, but no country has 
regions that make up so harmonious an ensemble as France. It is 
with an extraordinary inner peace that the eye roves from the broad, 
luxuriant meadows of the valley to the hills which are covered with 
vines of equal luxuriance right to their summits, and to the countless 
villages and towns rising from the foliage of the fruit-trees. There is 
nowhere a piece of bare ground, nowhere a discordant patch of 
infertility, or a harsh outcrop of rock with walls inaccessible to 
vegetation. Everywhere flora in profusion, a fine, rich green just 
taking on a shade of autumnal bronze, set off by the brilliance" of a 
sun which even halfway through October still burns hotly enough for 
not a single grape to be left unripe on the vine. 
I went a little further and a second, equally fine view unfolded 
before me. Far below, in a narrower bowl in the hills, lay Saint-Bris, a 
small township that likewise earned its livelihood entirely from the 
vine.  The same components as before, but more closely huddled 
together. Pastures and gardens down in the valley round the little 
town, vineyards all round about on the slopes of the bowl, only on 
the north side ploughed fields or fields and meadows of green clover 
growing on the stubble. Down in the streets of Saint-Bris the same 
bustle as in Auxerre; everywhere barrels and wine-presses, and all 
the inhabitants busy amidst laughter and jokes with pressing the 
grape-juice, pumping it into the barrels or carrying it through the 
streets in great vats. Amongst it all, a market was being held; in the 
broader streets peasant carts were halted with vegetables, corn and 
other field produce; the peasants with their white Phrygian caps and 
the peasant women with their Madras handkerchiefs round their 
heads thronged gossiping, shouting, laughing amongst the vintners; 
19-3447 

=====第558页=====
528 Frederick Engels 
and the little town of Saint-Bris presented a picture of such lively 
bustle that one could believe one was in a big city. 
Past Saint-Bris my way took me once more up a hill by a long 
ascent. But I climbed this hill with especial pleasure. Everybody was 
still occupied with the grape-harvest here, and a grape-harvest in 
Burgundy has a merriness about it of a different order to one in the 
Rhineland even. At every step I found the gayest company, the 
sweetest grapes and the prettiest girls; for here, where there is a 
small town always within three hours travel, where the population 
has a great deal of contact with the outside world by virtue of their 
trade in wine, here a certain degree of sophistication prevails, and no 
one assumes this sophistication more rapidly than the womenfolk, 
for they derive the most immediate and striking benefits from it. No 
French townswoman dreams of singing 
If I were as pretty 
As the girls who're country-bred, 
I'd wear a yellow straw hat 
With a rose-red ribbon tied.3 
On the contrary, she knows only too well that it is to the town, to 
the absence of arduous labour, to civilisation and its hundred aids to 
cleanliness and arts of toiletry that she owes the perfecting of her 
charms; she knows that even if country girls have not already 
inherited that coarse-boned build from their parents which the 
Frenchman so abhors and which is the pride of the Germanic race, 
country girls — as a result of exacting farm labour in the most 
burning sunshine and the heaviest rain alike, the difficulties in the 
way of keeping clean, the absence of any aids to physical culture, and 
their admittedly venerable but no less ungainly and tasteless 
attire—will mostly end up as ungainly, waddling scarecrows, 
comically dolled up in garish colours. Tastes vary; our German 
compatriots mostly prefer the farmer's daughter, and they are 
perhaps right to do so: all due respect for the kicks—similar to those 
of a trooper—and especially the fists of a strapping dairymaid; all 
honour to the grass-green and fiery-red check gown that embraces 
her mighty waist; hats off to that impeccably flat expanse that 
reaches from the back of her neck down to her heels and gives her 
from behind the appearance of a board covered with brightly 
coloured calico! But tastes vary, and so that portion of my fellow 
citizens-which differs from me, though being no less worthy of 
respect for that, must forgive me if the cleanly-washed, smoothly-
combed, slimly-built Burgundian women from Saint-Bris and 
a Goethe, "Kriegserklärung" (modified).—Ed. 

=====第559页=====
From Paris to Berne 529 
Vermenton made a pleasanter impression on me than those earthily 
dirty, tousled, young Molossian buffaloes between the Seine and the 
Loire who gape at one as though struck dumb if one rolls a cigarette, 
and take to their heels screaming if one asks them the way in good 
French. 
It will therefore readily be believed that I spent more time lying in 
the grass with the vintners and their girls, eating grapes, drinking 
wine, chatting and laughing, than marching up the hill, and that it 
would have taken me no longer to have climbed the Blocksberg or 
even the Jungfrau than this insignificant ridge. The more so since 
one can eat one's fill of grapes sixty times over each day and has thus 
the best of excuses at each vineyard to establish contact with these 
constantly laughing and obliging people of both sexes. But every­
thing must come to an end, and this hill was no exception. It 
was already afternoon when I descended the far side into the 
delightful valley of the Cure, a small tributary of the Yonne, to the 
little town of Vermenton, which has an even finer setting than 
Saint-Bris. 
Not far beyond Vermenton, this attractive region comes to an end. 
One gradually approaches the higher ridge of the Faucillon which 
divides the basins of the Seine, the Rhône and the Loire. From 
Vermenton one climbs for several hours and crosses a broad infertile 
plateau, where rye, oats and buckwheat largely take the place of 
wheat. 3 
a At this point the following note is written in an unknown hand: "[The 
manuscript breaks off here.]"—Ed. 

=====第560页=====

=====第561页=====
APPENDICES 

=====第562页=====

=====第563页=====
533 
RECEIPTS OF THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY 
OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE FOR MONEY RECEIVED 
AND PAID OUT339 
I 
April 2, 1848 
Communist League 
Workers of all countries, unite! 
The Central Authority certifies that it has received the sum of 
twenty-five francs (f. c.a) from its member Karl Marx. 
Paris,  April 2, 1848 For the Central Authority 
K. Marx 
Engels 
Henry Bauer 
Joseph Moll 
II 
Communist League 
Workers of all countries, unite! 
The Central Authority has received an advance of seventy-four 
francs 20 centimes from its member Marx, which is hereby 
confirmed. 
Paris,  April 2, 1848 For the Central Authority 
Engels 
Bauer 
J. Moll 
Fidei-commissum.— Ed. 

=====第564页=====
534 Appendices 
III 
Communist League 
Workers of all countries, unite! 
League member Friedrich Crüger acknowledges that he has 
received the sum of twenty-five francs as an advance from the 
Central Authority and he promises to repay this sum as soon as 
possible to the League. 
Paris,  April 2, 1848 
Friedrich Crüger 
First published in Der Bund der Printed according to the manu-
Kommunisten. Dokumente und Materialen, scripts 
Bd. 1, 1836-1849, Berlin, 1970 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第565页=====
535 
TO ALL WORKERS OF GERMANY340 
BROTHERS AND WORKERS! 
If we do not want once again to be the most deceived of all, and do 
not want for a long series of years to be exploited, despised and 
downtrodden by a handful of men, then we must not lose a moment, 
we must not remain inactive for a single minute. 
Isolated, as we have been hitherto, we are weak although we 
number millions. United and organised, on the other hand, we shall 
constitute an irresistible force. Therefore, brothers, everywhere in 
towns and villages form workers' associations in which our conditions 
are discussed, measures proposed to change our present situation, 
representatives from the working class to the German Parliament 
nominated and elected, and all other steps taken that are necessary 
for safeguarding our interests. Furthermore, all workers' associa­
tions in Germany must as quickly as possible enter into and keep in 
contact with one another. 
We propose that for the time being you choose Mainz as the centre 
for all the workers' associations and that you enter into correspon­
dence with the undersigned Executive Committee so that we can 
agree on a common plan and as soon as possible definitively decide 
the seat of the Central Committee etc. at a meeting of delegates of all 
the associations. 
We expect letters without postage pre-paid, just as for our part we 
shall write to the associations without pre-payment. 
Mainz, April 5, 1848 
The Workers' Educational Association in Mainz 
On behalf of the Executive Committee 
Speaker 
Wallau Writer 
Cluss 

=====第566页=====
536 Appendices 
Address: Secretariat of the Workers' Educational Association in 
Mainz, c/o Herr Adolf Cluss, Mainz, Franziskanergasse No. 15672-
First published in the Deutsche Volkszeit-
ung No. 8, April 8, 1848, the Mannheimer 
Abend-Zeitung No. 100, April 10, 
1848,  and in the supplement to the 
Seeblätter No. 89, April 13, 1848 Printed according to the Deutsche 
Volkszeitung 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第567页=====
537 
MARX'S APPLICATION 
FOR PRUSSIAN CITIZENSHIP 
To the police authorities in Cologne 
I have the honour herewith to request you to prevail upon the 
relevant Department to grant me citizenship in the city of Cologne. I 
was born on May 5, 1818, in Trier, studied at the local gymnasium 
and at the universities of Bonn and Berlin. In 1842 and 1843 I lived 
in Cologne as editor of the now defunct Rheinische Zeitung. When 
that newspaper ceased to exist I went abroad and relinquished my 
Prussian citizenship. After the events which took place recently, I 
returned to my country and now I intend to settle with my family in 
Cologne. 3 
Cologne, April 13, 1848 
Yours faithfully, 
Dr. Karl Marx 
Address: Apostelstrasse 7 
First published in the Zeitschrift für Printed according to the manu-
Geschichtswissenschaft No. 3, 1968 script 
Published in English for the first 
time 
The following version of the last sentence is given in the rough draft of this 
letter: "Following an invitation to take part in the editing of a newspaper that is to be 
founded in Cologne, I have now returned to my country, and intend to settle with my 
family in Cologne."—Ed. 

=====第568页=====
538 
ACCOUNT OF A STATEMENT MADE BY KARL MARX 
TO THE COLOGNE POLICE INSPECTOR 
The petitioner, the politically unreliable Dr. Karl Marx, was born in 
Trier on May 5, 1818, lived in Cologne in 1842-43, worked as editor 
of the Rheinische Zeitung, subsequently he went abroad and from 
there he obtained the enclosed permission to emigrate, which was 
issued by his home town Trier, 342 and has therefore lost his Prussian 
citizenship. 
According to his statement he is working on a book on economics 
which he intends to publish and he proposes to live partly on the 
proceeds of his writings and partly the personal property of his wife,3 
who,  together with their three children,b is still staying in Trier. 
The stamp attached to the application has been cancelled and is 
duly enclosed herewith. 
Cologne, April 19, 1848 
Hünermund, 
Police Inspector 
First published in the Zeitschrift für Printed according to the manu-
Geschichtswissenschaft No. 3, 1968 script 
Published in English for the first 
time 
Jenny Marx.— Ed. 
Their daughters Jenny and Laura and their son Edgar.— Ed. 

=====第569页=====
539 
PROSPECTUS FOR THE FOUNDING 
OF THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG' 
A new spirit has broken through in Germany. It has overthrown 
the old regime, it has doomed the old world to destruction. It 
demands a new society, a new life. 
It is the spirit of the people. The people has taken sovereign 
power, the people that does not want any division, any class 
rule,  which regards its component parts as co-operating members 
of one great body. It is its will that is to guide its life, regulate its 
work, create its well-being. 
The first task for this will is to create the forms in which it can 
deploy its strength safe from oppression or falsification. These are 
the forms of democracy. Already the people is preparing to elect a 
double representation3 from which it expects the establishment of its 
rights,  the division of the state powers and the guarantee of order, in 
short, a new Constitution. 
This is great, difficult work, even though only preparatory. The 
overthrown power will resist it, personal interest will not voluntarily 
submit to the demands of the whole. Democracy must stand its 
ground in the struggle against both these enemies of an order which 
serves the will of the whole, and whose purpose is the good of the 
whole: it will have on its side the experience of the past and the needs 
of the present. 
The immediate aim of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung  is to co-operate 
vigorously in this immediate public work. For the time being its chief 
task will be a thorough examination of the questions which relate to 
the constitution of Germany and Prussia in conjunction with the 
same or similar questions which occupy people abroad. It will not 
close its columns to any tendencies except those stemming from 
A reference to the election of the Prussian and the German National 
Assemblies.— Ed. 

=====第570页=====
540 Appendices 
absolutism or particular interests, it will not represent any particular 
party within the democracy, it will not proceed according to any 
preconceived theory and will not prematurely reject any view, even if 
it has not yet found general sympathy. 
But if the political formation of the fatherland is the most 
immediate of the great tasks which the German nation is determined 
to solve, it is by no means the greatest and by far not the most 
difficult task. Political democracy is merely the means to achieve 
thoroughgoing changes in civil society. All wishes, all demands are 
directed to this end. The worst sufferings of unemployment, of 
deprivation, of misery weigh on the great majority of the nation, in 
particular the working class. The general demand, the general 
longing is to abolish a condition in which the existence of the whole is 
dependent on the carelessness of the governing, on the accidental 
insight or short-sighted egoism of private individuals, a condition 
which indeed still lacks guiding principles and general institutions, 
without which there can be no free activity, no security of earning a 
living, no true enjoyment of life. Everywhere, in agriculture, in 
industry, in commerce, in education etc., there is a recognised need 
for the most important reforms. The nation demands a free, happy 
life in free, happy work. 
Between the will and the deed, between decision and execution, 
there is, however, a great distance, a hard road. Difficulties of 
every kind stand in the way. Not only malevolence, but incompe­
tence, even more, will have to be  ' overcome. Here every ounce 
of energy is required to overcome ignorance, narrow-minded 
particularism, and monopolistic aspirations; it is necessary to 
subordinate the conflicting interests, due to occupation and lo­
cality, to a common order which establishes and maintains the 
well-being of the whole, to organise work, intercourse and consump­
tion according to the conditions of life of a great nation which strives 
to promote the well-being of the whole and of every individual not by 
war and exploitation but by peaceful exchange and united co­
operation. 
It is in this field, however, that the least thorough preparations 
have been made; here, where the need became general before the 
insight did, it is above all the press which is qualified to bring the 
existing circumstances to public notice, to examine the conditions for 
change, to discuss the means of reform, to help educate public opi­
nion, to give a salutary direction to the will of the whole. This, then, 
is also the task of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, on which it will con­
centrate its efforts more and more, in the measure in which political 
discussions retreat into the background. 

=====第571页=====
Appendices 541 
No special justification is needed for the choice of the city of 
Cologne as the seat of such an enterprise. Cologne, the capital of the 
Rhine Province, the capital of all West Germany, as perhaps 
no other place in Germany, offers a suitable locality and the 
resources required for the publication of a great newspaper. 
Cologne can also confidently look forward to any change in the 
conditions of work and intercourse which is at the same time an 
improvement, and apart from the patriotism of its inhabitants, their 
local interest alone would make them sympathetic towards any 
reforms contributing to the well-being of the nation. 
While, therefore, the prospects for the success of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung can in every respect be said to be most favourable, 
there arises the question of the financial resources which must be 
raised to cover the costs in the initial period, so long as the number of 
subscribers and advertisements have not yet made the enterprise 
secure. For this purpose a capital of 30,000 talers is required, half of 
which is to be regarded as a reserve fund. This capital is to be raised 
through a limited joint-stock company. 
It will be divided into 600 shares of fifty talers each, and the 
payment will be in such instalments as to enable the less affluent also 
to promote the enterprise by their participation. 
Lists for the subscription of shares are open at: 
Herr W. Clouth, at St. Agatha No. 12 
Wolff & Kapferer, Hochstrasse No. 55 
Max Kemmerich, St. Katharinen 2 B 
Esch & Henn, Kleine Sandkaul No. 1. 
Please send applications from outside Cologne to: 
Dr. Daniels, Mittelstrasse No. 2, 
Cologne, April 1848. 
By "provisional agreement" of the first shareholders, the follow­
ing conditions have been added to those announced above: 
1) As soon as 200 shares are subscribed, a general meeting of 
shareholders will be called to agree upon the Rules of the company. 
The latter thereupon comes into operation. 
2) The management of the editorial office and the engagement of 
contributors and correspondents will be the responsibility of Herr 
Heinrich Bürgers. 
Written by Heinrich Bürgers in April Printed according to the journal 
1848 
First published in the  Westphälisches  Dampf-  Published in English for the first 
boot No. 12, May 17, 1848 time 

=====第572页=====
542 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COLOGNE 
COMMUNITY OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE 344 
MEETING OF MAY 11, 1848 
President Marx asks Gottschalk what his opinion or his decision is 
in regard to the League: what attitude towards the League he, 
Gottschalk, now intends to adopt. 
Gottschalk states that he repeats his resignation already submitted, 
since the transformation undergone by the present conditions 
required also a recasting of the Rules of the League, and under the 
existing Rules his personal freedom was in jeopardy; he states, 
however, that in all cases where the League might call upon his 
energies he would when the occasion arises do everything in his 
power. 
H. Bürgers, President 
Jos. Moll, Secretary 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the manu-
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 7, 1935 script 
Published in English foi the first 
time 

=====第573页=====
543 
ARTICLES OF THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
COMPA NY 345 
Article 1 
From today for a period of five years, a limited joint-stock 
company is formed for the purpose of publishing a daily newspaper 
under the title Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie. 
Article 2 
As a business the company carries the name H. Korff & Co., and a 
change of the latter shall have no effect on the continued existence of 
the company. 
Article 3 
The premises of the newspaper office in Cologne at any given time 
shall be the address of the company. 
Article 4 
The capital of the company, which is fixed at 30,000 Prussian 
talers,  will be raised by 600 shares of 50 talers each, and shareholders 
shall at once proceed to form the company. 

=====第574页=====
544 Appendices 
Article 5 
Payment of shares is made, if necessary, in instalments of between 
5 and 10 per cent which are called on the order of the managers3 of 
the company announced by two insertions in the company's news­
paper. 
Article 6 
If a shareholder does not pay a demanded instalment within the 
specified time, the company has the right either to declare forfeited 
the rights arising from the subscription, and from any payments 
already made, or to take him to court to force him to comply with 
contract. 
Article 7 
Interim receipts will be issued against payment of instalments, 
which on completion of payment are exchanged against shares.. 
Article 8 
Interim receipts and shares are signed by the company managers. 
Article 9 
Shares bear serial numbers, are registered and, like the interim 
receipts, are transferable. 
Article 10 
The transfer of shares and interim receipts is performed by a 
declaration to that effect, signed by both the transferor and the 
transferee, and if fifty shares are already issued in the name of the 
transferee, only by permission of the managers, and in this case the 
company reserves the right to acquire the shares presented for 
transfer, for the purpose of amortisation. 
In the original the word Gérant is used, which means the person who is legally 
responsible for the management of the newspaper and also the responsible publisher 
of the newspaper. In the article this word is rendered as "manager". In ensuing 
documents, where the other aspects seem to be predominant, the term "responsible 
publisher" is  used.—Ed. 

=====第575页=====
ber 
„fltuen Whcinifdmi 3etttsttg& 
§ î. 
© bilbet jt# eine Jtommanbite--2Iftien--@efeü'fa)aft »on ^eure 
ab auf bie £)auer »on fünf 3a£ren, welche ben 3wd fyat, 
ein £agebfatt unter bem £iter: „Weue diptinifât 3?itong, 
Drgan ber 2)emofratie" herausgegeben. 
§2. 
%iê frirma fityrt bie ©efeUfctyaft ten tarnen ©. Äorff & 
Qfomp. unb f>at bie 2lenberung berfefben auf ba$ gortbefte^en 
ber ©efeflfa)aft feinen Grinfïuj?. 
§3. 
2)a$ jebeämalige Çofat ber 3eitung&(£rpebition in @oïn 
tfï baê 2>omtgt[ ber ©efeljffc^aft, 
§4. 
$a$ Capital ber ©efeflfcbaft,  rcerc&eé  auf 30,000 XÇakx 
fv. Gîour. feftgefe$t tft, wirb bura; 600 Slftten, jîebe au 50 
ibaïer jufammengebracbt unb treten Gîomfcarenten afê ®e* 
fetffcfyaft fofort aufammen. 
§ 5. 
2)ie Grinaajrïung ber 2Ietien--33etrâge erfolgt na# 33ebürf--
nijj tn 9?aten  »on 5 U$ 10 p@t., bie @inforberung berfeîben 
gefa)ie£t gemäß 33efttmmung ber ©eranten ber ©efeUfdjaft 
burâ) swet'matige 33efanntmaa;ung tn ber 3«tung ber @e^ 
feUfa)aft 
§ 6. 
3af>ft eût 2lftionair einen eingeforberten @infa;u§ nia)t 
Articles of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung Company 

=====第576页=====

=====第577页=====
Appendices 547 
Article 11 
Every shareholder shares in the gains and losses of the company in 
proportion to the number of his shares, but is answerable for its 
liabilities only with the amount of his share. 
Article 12 
Every shareholder living elsewhere is obliged to choose an address 
in Cologne; failing that, the address of the company is regarded as 
such. 
Article 13 
The heirs or assigns of a shareholder can in no circumstances 
apply for affixation of seals, form an opposition, demand an 
inventory or licitation, even if there are among them minors or other 
disqualified persons; they must content themselves with the annual 
balance-sheet and the dividends as they are fixed for the other 
shareholders. 
Article 14 
The company is represented by a manager (Hermann Korff) and 
two co-managers (Louis Schulz and Stephan Adolph Naut), whose 
shares are called in for the period of their management. 
Article 15 
The manager assumes legal liability for the content of the 
newspaper, handles the commercial business of the company, the 
publication of the newspaper, the editing of advertisements and 
checking of proofs. The commercial direction is in his hands with the 
co-operation and control of the two co-managers. 
As emolument for their trouble the manager and co-managers 
receive a percentage of the income from subscriptions after 
deducting postage and stamp duty: 5 per cent of the first thousand 
subscriptions, 4 per cent of the next thousand, 3 per cent of the third 
thousand, 2 per cent of the fourth and thereafter 1 per cent of every 
thousand. The manager receives one-fifth of this amount, the two 
co-managers two-fifths each. In addition, the manager receives an 
annual salary of 800 talers. To be valid, all bills and promissory notes 
require the signatures of the manager and the two co-managers. 

=====第578页=====
548 Appendices 
Article 16 
The managers are expressly forbidden to participate, either 
directly or indirectly, in any similar enterprise. 
Article 17 
The salaried manager cannot allow a substitute to represent him 
without the permission of the co-managers, whereas the latter may 
do so any time they like on their own responsibility. 
Article 18 
The retirement of one or more of the managers either through 
death or termination of the employment does not entail the 
dissolution of the company and does not affect this agreement in any 
way. In such a case those who remain in office must in the first week 
after the demise or termination of employment call a general 
meeting to decide on the filling of the vacancy. 
Article 19 
After one year has passed, the manager is allowed to leave the 
company, giving three months notice. Likewise, the two co-managers 
are entitled by unanimous decision and with the co-operation of the 
general meeting to give three months notice to the manager. The 
co-managers are entitled to leave at any time, giving three months 
notice. 
Article 20 
The managers must contact a bank in the usual commercial 
manner and transfer to it, at interest, all cash which is not for 
immediate use or necessary for the current expenses of the week, so 
as to be able to use it at any time it may be needed. Repayments by 
the bank must be receipted over the signature of the manager and 
the two co-managers. 
Article 21 
The general meeting of shareholders elects annually a Supervisory 
Board consisting of seven members which superintends the conduct 
of business. 

=====第579页=====
Appendices 549 
Article 22 
Every member of the Supervisory Board is entitled to resign from 
his position if he has announced his intention in writing six weeks 
before. If the position of a member of the Board falls vacant, the 
Supervisory Board nominates a substitute who keeps his position 
until it is definitively filled by the general meeting. 
Article 23 
The Supervisory Board takes all decisions by majority vote in the 
presence or at least five members. If the voting is equal, the chairman 
has the casting vote. 
Article 24 
Minutes are taken of all proceedings and decisions and are signed 
by the Supervisory Board members present. 
Article 25 
The Supervisory Board meets regularly once a month; at the 
invitation of the chairman as often as he deems necessary, or if two 
members or one of the managers demand it. 
Article 26 
The Supervisory Board stands by the managers as controlling 
committee, checks the books and shares record at any time, either 
direcdy or through an authorised shareholder or non-shareholder, 
inspects the cash and the balance-sheet. 
Article 27 
The members of the Supervisory Board receive neither salary nor 
a premium for their trouble. 
Article 28 
Every year in the month of February a general meeting is held, the 
first of these in the year 1849. Extraordinary general meetings may 
be called as often as the Supervisory Board deems necessary, or if 

=====第580页=====
550 Appendices 
one of the managers or 20 members of the company who own at least 
40 shares demand it. 
Article 29 
The invitation to ordinary or extraordinary general meetings is 
extended twice through the company's newspaper, to extraordinary 
ones with a brief indication of the agenda. Ordinary general 
meetings are called by the Supervisory Board, extraordinary ones by 
the latter or by one of the managers. 
Article 30 
The general meeting consists of all shareholders whose sharehold­
ings have been entered in the company's register for at least six 
weeks. Registration is effected for the first time by signing the 
company contract, later upon written demand with the company. 
The holder of one share has one vote, of four shares two votes, of ten 
shares three votes, of fifteen shares four votes, of twenty and more 
shares five votes. Absentees can be represented by shareholders, but 
these can never combine more than ten votes in one person. Written 
authority for representation of absent shareholders must be 
submitted to the Supervisory Board for inspection on the day of the 
general meeting at the latest. 
Article 31 
All decisions are taken by an absolute majority; if voting is equal, 
the chairman has the casting vote. All elections, however, are made 
by simple majority. If two or more persons receive equal votes, the 
election is decided by lot. 
Article 32 
Elections are always held by secret ballot, but decisions only when 
holders of at least 50 shares demand it. 
Article 33 
In case of a secret ballot the chairman appoints two scrutineers and 
distributes the ballot papers which carry on the reverse side the 
number of votes and his signature. Every authorised representative 

=====第581页=====
Appendices 551 
can cast a separate ballot paper for each shareholder he represents, 
in addition to his own. 
Article 34 
Regular items for the agenda of the general meeting are: 
a) Managers' report on last year's business; 
b) Supervisory Board's report on the audit of the accounts; 
c) decisions on any criticism raised by the Supervisory Board 
against the accounts, and endorsement; 
d) election of members of the Supervisory Board; 
e) decision on matters referred to the general meeting by the 
Supervisory Board, the managers, or individual share­
holders. 
Article 35 
Special motions by individual shareholders must be received by the 
managers at the latest a week before the general meeting, otherwise 
they are entitled to defer the decision to the next general meeting. 
Article 36 
Minutes of the proceedings of the general meeting are taken by a 
shareholder appointed by the chairman; to be valid, they must be 
signed by the chairman, the Supervisory Board members present, 
and at least two other shareholders. 
Article 37 
The managers draw up a balance-sheet annually on 1st December 
and together with the receipts pass it on for auditing to the 
Supervisory Board at the latest on 20th January. The Board must 
present it to the ordinary general meeting together with its report. 
Article 38 
During the last days before the general meeting the balance-sheet 
and receipts must be available to all shareholders for inspection in 
the business premises of the company. 
Article 39 
If at the closing of the annual accounts after deduction of interest 
a net surplus is shown, then 1) all contracted royalties are settled, and 

=====第582页=====
552 Appendices 
2) ten per cent is put to a reserve fund for unexpected losses and 
improvements of the newspaper and for extraordinary expendi­
tures,  and 3) the remaining sum is distributed as dividends among 
the shareholders. 
Article 40 
The use of the reserve fund, which must not exceed the sum of 
10,000 talers, is decided by the general meeting upon the motions of 
the Supervisory Board and the managers. 
Article 41 
The managers announce by two insertions in the company's 
newspaper where the interest and dividends can be collected 
annually commencing on 1st March. 
Article 42 
Interest and dividends which have not been collected within two 
years from the pay-day announced, or collection of which has not 
been notified by any person within the specified period, become the 
property of the company. 
Article 43 
The company is automatically dissolved before the expiry of the 
period specified in Article 1 if losses occur which exhaust four-fifths 
of the subscribed share capital. 
Article 44 
In all these cases the managers must call an extraordinary meeting 
which shall decide on the manner in which the company is to be 
liquidated. 
Article 45 
Changes of Articles can be decided at a general meeting by a 
majority of three-quarters of the voters present or represented if 
their general content was indicated in the notice. 

=====第583页=====
Appendices 553 
Article 46 
Disputes between the company and shareholders shall be settled 
by arbitration. 
Printed by W. Clouth in Cologne 
First published as a separate leaflet in July Printed according to the leaflet 
1848 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第584页=====
554 
LEGAL INVESTIGATION 
AGAINST THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
Cologne, July 7. The responsible publisher3  of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung,  Korff,  and its editor-in-chief, Karl Marx, were interrogated 
yesterday at the office of the examining magistrate, both of them 
being accused of insulting or libelling the Chief Public Prosecutor, 
Herr Zweiffei, and the policemen who arrested Anneke. The 
interrogation began at 4 o'clock. After its conclusion, at about 6 
o'clock, the examining magistrate and Public Prosecutor Hecker 
accompanied the accused to the office of the editorial board, where 
with the aid of a police inspector a search of the premises took place 
in order to discover the manuscript and thus the author of the 
inculpated article. 13 There was found a note in an unknown 
handwriting but it was not a copy of the inculpated article. This note 
was added to the dossier of the indictment against Marx and  consorts. 
In view of this last expression, it seems that it is intended to institute 
proceedings against the editorial board en masse although the 
responsible publisher,  Korff,  who alone appends his signature to the 
newspaper, undertakes, of course, also the legal responsibility for it. 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 38, July 8, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a Gérant. See footnote on p.  544.—Ed, 
b See this volume, pp. 177-79.—Ed 

=====第585页=====
555 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 
AGAINST THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
Cologne, July 22. This morning the editor-in-chief of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, Karl Marx, was again summoned before the 
examining magistrate to be interrogated on account of the 
incriminated article on the arrest of Herr Anneke. This time the 
summons did not include the responsible publisher of the newspa­
per, Herr  Korff. 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 53, July 23, 1848 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第586页=====
556 
REPORT OF THE SPEECHES 
MADE BY MARX AND ENGELS 
AT THE GENERAL MEETING 
OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY IN COLOGNE 
ON AUGUST 4, 1848346 
[...] Hereupon Dr. Marx, editor-in-chief of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, examines the principles of Herr Weitling, pronounced at the 
meeting of the Democratic Society held a fortnight ago, a and in a 
pithy and fairly long speech seeks to prove, on the grounds of 
the historical development of the revolutions that have taken place 
during the last few centuries, that, the separation of political and 
social interests assumed by Weitling is as unthinkable as their direct 
opposition, that, rather, the political and social interests must 
interpenetrate. The claim that social development retards political 
development was also incorrect; unfortunately, in respect of social 
development we Germans had only now arrived at the point which 
the French had already reached in the year 1789; the present 
contradictions could only be resolved by sharply defining them and 
emphasising the interests of the individual classes; only in this way, 
that is by using intellectual weapons, can an amicable settlement be 
achieved. The disregard of the position of the various strata of the 
population to one another, the refusal to make reciprocal conces­
sions and wrong notions about class relations have led to the bloody 
outcome in Paris. The dictatorship which Weitling proposed as the 
most desirable constitutional form is, for similar reasons, regarded 
by Marx as impractical and quite unfeasible, since power cannot be 
attained by a single class; the intention to carry on a dictatorship in 
accordance with a system devised by a single brain, deserves to be 
called nonsensical. On the contrary, the governing power, just as the 
Provisional Government in Paris, must consist of the most heteroge-
a On July 21, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第587页=====
Appendices 557 
neous elements, which by means of an exchange of views have to 
agree on the most appropriate mode of administration. 
Herr Engels reports on the Government's rejection of the 
application for citizenship of Dr. Marx. 3 As the latter was a 
Rhineland Prussian by birth, and as since the March revolution all 
political refugees have had their citizenship restored to them, this 
interpretation of citizenship involved injustice and breach of faith; 
he would thereby be regarded as a foreigner who could be expelled 
at any time. 
First published in the newspaper Der Printed according to the newspaper 
Wächter am Rhein, 2. Dutzend, No. 1, 
Aueust 23 1848 Published in English for the first 
time 
a See this volume, pp. 407-10.—Ed. 

=====第588页=====
558 
ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE CONVOCATION 
OF THE RHENISH DISTRICT CONGRESS 
OF DEMOCRATIC ASSOCIATIONS347 
Cologne, August 4. In accordance with the decision of the 
Democratic Congress in Frankfurt, which resolved that Cologne 
should be the seat of the Executive for the Prussian Rhine Prov­
ince and authorised the democratic associations there to con­
vene a district congress for organising the democratic party in the 
province, the Central Committee of the associations here348 invites all 
democratically-minded associations in the Rhine Province to appoint 
delegates to this congress, which will take place here on Sunday, 
August 13. The delegates must report their arrival in the upstairs 
hall of the Stollwerk premises. 
The Central Committee 
of the three democratic associations in Cologne 
Schneider II, Marx 
(For the Democratic Society) 
Moll, Schapper Becker, Schützendorf 
(For the Workers' Association) (For the Association for Workers 
and Employers 
At a moment when reaction, operating under the name of 
itinerant "constitutional" congresses, is reviewing and concentrating 
its forces throughout the state, democrats do not need any more 
exhaustive exposition of the necessity for an energetic counter-

=====第589页=====
Appendices 559 
attack. They merely have to make use of the same freedoms which 
the Association "With God for King and Fatherland"3 and its branch 
associations enjoy. 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 66, August 5, 1848 
Published in English for the first 
Words from the decree of Frederick William III issued on March 17, 181; 
announcing the setting up of the army reserve.— Ed. 

=====第590页=====
560 
THE LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 
AGAINST THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
Cologne, August 4. Our entanglement with the office of the Public 
Prosecutor continues to take its course. Last Monday the responsible 
publisher Korff was again summoned before the examining magis­
trate and yesterday two of our editors, Dronke and Engels, were 
cited as  witnesses.  Dronke is away at present; Engels appeared but was 
not interrogated on oath, since it is supposed that the note recently 
confiscated in our office 3 is in his handwriting and it is possible, 
therefore, that he, too, will be involved in the indictment. 
It is clear that the prosecution is not satisfied with the manager 
functioning as the responsible publisher. The editor-in-chief has to 
be implicated, the author of the article in question has to be 
discovered, the editors — any one of whom could be the author of the 
article in question — have to be made to give evidence against one 
another, indeed, if possible, against themselves. 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 66, August 5, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
See this volume, p.  554.—Ed. 

=====第591页=====
561 
KARL MARX TO POLICE 
SUPERINTENDENT GEIGER 349 
To Police Superintendent Geiger 
Here. 
Sir, I inform you that I have immediately appealed3 to the Ministry 
of the Interior against the paper drawn up by youb and that I 
continue to regard myself as before as a citizen of the German 
Empire. 
Cologne, August 5, 1848 
Editor-in-Chief of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung Dr. Karl Marx 
First published in the Zeitschrift für Printed according to the manu-
Geschichtswissenschaft No. 3, 1968 script 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a See this volume, pp. 407-10.— Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 408.—  Ed. 

=====第592页=====
562 
FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL MEETING 
OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY 
IN COLOGNE HELD ON AUGUST 11, 1848 
After the minutes of the preceding general meeting had been read 
and approved at the request of acting President Marx, Herr 
Wolff read out the protest to the German National Assembly against 
the partition of Poland, 3 which was joyfully greeted and adopted 
with acclamation. 
Herr Rittinghausen gave many reasons vindicating Herr Marx's 
right to citizenship recendy contested by the Prussian Government. 0 
He considered that the best thing would be, by means of a 
deputation tomorrow, to make the Government reverse this illegal 
and altogether ridiculous action, and if the Government is unwilling 
to do that, to send a protest at such behaviour directly to the 
Minister. The protest was read and adopted, and in the event of the 
refusal of citizenship for Marx not being withdrawn people will be 
invited to sign the protest this evening. 
Herr Marx dwelt in more detail on the grounds proving the 
injustice of the measures adopted against him, and the applause of 
the whole meeting testified to the force of his arguments. The 
circumstance on account of which the Government refused him the 
right of citizenship really lies in the fact that previously attempts had 
been made in vain to win him over to the side of the Government. 
Herr Engels reported a new vexatious police measure against 
Schapper by which the latter is threatened with deportation. 0 He 
described the intervention of the police and especially stressed that 
in any case Schapper as a citizen of Nassau has the right to be 
a See this volume, pp. 564-65.—Ed. 
b Ibid., pp. 407-10.— Ed. 
c Ibid., pp. 383-84.— Ed. 

=====第593页=====
Appendices 563 
regarded as a German and as such, by the decision of the Frankfurt 
National Assembly, is entided to reside in any of the 38 German 
states. 
Rittinghausen, Schneider and Bürgers were elected as delegates to 
put the case of Marx and Schapper before the Regierungspräsident 
and the Police Superintendent and try to effect a reversal of the 
decisions in question. 
Deputy Gladbach, whose appearance was greeted with stormy 
applause, explained at length that salvation should not be expected 
to come either from the Berlin Assembly or from the Frankfurt 
Assembly. 
Herr Engels stressed that it was Gladbach who had always 
distinguished himself by his liberal outlook and audacity and 
especially by his vigorous protest against the way the Schleswig-
Holsteiners were dealt with in Spandau. 3 Thereupon three cheers 
were given for Herr Gladbach. 
First published in the newspaper Der Printed according to the newspaper 
Wächter am Rhein, 2. Dutzend, No. 2, 
August 25, 1848 Published in English for the first 
time 
a See this volume, pp. 180-81 and 192-93.—Ed. 

=====第594页=====
PROTEST OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY 
IN COLOGNE AGAINST THE INCORPORATION 
OF POSEN IN THE GERMAN CONFEDERATION 31 
Cologne, August 12. The Democratic Society of Cologne has 
submitted the following protest to the National Assembly: 
To the High National Assembly! 
The Democratic Society of Cologne, considering 
1. that Germany, which is engaged in a struggle for freedom, 
does not desire to oppress other nationalities but to promote 
their efforts for freedom and independence; 
2. that the liberation of Poland is a vital question for Germany; 
3. that Poland has in fact been repeatedly robbed of its freedom 
and national independence by three despots; 
4. that since 1792 all attacks upon Poland and all partitions of 
Poland have always been aimed by reaction against the freedom 
of the whole of Europe, and, on the other hand, whenever a 
liberation of the peoples took place there was insistence also on 
the restoration of Poland; 
5. that even the Committee of Fifty,351 in the name of the German 
people, indignantly rejected any share in the outrage commit­
ted against Poland and clearly proclaimed the duty of the 
German people to co-operate in the restoration of an indepen­
dent Poland; 
6. that after the March revolution even the King of Prussia, 
compelled by the force of public opinion, solemnly assented to 
the reorganisation of Posen; 
7. that despite that the National Assembly in Frankfurt, which, it 
is true, arose from indirect elections, in its sitting of July 27, 
1848,  voted for the incorporation of three-quarters of the 
Grand Duchy of Posen in the as yet non-existent German 
Empire and thereby incurred the guilt of a new partition of 

=====第595页=====
Appendices- 565 
Poland and the flouting of liberty in the same way as did the 
Vienna Congress and the German Federal Diet; 
8. that nevertheless the healthy part of the German people will not 
and cannot take any part in oppressing the Polish nation for the 
benefit of reaction and in the interests of a number of Prussian 
bureaucrats, landowners and hucksterers; 
resolves in its sitting today: 
to make a formal protest against the decision adopted by the 
German National Assembly on July 27, 1848, in regard to the 
Grand Duchy of Posen and herewith to lay before Germany, 
Poland and the whole of Europe its vigorous objections to this 
incorporation which is solely of advantage to the reactionary 
party in Prussia, Russia and Austria. 
On behalf of the Democratic Society, 
The Committee 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 74, August 13, 1848 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第596页=====
566 
THE LEGAL INVESTIGATION 
AGAINST THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
Cologne, August 12. The interesting relations between our news­
paper and the Public Prosecutor's office continue to take their 
course. Yesterday one of our editors, Ernst Dronke, was again sum­
moned to appear before the examining magistrate as a witness. 
There was no interrogation on oath since information had been 
received that, on the evening after Anneke's arrest, Dronke had 
visited Anneke's wife and obtained there particulars about the arrest. 
When the witness asked against whom the indictment was being 
made, an explanation of the term "Marx and consorts" was given to 
the effect that it was merely possible that the responsible publisher 
Korff would be indicted whereas they intended to indict the 
editor-in-chief, Karl Marx, as the supposed author of the incrimi­
nated article. 
Incidentally, Dronke stated that he did not consider himself 
bound to tell the truth, since as editor it was possible he might 
be implicated in the authorship of the article and he would not 
testify against  himself. 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 74, August 13, 1848 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第597页=====
567 
RECORD OF ENGELS' SPEECH AT THE PUBLIC 
MEETING OF THE FIRST CONGRESS 
OF RHENISH DEMOCRATS HELD AT COLOGNE 
ON AUGUST 13, 1848 
FROM A NEWSPAPER REPORT 
Engels from Cologne: A characteristic feature of the Rhineland is 
hatred of Prussian officialdom and dyed-in-the-wool Prussianism; it 
is to be hoped that this attitude will endure. 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 101, September 13, 1848 _ ... , , . r ,. , , , .. 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第598页=====
568 
NOTE IN THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
ON MARX'S DEPARTURE FOR VIENNA 
Cologne, August 24. The editor-in-chief of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, Karl Marx, yesterday went to Vienna for a few days. 352 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 85, August 25, 1848 , . ,. , „ , r. 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第599页=====
569 
FROM A NEWSPAPER ITEM 
LISTING THE NAMES OF VISITORS 
WHO HAD JUST ARRIVED IN VIENNA 
New Arrivals 
August 27 
Herr Steriol Damesa, merchant, from Semlin.— Baroness Beust, 
wife of the royal and imperial cavalry captain from Tarnow.— Herr 
Anton Feuerstein, merchant, from Schwarzenberg.— Herr Carl 
Marx, Ph. D., from Paris. 353—Messrs. Alex. Kusa and Basil. Ghika, 
men of private means, from England.3 
First published in the Wiener Zeitung Printed according to the newspaper 
No. 236, August 30, 1848 ,,.,,. ^ ,.,,, r-
Published m English for the first 
There follows a list of other persons who had arrived in Vienna that day.— Ed. 

=====第600页=====
570 
NEWSPAPER REPORTS OF MARX'S SPEECH 
IN THE VIENNA DEMOCRATIC ASSOCIATION 
ON AUGUST 28, 1848 
[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 94, September 5, 1848] 
Vienna, August 29. At yesterday's meeting of the Democratic 
Association it was discussed whether the Association should ap­
proach the Emperor or the Imperial Diet so as to bring about the 
downfall of Minister Schwarzer or rather the fall of the entire 
Doblhoff Ministry. Herr Julius Fröbel and Herr Marx were present 
as guests and both took part in the debate from different 
standpoints. 
Herr Julius Fröbel was of the opinion that the Association should 
approach the Emperor, whereas Herr Marx maintained that the 
democratic principle was to be found in the Imperial Diet. No one 
here is surprised that the Berlin "theoretical" so-called democrats in 
practice seek to "reach agreement" with the sovereigns. 
[Der Radikale No. 64, August 31, 1848] 
Vienna, August 30. The meeting of the Democratic Association on 
the 28th of this month is one of the most interesting and important 
events in our current history. Among the guests present we mention 
the well-known political writer Julius Fröbel and the editor of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Herr Karl Marx; both of them have become 
important on account of their particular fate. As writers, too, they 
occupy a definite position which is of importance for Germany.... 
Herr Marx was of the opinion that it was a matter of indifference 
who was Minister, for here too—as in Paris—it was now a question of 
the struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. His speech 
was very witty, trenchant and instructive.... 

=====第601页=====
Appendices 571 
[ Wiener Zeitung No. 252 (supplement), September 17, 1848] 
... in a Viennese Association, where a debate about the dismissal of 
the Ministers was in progress, an  academic  from  abroad  really had the 
audacity to say the following: 
"Up to now the speakers mentioned only two great powers, the 
Imperial Diet and the Emperor, to whom they intended to appeal in 
order to bring about the dismissal of the Ministers; but the greatest 
power, the people, has been forgotten! We must  appeal to the people  and 
must try to influence it employing every possible means. We must raise a 
storm against the Government, and must work towards this end in every 
possible way, even using Mephistophelian means. We must use the press, 
posters and discussions to achieve this."*54 
Printed according to the newspapers 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第602页=====
572 
NEWSPAPER REPORTS OF MARX'S SPEECH 
IN THE FIRST WORKERS' ASSOCIATION 
OF VIENNA ON AUGUST 30, 1848 
[Die Constitution No. 133, September 1, 1848] 
Dr. Marx spoke about the workers, especially the German workers 
abroad.—The national workshops and the latest workers' revolution 
in Paris. He asserted that the German workers could be proud that a 
considerable number of those deported were their compat­
riots.—The Chartists in England and the recent Chartist movements. 
England and the complete emancipation of the workers of Europe. 
Belgium. 
[Der Volksfreund No. 109, September 3, 1848] 
Dr. Marx, editor of the [Neue] Rheinische Zeitung, greeted the 
Association and said that he felt it an honour to speak also to a 
workers' association in Vienna, as he had already done in Paris, 
London and Brussels. 
Printed according to the newspapers 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第603页=====
573 
REPORT OF MARX'S LECTURE ON WAGE LABOUR 
AND CAPITAL AT THE MEETING 
OF THE FIRST WORKERS' ASSOCIATION 
OF VIENNA ON SEPTEMBER 2, 1848355 
...Dr. Marx delivered a fairly long lecture on wage labour and 
capital. He said in his introduction that all revolutions are social 
revolutions. Capital consists not of money, but of raw materials, 
instruments of production and articles of consumption; wage labour 
produces capital as distinct from the products. The assertion that the 
interests of the capitalist and of the wage labourer are identical is 
false.  Along with division of labour, competition among the workers 
grows and wages fall; but this occurs still more owing to the use of 
machines. Production costs determine wages. Civilisation does not 
increase the well-being of the workers, but does the opposite. Taxes 
and the price of the necessities of life increase. 
The lecturer spoke also about the remedies that had been tried 
and their inadequacy, such as, for example, Malthus' theory of 
over-population. The workhouses in England. Industrial training. 
Abolition of protective tariffs and of taxes. Finally, he stated that 
conditions must improve because not all the workers are used as 
workers, but part of them are maintained.... 
First published in Die Constitution 
No. 136, September 5, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第604页=====
574 
REPORT OF PLATOON LEADER MENTES 
OF THE COLOGNE CIVIC MILITIA 
Third Standard Company No. XVI 
Report 
of the 5th Platoon of the Standard Guard of September 1, 1848 
Absent from the standard guard without excuse: 
Corporal Herr C. Mohr Sculptor 
ditto " Ferd. Rhien Pharmacist 
Militiaman J. A. Fischer Çap-maker 
ditto G. Weerth Editor of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
ditto E. Dronke ditto 
ditto F. Engels ditto 
ditto F. Schnabel Cap-maker3 
ditto C. Kayser Merchant 
ditto R. Kayser ditto 
ditto M. Olzem ditto 
ditto Jac. Schmidt Shoemaker 
ditto Fried. Greven Butcher 
ditto Wm. Engels Garment-maker 
ditto Joh. Struben ditto 
ditto Ign. Wieners — 
ditto J. P. Mohr Roofer 
ditto M. Woocker Grocer 
ditto C. Deckker — 
Cologne, September 2, 1848 
Platoon leader 
M. Mentes 
Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published for the first time 
In the original the whole line is crossed out and the following note inserted: "he 
turned up".— Ed. 

=====第605页=====
575 
REPLY 
No. 201 of the Breslauer Zeitung publishes a report from Berlin 
that knight Schnapphahnski 356 has bought many shares in the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung and for this reason the series of feature articles 
about him has come to an end, because it is not possible for a 
newspaper to wage a polemic against its own shareholders. The 
allegedly democratic Düsseldorfer Zeitung considers itself bound to 
reproduce this insinuation in its columns. Whatever concoctions it 
may be desired to invent in Berlin, a Silesian newspaper ought to 
have known that this assertion was a lie and why it was a lie. 
Unfortunately for it, however, the treacherous assertion comes too 
late. No. 92 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, which was published long 
before the arrival of No. 201 of the Breslauer Zeitung, contains the 
continuation of the feature articles in question. Moreover, the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung is the newspaper of a party and has already given 
sufficient proof that it is not to be bought. 
The Responsible Publishers 
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time First published in the supplement to the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 93, September 
S, 1848 

=====第606页=====
576 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 
AGAINST THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
Cologne, September 5. Yesterday one of our editors, Friedrich 
Engels, was again summoned to appear before the examining 
magistrate in the investigation against Marx and consorts, 3 but this 
time not as a witness but as co-accused. The preliminary investigation 
has ended, and if the Public Prosecutor's office does not make any 
further proposals, the Council Chamber will shortly have to decide 
whether Marx, Engels and Korff will have to appear before the 
Assize Court on the charge of insulting or libelling Chief Public 
Prosecutor Z weiff el and the six policemen. 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 95, September 6, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a See this volume, p.  566.—Ed. 

=====第607页=====
577 
ADDRESS 
TO THE GERMAN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY IN FRANKFURT 
ADOPTED BY A PUBLIC MEETING 
HELD IN COLOGNE ON SEPTEMBER 7, 1848357 
An armistice with Denmark, which has been ratified by Prussia, 
has been presented by the Prussian Government to the Imperial 
Government, and by the Imperial Government to you. 
The undersigned German citizens resident in Cologne protest 
against this armistice, and, considering: 
1. that Prussia has concluded this armistice on the basis of an 
authorisation issued by the Imperial Regent3 but not counter­
signed by any responsible Imperial Minister, and hence legally 
invalid; 
2. that Prussia has exceeded this authorisation in every point thus 
pursuing only the interests of absolutism and its own, un-
German plans; 
3. that no political agreement may be concluded without previous 
authorisation of the National Assembly; 
4. that this armistice forces the victorious German troops to an 
ignominious retreat, instals a Danish Government in Schleswig-
Holstein and Lauenburg, betrays to Denmark the Provisional 
Government, which arose from the revolution and was 
recognised by Germany, and all its decisions; withdraws the 
Schleswig troops from the German High Command and 
delivers Schleswig-Holstein to civil war; 
5. that whereas Germany has constantly fought the revolution in 
Italy, Posen and Prague, the Danish war is the only one in which 
Germany defends the revolution against legitimism and ab­
solutism; 
Archduke John of Austria.— Ed. 

=====第608页=====
578 Appendices 
request you: to  reject  the armistice concluded by Prussia in violation 
of the authorisation and in defiance of the Central Authority and the 
National Assembly, and to defend the revolution in Schleswig-
Holstein even at the risk of a European war, and never again to 
entrust the present Prussian Government with diplomatic negotia­
tions on behalf of Germany; and, finally, to declare that Germany 
will on no account force the Danish-speaking North Schleswig to 
become a part of Germany against its will. 
Cologne, September 7, 1848 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 98, September 9, 1848 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第609页=====
579 
MINUTES OF THE COMMITTEE MEETING 
OF THE COLOGNE WORKERS' ASSOCIATION 
HELD ON SEPTEMBER 11, 1848 
After reading the minutes of the previous meeting, the secretary, 
Citizen Kalker, declared that because of his departure from here, 
which would take place tomorrow, it would no longer be possible for 
him to give his services as secretary of the Association and that he 
herewith handed over his functions to the Association. 
Thereupon Citizen Blum jun. was proposed as secretary and 
accepted. 
The latter then took the floor and related the detailed circum­
stances of the arrest of himself and Citizen Salget last Sunday 
evening in Wesseling by the Burgomaster of that place.3  For, on their 
way back to Cologne, after visiting a Workers' Association founded 
earlier in Cassel, they visited the Workers' Association in Wesseling; 
they had spoken there about social reform for barely a quarter of an 
hour, when Geier, the local Burgomaster, suddenly appeared 
accompanied by a policeman, arrested them, and placed them in 
custody in the latter's house, but next morning, with the most 
friendly civility, he let them go home peacefully. 
President Moll thereupon asked Citizen Blum whether he had 
perhaps promised the Burgomaster of Wesseling not to take any 
steps against him, and when the question was answered in the 
negative, he moved that, to safeguard their rights and prevent 
similar illegal and arbitrary arrests, the meeting should decide to 
take the necessary steps, namely through the courts, which was 
agreed unanimously. 
Citizen Röser requested the managing committee of the Society to 
invite the Workers' Association in Frechen to the public meeting to 
a See this volume, p.  426.—Ed. 

=====第610页=====
580 Appendices 
be held on the 15th in Worringen. The secretary was instructed to 
comply. 
Citizen Dronke: We have now reached a point which could be 
more important and fraught with more consequences than many 
might perhaps think. The Government of Action has fallen, along 
with its world-enchanting financial plans. But let us not assume that 
we are now at the goal of our desires, or that anything will be done 
for us; let us not even count on getting a Government of the Left. On 
the contrary, we now have the prospect of a Government which does 
not even belong to the Chamber and will consist of people from the 
past, von Vincke etc. Behind such a Government stands absolutism 
in all its grandeur, all its insolence and arrogance. It will probably 
wish to disperse the Chamber with the aid of Pomeranian bayonets, 
and then the struggle between monarchy and nation will be 
inevitable. Perhaps while we are sitting here they are already fighting 
on the barricades in Berlin. 
Thereupon the meeting turned to the social question, and 
President Moll remarked that we had come to a halt on the question 
whether an organisation of work was possible or not.358 People often 
threw at us the failure of the national workshops in France359 in 
order to prove that an organisation of work was impossible. 
Citizen Engels made a lengthy speech on this subject. His speech 
was received with great applause. 
After a written reply from the local Town Council had been read, 
concerning the request that the expenses of our delegates to the 
workers' congress in Frankfurt360 be defrayed, in which the Town 
Council asks for further details, the meeting was closed. 
Voluntary contributions amounted to 11 silver groschen and 7 
pfennigs. 
First published in the Zeitung des Arbeiter- Printed according to the newspaper 
Vereines zu Köln No. 33, September 21, 
ig4g Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第611页=====
581 
LETTER WRITTEN BY VON KÜHLWETTER, 
MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR, 
TO KARL MARX361 
To Dr. Marx, Esquire, in Cologne 
In reply to your submission of the 23rd of last month,3 I have to 
inform you that I cannot consider it illegal that for the time being the 
Royal Government in Cologne has rejected your request to be 
accorded the status of Prussian, since you do not possess a right to 
naturalisation; for your status of Prussian became extinct under 
Paragraph 20 of the law of December 31, 1842, Statute Book 1843, 
p. 17, by your acceptance of the Deed of Release which you 
requested for the purpose of emigrating to North America in the 
year 1845,362  of which you also availed yourself when you settled 
abroad. A claim to readmission, however, is neither conferred on the 
emigrant by that law nor can it be derived from the decision of the 
Prussian Assembly of March 30 of this year nor from general legal 
principles. 
Berlin, September 12, 1848 
Minister of the Interior 
von Kühlwetter 
Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time First published in the Frankfurter 
Zeitung und Handelsblatt No. 176, 
June 27, 1913 
a See this volume, pp. 407-10.— Ed. 

=====第612页=====
582 
MASS MEETING 
AND THE COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
Cologne, September 14. We return to the subject of yesterday's 
mass meeting and its results, since these have caused a fairly 
considerable sensation in our city. 
The mass meeting on the Frankenplatz was opened shortly after 
12 o'clock by Herr W.  Wolff,  who briefly explained its purpose and 
proposed that Herr H. Bürgers should preside over it. Herr 
Bürgers, who was elected by acclamation, came on to the platform 
and gave the floor again to Herr  Wolff,  who then proposed that a 
Committee of Public Safety be formed to represent the parts of the 
population of Cologne not represented in the existing legal 
authorities. Herr F. Engels seconded the motion, which was 
supported also by Herr H. Becker and Herr E. Dronke. The 
proposal was adopted amid stormy applause by the audience of at 
least 5,000-6,000 persons, with only five votes against, after no 
opposer had come forward despite repeated invitations. It was then 
decided to fix the number of members of the Committee at 30, and 
these 30 were elected. 363 Since these included also two, Gottschalk 
and Anneke, who were under arrest, two substitutes for them were 
also elected. 
Herr F. Engels then proposed the following address to the Berlin 
Assembly: 
To the Assembly which is to agree on the Prussian Constitution in 
Berlin. 
The undersigned citizens of Cologne, 
considering: 
that the Assembly which is to agree on the Prussian 
Constitution has made it the bounden duty of the 
Government to issue without further delay the decree 

=====第613页=====
Appendices 583 
decided on August 9 concerning reactionary efforts of 
officers so as to calm the country and also avoid a breach 
with the Assembly3; 
that in consequence of this decision the Auerswald-
Hansemann Government has been dismissed and the King 
has charged Imperial Minister Beckerath, who has just 
been overthrown, to form a new Government; 
that Herr Beckerath by no means affords the requisite 
guarantees for implementing the decision of the Assem­
bly; and that, on the contrary, in view of his known 
counter-revolutionary sentiments, an attempt to dissolve 
the Assembly is to be expected; 
that an Assembly elected by the people for reaching 
agreement on the Constitution between King and people 
cannot be unilaterally dissolved, because otherwise the 
Crown would not be on a level with, but above the 
Assembly; 
that a dissolution of the Assembly would therefore be a 
coup d'état; 
call upon the [members of the] Assembly, 
in the event of an attempt to dissolve the Assembly, to do 
their duty and defend their seats even against the force of 
bayonets. 
This address was unanimously adopted, following which the 
meeting came to an end. 
Although numerous delegates from the Citizens' Association were 
present in the upper parts of the square, and although it is said that a 
number of well-known "wailers"364 did their utmost to recruit 
rowdies by persuasion and the offer of money, and furthermore 
although policemen in plain clothes were present in fairly large 
numbers, nevertheless the meeting was skilful enough to prevent all 
attempts at disturbing the peace. 
Meanwhile the commanders of the civic militia were sitting in the 
Town Hall and debating what to do, for some of them considered 
that disturbances were bound to occur. In the middle of their 
deliberations the door opened and the leaders of the Citizens' 
Association burst into the room, declaring that the Committee of 
Public Safety was the first step towards revolution, that Cologne was 
in danger and the red republic on the verge of being proclaimed, 
a See this volume, pp. 417-18.—Ed. 

=====第614页=====
584 Appendices 
and that if the civic militia by itself was insufficient to maintain order, 
the Citizens' Association with all its resources would put itself at the 
disposal of Herr von Wittgenstein] Herr von Wittgenstein was adroit 
enough to refuse this offer and to refrain also from calling any of the 
civic militia to arms. The consequences proved how right the civic 
militia was on this occasion. 
Not satisfied with this, while the mass meeting was still in progress, 
the gentlemen of the Citizens' Association posted up copies of a 
"Protest", which we reproduce below. Within five minutes the 
Protest, which was unsigned, disappeared without trace from every 
part of the city. Towards evening it reappeared as a leaflet in bold 
type,  printed at the press of the Kölnische Zeitung and distributed to 
subscribers to this newspaper. This time it had the following amusing 
introduction: 
Cologne, September 13, 1848 
The so-called democrats want to exploit the alarm caused by the latest decisions of 
the Assemblies in Frankfurt and Berlin in order to regain the ground they have 
increasingly lost and to provoke a conflict at all costs. With this aim, too, the 
significance and danger of the friction between the army and the citizens which 
occurred in Cologne on the 11th of this month has been recklessly depicted with 
deliberate exaggeration and exploited for criminal purposes. By means of a wall-
poster, even this morning a mass meeting was convened to be held in the open air at 
midday, and this meeting actually elected by acclamation a list of persons who had 
been proposed and agreed upon in advance, to a Committee of Public Safety. 
It is unquestionably true that no one should recognise such an authority, which has 
arisen from a casually assembled mass of people, bypassing the existing official bodies, 
and that the members of this committee, should they presume to act as such, at once 
make themselves liable to legal proceedings. It is however better to prevent crimes 
than to punish them after they have been committed and perhaps claimed many 
victims. 
Hence it is our duty to warn all citizens and to call their attention to the present 
danger. 
To this end, the following protest is issued, together with an appeal: 
Protest 
The formation of a Committee of Public Safety is the first step towards 
Revolution. 
Whoever wants true freedom and order is invited to support the existing 
authorities with all his might, to oppose the criminal efforts of a minority and to 
protest against the formation of a Committee of Public Safety. 
In particular, all members of the civic militia are urged to do their duty and 
energetically protect law and order. The pretended danger from the army is 
non-existent, but the real danger arises from the formation of a Committee of Public 
Safety. 
Several members of the managing committee 
of the Cologne Citizens' Association. 

=====第615页=====
Appendices 585 
The Committee of Public Safety held its first meeting yesterday 
evening and in the first place decided to file this amusing protest, 
and the gentlemen of the Citizens' Association will evidently have to 
be satisfied with that. The Committee elected a president,3 a 
secretary15 and three members of an Executive Committee.0  Further­
more, it adopted a communication addressed to the Regierungspräsi­
dent, the Commandant's office, the Town Council, and the command 
of the civic militia, in which it notified these authorities of its 
formation and informed them that it would use all legal means to 
pursue the aim of maintaining calm, in agreement with the 
authorities wherever possible, but at the same time watching over the 
preservation of the people's rights. It resolved moreover to 
announce this by means of a wall-poster to the inhabitants of 
Cologne. We shall publish both documents tomorrow. 
This morning, people's minds have already been to some extent 
set at rest. People laugh at yesterday's alarm which caused them to 
see in the Committee a Provisional Government, a comité de salut 
public, a conspiracy for a red republic, in short, everything but what it 
actually is: a committee elected directly and publicly by the people, a 
committee which undertakes the task of representing the interests of 
the part of the population not represented in the legally instituted 
authorities, a committee which operates only in a legal way and has 
no intention of wanting to arrogate any other authority than the 
moral influence which the right of free association, the laws, and the 
confidence of the electors allow it to exert. 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 103, September 15, 1848 , , ,.,,,,. 
Published in English for the first 
time 
Hermann Becker.— Ed. 
Funk.— Ed. 
Weyll, Bernigau and Moll.— Ed. 

=====第616页=====
586 
MASS MEETING IN WORRINGEN 
Cologne, September 18. Yesterday a large public meeting took 
place at Worringen. From Cologne five or six large" Rhine barges, 
each with a few hundred persons, and with the red flag at the prow, 
made the trip down the Rhine. More or less numerous delegations 
were present from Neuss, Düsseldorf, Krefeld,  Hitdorf,  Frechen 
and Rheindorf.  The meeting, which was held in a meadow at the side 
of the Rhine, comprised at least 6,000-8,000 persons. 
Karl Schapper from Cologne was appointed chairman, and 
Friedrich Engels from Cologne secretary. On a proposal put by the 
chairman, the meeting declared unanimously, except for one vote, in 
favour of a republic, and in fact for a democratic social republic, a red 
republic. 
On the proposal of Ernst Dronke from Cologne, the same address 
to the Berlin Assembly that had been adopted the previous 
Wednesday at the meeting on the Frankenplatz in Cologne (in which 
the Assembly was called upon, in the event of its being dissolved, not 
to give way even before the force of bayonets  a) was also unanimously 
adopted by the Worringen meeting. 
On the proposal of Joseph Moll from Cologne, it was de­
cided to  recognise  the Committee of Public Safety elected at the public 
meeting in Cologne and on the motion of a member of the meeting 
three hearty cheers were given for this Committee. 
a See this volume, pp. 582-84.—Ed. 

=====第617页=====
Appendices 587 
On the proposal of Friedrich Engels from Cologne, the following 
address was unanimously adopted: 
To the German National Assembly in Frankfurt. 
The German citizens here assembled hereby declare that if 
as a result of the resistance of the Prussian Government to the 
decisions of the National Assembly and the Central Authority 
a conflict should arise between Prussia and Germany, they will 
be ready to sacrifice their lives and property on the side of 
Germany. 
Worringen, September 17, 1848 
On the proposal of Schultes from Hitdorf it was resolved that 
the Kölnische Zeitung did not represent the interests of the Rhine 
Province. 
In addition, there were speeches by W. Wolff from Cologne, 
F. Lassalle from Düsseldorf,  Esser  from Neuss, Weyll, Wächter, Becker 
and Reichhelm from Cologne, Wallraf from Frechen, Müller, a 
member of the Worringen Workers' Association, Leven from 
Rheindorf,  and Imandt from Krefeld. The proceedings concluded 
with a short speech by Henry Brisbane of New York, the well-known 
editor of the democratic-socialist New-York Tribune. 
During the meeting, news came from a trustworthy source that it 
was intended "on Tuesday to send the 27th Regiment again to 
Cologne, to draw in also the remaining battalions of the regiment, to 
provoke conflicts between the soldiers and the citizens, and to take 
advantage of this occasion to proclaim the city in a state of siege, to 
disarm the civic militia, and in short to deal with us in the same way 
as with Mainz". 3 
In case this report should actually prove to be well founded and a 
clash take place, the inhabitants of the areas around Cologne present 
at the meeting promised their help. In fact, the people from 
Worringen are only waiting to be called upon for them to appear on 
the scene. 
Let the ex-commander of the civic militia, Herr Wittgenstein, 
take note of this. 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 106, September 19, 1848 ,,.,,. ,. , r , c 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a See this volume, pp. 20 and 23.—Ed 

=====第618页=====
588 
DECISION OF THE MASS MEETING 366 
The favour of reprinting is requested. 
PROCLAMATION 
The citizens assembled in a mass meeting in Cologne on 
September 20," 
considering: 
that the decision of the Frankfurt National Assembly of the 
16th,  approving the dishonourable armistice with Denmark, is 
a betrayal of the German people and of the honour of German 
arms, 
declare: 
Article 1. The members of the Frankfurt so-called National 
Assembly, with the exception of those who have announced to 
the people their readiness to resign, are traitors to the people; 
Article 2. The fighters at the barricades in Frankfurt have 
rendered a meritorious service to the fatherland. 
This proclamation is to be distributed as widely as possible by 
wall-posters and through the press. 
A separate leaflet with the text of the Proclamation was also issued. In this leaflet 
the introductory phrase was printed in the following form: "The citizens assembled in 
a mass meeting, which was summoned by the Committee of Public Safety, the 
Democratic Association and the Workers' Association, in Cologne on September 
20...."—  Ed. 

=====第619页=====
Appendices 589 
The office of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung is prepared to accept 
contributions for the support of the insurgents and their families. 3 
First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 110, September 23, 1848 
Published in English for the first 
time 
In the leaflet this sentence is replaced by the following text: "The office of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung has consented to accept contributions in aid of those who 
fought on the barricades in Frankfurt and their families, and it will forward them to 
Deputy Schlöffel from Silesia for appropriate use. 
"The other democratic newspapers will undoubtedly act in a similar  way."—Ed. 

=====第620页=====
590 
ANNOUNCEMENT 
OF THE RESPONSIBLE PUBLISHERS 
OF THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
TO OUR SUBSCRIBERS 
During the state of siege imposed on Cologne, when the pen has to 
submit to the sabre, the 
NEUE  RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
has been forbidden to appear and for the time being is unable to 
fulfil its obligations to its esteemed subscribers. 
We hope, however, that the exceptional situation will continue 
only for a few days more, and then during the month of October we 
shall be able to ensure the dispatch of our newspaper to our 
subscribers in an enlarged format, with new powerful means for its 
support, the more punctually because before long the printing will 
be done by a new rapid printing-press. 
Cologne, September 28, 1848 
THE RESPONSIBLE PUBLISHERS 
Published as a leaflet Printed according to the leaflet 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第621页=====
591 
ANNOUNCEMENT 
OF THE RESPONSIBLE PUBLISHERS 
OF THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
TO OUR  SUBSCRIBERS 
According to the assurance of the office of the Fortress 
Commandant received in reply to our inquiry, the state of siege will 
end in Cologne on October 4 and accordingly the 
NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
WILL APPEAR AGAIN ON OCTOBER  5. 367 
We take this opportunity, therefore, to invite the friends of our 
paper, with references to the circular of September 28, to subscribe 
for the 4th quarter, and accordingly to notify the nearest post-office 
as soon as possible. 
New equipment will enable us in future to avoid any irregularity in 
dispatch. 
The subscription rate for three months in Cologne is 1 taler 15 
silver groschen, and in all other places in Prussia 1 taler 24 silver 
groschen 6 pfennigs. Advertisements are 1 silver groschen 6 
pfennigs per 8-point line of column width (4 columns per page) or 
the equivalent space. 
Cologne, September 30, 1848 
THE  RESPONSIBLE PUBLISHERS 
Published as a leaflet Printed according to the leaflet 
Published in English for the first 
time 
•21 34-47 

=====第622页=====
592 
INVITATION TO SUBSCRIBE 
TO THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung was quite unjustifiably suppressed for 
some days by the armed reaction during the state of siege imposed 
on the city of Cologne. After today's lifting of the state of siege, the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung will once more defend the democratic interests of 
the whole people with energy and circumspection. This is just now the more 
essential since we have all seen with what brazen ruthlessness the armed 
reaction has come out in the most  recent  period in opposition to  the freedom 
justly won by the people. Making this announcement to supporters of 
democracy, we ask them at the same time for really numerous 
subscriptions for the fourth quarter now commencing, since the 
democratic newspapers, which moreover encounter hostility from 
many sides, especially need the active co-operation of their supporters. 
For Cologne, the subscription per quarter costs 1 taler 15 silver groschen. In 
Prussia outside Cologne it is 1 taler 24 silver groschen 6 pfennigs. Outside 
Prussia the printed matter mail charges in the foreign country concerned have to 
be added. 
Advertisements: per 8-point line of column width (4 columns per page) or 
the equivalent space, cost 1 silver groschen 6 pfennigs. 
Cologne, October 3, 1848. 
H. Kor ff 
Responsible Publisher 
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
Published as a leaflet Printed according to the leaflet 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第623页=====
593 
WARRANT FOR THE ARREST 
OF HEINRICH BÜRGERS AND FRIEDRICH ENGELS 
Warrant for  arrest.  The persons described below have taken refuge 
in flight from the investigation instituted against them on account of 
crimes envisaged in Articles 87, 91 and 102 of the Penal Code. On 
the basis of the order for their appearance in court issued by the 
examining magistrate here, I therefore request all authorities and 
officials whom it may concern to be on the look-out for them and, if 
discovered, to arrest them and have them brought before me. 
Cologne, October 3, 1848 
For the Chief Public Prosecutor, 
Public Prosecutor Hecker 
Description. I. Name: J  oh. Heinr. Gerhard Bürgers; occupation: 
writer; place of birth and residence: Cologne; religion: Catholic; age: 
28 years; height: 5 feet 7 inches; hair, eyebrows and eyes: brown; 
forehead: round; nose: thin; mouth: medium; beard: brown; teeth: 
good; chin and face: oval; complexion: healthy; figure: slender; 
language: German. 
II. Name: Friedrich Engels; occupation: merchant; place of birth 
and residence: Barmen; religion: Evangelical; age: 27 years; height: 
5 feet 8 inches; hair and eyebrows: dark blond; forehead: ordinary; 
eyes:  grey; nose and mouth: well-proportioned; teeth: good; beard: 
brown; chin and face: oval; complexion: healthy; figure: slender. 
First published in the Kölnische Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 271, October 4, 1848 ,. , „ , ,. 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第624页=====
594 
BLACK LIST 
Cologne, October 13. A very well-informed friend in Brussels 
writes to us: 
"Engels and Dronke were arrested and transported across the frontier in a prison 
van only because they were imprudent enough to give their names. 3 A worker from 
Cologne, Schmitz, who is supposed to have played an active part in the freeing of 
Wächter, shared the same fate. The fact is that the Brussels police had a long list of 
persons who have fled from Cologne. Thus the Belgian police were accurately 
informed also about the alleged participation of Schmitz in the.freeing of Wächter." 
Is perhaps acting Police Superintendent Geiger informed about 
the authors and senders of this black list? 
First published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 116, October 14, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a See this volume, pp. 459-61.—Ed. 

=====第625页=====
595 
FROM THE MINUTES 
OF THE COMMITTEE MEETING 
OF THE COLOGNE WORKERS' ASSOCIATION 
ON OCTOBER 16, 1848. 
ENTRY OF MARX'S SPEECH 
IN CONNECTION WITH HIS ASSUMPTION 
OF THE PRESIDENCY 
The acting President, Citizen Röser, stated that Dr. Marx had 
acceded to the request of the deputation sent to him from the 
Association that he should put himself at the head of our 
Association, and he therefore asked him to take his seat. 
Dr. Marx: His position in Cologne was precarious. The reply he 
had received from ex-Minister Kühlwetter to his request for 
renaturalisation 3 was tantamount to a concealed order for his 
expulsion. He would, of course, lodge a protest against it in the 
National Assembly. On the other hand, he was to be tried at the 
Assize Court for an alleged press offence. Moreover, owing to the 
temporary dispersion of the editorial board of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung he was overburdened with work. Nevertheless, he was ready, 
provisionally until Dr. Gottschalk was set free, to accede to the desire 
of the workers. The Government and the bourgeoisie ought to 
realise that, despite their acts of persecution, there were always 
persons to be found who would be ready to put themselves at the 
disposal of the workers. 
Dr. Marx then spoke in some detail about the revolutionary 
activities of the German workers abroad, and in conclusion stressed 
their outstanding role in the recent Vienna revolution. He therefore 
proposed an address to the Vienna Workers' Association. (Adopted 
with acclamation.)... 
The President's proposal (concerning the rules of procedure) was 
that the first hour should be devoted to the interests of the 
Association (i.e. to its internal and external affairs), that during the 
See this volume, p.  581.—Ed. 

=====第626页=====
596 Appendices 
second hour social and political questions should be discussed, and 
that the meeting should begin at 8.30. (Adopted.)... 
First published in the Zeitung des Arbeiter- Printed according to the newspaper 
Vereines zu Köln No. 40, October 22, 1848 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第627页=====
597 
FROM THE MINUTES 
OF THE GENERAL MEETING 
OF THE COLOGNE WORKERS' ASSOCIATION 
ON OCTOBER 22, 1848 
The President, Dr. Marx, opened the meeting with some remarks 
about the system of indirect election. 
Citizen Röser: We have received a request to send a delegate to the 
Democratic Congress to be held in Berlin on the 26th of this month. 3 
In this connection, however, the question arises whether the 
Workers' Association should send someone separately or together 
with the Democratic Association. At the last committee meeting of 
your Association decision was taken in favour of the former 
alternative, namely to act independently, but it remains for the 
general meeting to give its approval and in connection with such 
acceptance it is essential that the question of cost should be taken into 
account. Therefore I move: 
That we elect a delegate to represent us alone, and that we levy a 
voluntary contribution to cover the expenses. 
The motion was adopted and the contributions fixed at a 
minimum of one silver groschen.... 
* Citizen Beust was proposed and elected delegate to the Congress 
in Berlin. 
The President, Dr. Marx, and the Vice-President, Citizen Röser, 
were confirmed in their official positions by the meeting.... 
First published in the newspaper Freiheit, 
Brüderlichkeit, Arbeit No. 2, October 29, 
1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a See this volume, pp. 490-92.— Ed. 

=====第628页=====
598 
FROM THE MINUTES 
OF THE COMMITTEE MEETING 
OF THE COLOGNE WORKERS' ASSOCIATION 
ON NOVEMBER 6, 1848. 
ENTRY RELATING TO MARX'S REPORT 
ON THE EVENTS IN VIENNA 
... The President, Dr. Marx, gave a short report on the events in 
Vienna and stressed especially that it was only as a result of the 
manifold betrayal on the part of the bourgeoisie there that it became 
possible for Windischgrätz to capture the city.... 
First published in the newspaper Freiheit, Printed according to the newspaper 
Brüderlichkeit, ArbeitNo. 6, November 12, 
1848 Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第629页=====
NOTES 
AND 
INDEXES 

=====第630页=====

=====第631页=====
601 
NOTES 
"Demands of the Communist Party in Germany" were written by Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels in Paris between March 21 (when Engels arrived in Paris from 
Brussels) and March 24, 1848. This document was discussed by members of the 
Central Authority, who approved and signed it as the political programme of the 
Communist League in the revolution that broke out in Germany. In March it was 
printed as a leaflet, for distribution among revolutionary German emigrant 
workers who were about to return home. Austrian and German diplomats in Paris 
informed their respective governments about this as early as March 27, 28 and 29. 
(The Austrian Ambassador enclosed in his letter a copy of the leaflet which he 
dated "March 25".) The leaflet soon reached members of the Communist League 
in other countries, in particular, German emigrant workers in London. 
Early in April, the "Demands of the Communist Party in Germany" were 
published in such German democratic papers as Berliner Zeitungs-Halle (special 
supplement to No. 82, April 5, 1848), Düsseldorfer Zeitung (No. 96, April 5, 1848), 
Mannheimer Abendzeitung (No. 96, April 6, 1848), Trier'sche Zeitung  (No.  97, April 
6, 1848, supplement), Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung (No. 100, April 9, 1848, 
supplement), and Zeitung für das deutsche Volk (No. 21, April 9, 1848). 
Marx and Engels, who left for Germany round about April 6 and some time 
later settled in Cologne, did their best along with their followers to popularise this 
programme document during the revolution. In 1848 and 1849 it was repeatedly 
published in the periodical press and in leaflet form'. Not later than September 10, 
1848,  the "Demands" were printed in Cologne as a leaflet for circulation by the 
Cologne Workers' Association both in the town itself and in a number of districts 
of Rhenish Prussia. In addition to minor stylistic changes, point 10 in the text of 
the leaflet was worded differently from that published in March-April 1848. At 
the Second Democratic Congress held in Berlin in October 1848, Friedrich Beust, 
delegate from the Cologne Workers' Association, spoke, on behalf of the social 
question commission, in favour of adopting a programme of action closely 
following the "Demands". In November and December 1848, various points of 
the "Demands" were discussed at meetings of the Cologne Workers' Association. 
Many editions of the "Demands" published during the revolution and after its 
defeat have survived to this day in their original form, some of them as copies kept 
in the police archives. 

=====第632页=====
602 Notes 
At the end of 1848 or the beginning of 184-9 an abridged version of the 
"Demands" was published in pamphlet form by Weiler Publishers in Leipzig. The 
slogan at the beginning of the document, the second paragraph of point 9 and the 
last sentence of point 10 were omitted, and the words "The Committee" were not 
included among the signatories. 
In 1853, an abridged version of the "Demands" was printed, together with 
other documents of the Communist League, in the first part of the book Die 
Communisten-V er schworungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, published in Berlin for 
purposes of information by Wermuth and Stieber, two police officials, who staged 
a trial against the Communists in Cologne in 1852. 
Later Engels reproduced the main points of the "Demands" in his essay On the 
History of the Communist League, published in November 1885 in the newspaper 
Sozialdemokrat, and as an introduction to the pamphlet: K. Marx, Enthüllungen über 
den Kommunisten Prozess zu Köln, Hottingen-Zürich, 1885. 
English translations of the "Demands of the Communist Party in Germany" 
appeared in the collections: The Communist Manifesto of Karl Marx and Friedrich 
Engels with an introduction and explanatory notes by D. Ryazanoff, Martin 
Lawrence, London (1930); K. Marx, Selected Works, Vol. II, ed. V. Adoratsky, 
Moscow-Leningrad, Co-operative Publishing Society of Foreign Workers in the 
USSR (1936); ibid., New York (1936); Birth of  the Communist Manifesto, edited and 
annotated, with an Introduction by D. J. Struik, International Publishers, New 
York, 1971, and in other publications. p. 3 
The letter to the editor of the Populaire and the Declaration are in Engels' 
handwriting. Both documents were drawn up at the end of March 1848 after 
Engels' arrival in Paris and reflect the struggle which the leaders of the 
Communist League were waging against those German petty-bourgeois emigrant 
leaders in Paris, Herwegh and Bornstedt among others, who intended to speed up 
revolution in Germany by moving in a volunteer legion organised by using private 
donations and subsidies from the Provisional Government of the French Republic. 
Appeals to enlist were accompanied by demagogic appeals to the patriotic and 
revolutionary sentiments of German emigrants. Marx, Engels and other members 
of the Central Authority of the Communist League spoke out against the 
adventurist nature of such plans to "export revolution" and advised German 
workers instead to return to their home country individually in order to take part 
in the revolutionary events that were brewing there. "We opposed this playing 
with revolution in the most decisive fashion," Engels later wrote in his work On the 
History of  the Communist League. "To carry out an invasion, which was to import the 
revolution forcibly from outside, into the midst of the ferment then going on in 
Germany, meant to undermine the revolution in Germany  itself,  to strengthen the 
governments and to deliver the legionaries ... defenceless into the hands of the 
German troops." 
The letter and the Declaration were first published in English in the journal 
Science and Society, 1940, Vol. IV, No. 2. The first publication in the language of 
the original appeared in the collection Der Bund der Kommunisten. Dokumente und 
Materialien, Bd. I, 1836-1849, Berlin, 1970. p. 8 
The Cerman Democratic Society (below it is called the Society of German 
Democrats) was formed in Paris after the February revolution of 1848. The society 
was headed by petty-bourgeois democrats, Herwegh, Bornstedt (the latter 
expelled from the Communist League) and others, who campaigned to raise a 
volunteer legion of German emigrants with the intention of marching into 

=====第633页=====
Notes 603 
Germany. In this way they hoped to carry out a revolution in Germany and 
establish a republic there. Late in April 1848 the volunteer legion moved to Baden 
where it was dispersed by government troops. p. 8 
The German Workers' Club was founded in Paris on March 8 and 9, 1848, on the 
initiative of Communist League leaders. The club's aim was to unite German 
emigrant workers in Paris, to explain to them the tactics of the proletariat in a 
bourgeois-democratic revolution, and also to counter the attempts of the 
bourgeois and petty-bourgeois democrats to stir up the German workers by 
nationalist propaganda and enlist them into the adventurist invasion of Germany 
by volunteer legions. The club successfully arranged the return of German 
workers one by one to their home country to take part in the revolutionary 
struggle there. p. 9 
On March 29, 1848, the supplement to No. 89 of the Trier'sche Zeitung carried a 
report from Paris, dated March 24, in which the activity of the German 
Democratic Society (see Note 3) was criticised. This article was apparendy written 
by one of Marx's followers in the Communist League, probably with Marx's help. 
The author vehemendy denounced the idea of an armed invasion of Germany by 
the volunteer legion and stated that the German Workers' Club associated with the 
Communist League had nothing to do with this venture. 
Deeply hurt by this article, the leaders of the German Democratic Society sent 
Marx a note signed by Bornstedt, Löwenfels, Bernstein, Volk and Mayer in which 
they demanded the author's name. The reply is published here from a copy made 
by Engels. After Marx had rejected their demand, one of the society's leaders, 
Herwegh, wrote a memorandum for the German periodicals (on April 3, 1848), in 
which he justified the idea of a volunteer legion and venomously attacked 
communists. p. 10 
Marx's letter was published in L'Alba on June 29, 1848, with the following 
introductory note by the editors: "We publish the following letter received from 
Cologne to show what feelings the noble-minded Germans entertain towards Italy; 
they ardendy wish to establish fraternal relations between the Italian and German 
peoples, whom European despots have tried to set against each other." 
The reply by the editors of L'Alba, signed by L. Alinari, is quoted in Engels' 
article "Germany's Foreign Policy" (see this volume, p. 167). 
An English translation of this letter was published in the magazine Labour 
Monthly No. 5, 1948, and in the collection: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, 
Selected  Correspondence  (Moscow, 1955, London, 1956). p. 11 
This statement of the editorial board was printed in the first number of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, which appeared in the evening of May 31, but was dated June 
1, 1848. (In English the statement was published in the magazine Labour Monthly 
No. 5, 1948, and in the collection: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Articles from 
the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972.) 
Marx and Engels began to plan the publication of a German revolutionary 
paper as far back as March 1848 when they were still living in Paris. On March 26 
and 28, 1848, Engels wrote about this plan to his brother-in-law Emil Blank. 
The publication of a proletarian newspaper was regarded by Marx and Engels 
as an important step towards a mass party of the German proletariat, which, they 
believed, should be founded on the basis of the Communist League. On their 
arrival in Germany, they realised that the conditions for creating such a party were 
not yet ripe: the German workers were disunited; their immaturity and lack of 

=====第634页=====
604 Notes 
organisation made them easy prey to narrow craft and petty-bourgeois influences 
and particularist moods, while the Communist League, for which there was no 
sense in continuing secret activities during the revolution, was too weak and small 
in number to be instrumental in consolidating the workers. Marx and Engels 
realised this after studying the reports submitted by the Central Authority 
emissaries on the situation in the League's local communities. In this context, the 
role of a newspaper in influencing the masses, in their ideological and 
political education and consolidation, seemed peculiarly important. The paper 
could be used for political guidance of the activities of Communist League 
members, who were instructed by Marx and Engels to avail themselves of every 
legal opportunity and join the emerging workers' associations and democratic 
societies. 
Marx and Engels decided to publish the paper in Cologne, the capital of the 
Rhine Province, one of the most economically and politically advanced regions in 
Germany. The new paper was given the name of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung to 
emphasise that it was to continue the revolutionary-democratic traditions of the 
Rheinische Zeitung, which Marx had edited in 1842 and 1843. Taking account of 
the specific circumstances, with the absence of an independent mass workers' 
party in Germany, Marx, Engels and their followers entered the political scene as a 
Left, actually proletarian, wing of the democratic movement. This determined the 
stand of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, which began to appear under the subtitle 
"The Organ of Democracy". 
When they started the paper, Marx and Engels had to cope with serious 
financial difficulties as well as with thé opposition from sectarian elements in the 
Communist League (Hess, Anneke and others), who intended to publish a purely 
local sheet under a similar title. In April and May 1848, Marx and Engels worked 
hard selling shares in the paper, finding contributors and establishing regular 
contacts with democratic periodicals in other countries. The editorial committee 
was known for its unanimity of views, well-co-ordinated work and strict division of 
functions. 
As a rule, Marx and Engels wrote the editorials formulating the paper's stand on 
the most important questions of the revolution. These were usually marked 
"*Köln" and "**Köln". Sometimes editorial articles marked with one asterisk 
were printed in other sections under the heading of news from Italy, France, 
England, Hungary and other countries. In the early months of the paper's 
existence Marx was fully occupied with administrative and organisational matters 
and most of the leading articles were written by Engels. In addition to this, Engels 
also contributed critical reviews of debates in the Berlin and Frankfurt National 
Assemblies, articles on the national liberation movements in Bohemia, Posen and 
Italy, and on the war in Schleswig-Holstein, revolutionary developments in 
Hungary and political life in Switzerland. Wilhelm Wolff contributed articles on 
the agrarian question, on the condition of the peasants and their movement, 
particularly in Silesia. He was also responsible for the current events section. 
Georg Weerth wrote feuilletons in verse and prose. Ernst Dronke was for some 
time the Neue Rheinische Zeitung correspondent in Frankfurt am Main and wrote 
several articles on Poland. Ferdinand Wolff was for a long time one of the paper's 
correspondents in Paris. The only article which Heinrich Bürgers wrote for the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung was almost entirely rewritten by Marx. Ferdinand 
Freiligrath, who became one of the paper's editors in October 1848, published his 
own verses. 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung was a daily paper (from September 1848 it 
appeared every day except Monday). Its editors often published a second edition 

=====第635页=====
Notes 605 
on one day in order to supply their readers with prompt information on all the 
most significant revolutionary developments in Germany and Europe; supple­
ments were printed when there was too much material to be squeezed into the 
four pages of the number, while special supplements and special editions printed 
in the form of "leaflets carried the latest and most important news. 
The consistent revolutionary tendency of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, its militant 
internationalism and political accusations against the Government displeased its 
bourgeois shareholders in the very first months of the paper's existence; its editors 
were persecuted by the Government and attacked in the feudal-monarchist and 
liberal-bourgeois press. Following the appearance of the paper's first number, 
which carried Engels' article "The Assembly at Frankfurt" (see this volume, 
pp. 16-19), a large number of the shareholders withdrew their financial support, 
and articles in defence of the June uprising of the Paris proletariat frightened 
away most of the rest. The editors now had to rely on German and Polish 
revolutionary circles for funds. 
To make Marx's stay in the Rhine Province more difficult, the Cologne 
authorities, on instructions from Berlin, refused to reinstate him with the rights of 
Prussian citizenship (which Marx had renounced in 1845); on several occasions he 
and other editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung were summoned to court. On 
September 26, 1848, when a state of siege was introduced in Cologne, several 
democratic newspapers, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung among them, were sus­
pended. To avoid arrest, Engels, Dronke and Ferdinand Wolff had to leave 
Germany for a time. Wilhelm Wolff stayed in Cologne but for several months lived 
illegally. When the state of siege was lifted, the paper resumed publication on 
October 12, thanks to the great efforts of Marx who sank all his ready money into 
the paper. Until January 1849, the whole burden of the work, including editorial 
articles, lay on Marx's shoulders since Engels had to stay out of Germany (in 
France and Switzerland). 
Persecution of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung editors by the legal authorities and 
the police was intensified, particularly after the counter-revolutionary coup in 
Prussia in November-December 1848. 
In May 1849, when the counter-revolution went into the offensive all over 
Germany, the Prussian Government issued an order for Marx's expulsion from 
Prussia on the grounds that he had not been granted Prussian citizenship. Marx's 
expulsion and repressions against other editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
caused publication of the paper to be ceased. Its last issue (No. 301), printed in red 
ink, came out on May 19, 1849. In their farewell address to the workers, the 
editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung said that "their last word will everywhere 
and always be: emancipation of the working class!" p. 15 
The September Laws, promulgated by the French Government in September 1835, 
restricted the rights of jury courts and introduced severe measures against the 
press.  They provided for increased money deposits (caution money) for periodical 
publications and introduced imprisonment and large fines for publication of 
attacks on private property and the existing political system. p. 15 
The opening session of the all-German National Assembly, the purpose of which 
was to unite the country and draft a Constitution, took place on May 18, 1848, in 
Frankfurt am Main at St. Paul's Church. Among the deputies elected in various 
German states late in April and early in May, there were 122 government officials, 
95 judges, 81 lawyers, 103 teachers, 17 manufacturers and wholesale dealers, 15 
physicians and 40 landowners. The liberal deputies, who were in the majority, 

=====第636页=====
606 Notes 
turned the Assembly into a mere debating club, incapable of taking any resolute 
decisions. 
In writing this and the following articles concerning the debates in the 
Frankfurt National Assembly, Marx and Engels made use of the stenographic 
reports which later appeared as a separate publication,  Stenographischer  Bericht über 
die Verhandlungen der  deutschen  constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am 
Main,  Frankfurt am Main and Leipzig, 1848-1849. 
Engels' article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. p. 16 
10 At the sitting of the Frankfurt National Assembly on May 19, 1848, the liberal 
Deputy Raveaux proposed that Prussian deputies elected to both the Berlin and 
Frankfurt Assemblies should have the right to be members of both. The Berlin 
Assembly, i. e. the Prussian National Assembly, was convened on May 22, 1848, to 
draft a Constitution "by agreement with the Crown". The Assembly was elected 
under the electoral law of April 8, 1848, by universal suffrage and an indirect 
(two-stage) voting system. Most of the deputies belonged to the bourgeoisie or 
liberal bureaucracy. p. 17 
The limited understanding of a loyal subject—an expression used by the Prussian 
Minister of the Interior von Rochow. In his letter of January 15, 1838, addressed 
to the citizens of Elbin who expressed their dissatisfaction at the expulsion of seven 
oppositional professors from the Hanover Diet, Rochow wrote: "Loyal subjects 
are expected to exhibit due obedience to their king and sovereign, but their 
limited understanding should keep them from interfering in affairs of heads of 
state."  p. 18 
12 The Preparliament, which met in Frankfurt am Main from March 31 to April 4, 
1848,  consisted of representatives from the German states, most of its delegates 
being constitutional monarchists. The Preparliament passed a resolution to 
convoke an all-German National Assembly and produced a draft of the 
"Fundamental Rights and Demands of the German People". Although this 
document proclaimed certain rights and liberties, including the right of 
all-German citizenship for the residents of any German state, it did not touch the 
basis of the semi-feudal absolutist system prevalent in Germany at the time. 
p. 18 
The seventeen "trusted men" who represented the German governments were 
summoned after the March revolution in Germany by the Federal Diet, the central 
body of the German Confederation (which was founded in 1815 by the Congress 
of Vienna). The "trusted men", among them Dahlmann, von Schmerling, Uhland 
and Bassermann, met in Frankfurt am Main from March 30 to May 8, 1848, and 
drafted an all-German Imperial Constitution based on constitutional-monarchical 
principles. 
The Federal Diet consisted of representatives of the German states. Though it 
had no real power, it was nevertheless a vehicle of feudal and monarchical 
reaction. After the March revolution of 1848, reactionary circles in the German 
states tried to revive the Federal Diet and use it to undermine the principle of 
popular sovereignty and prevent the democratic unification of Germany, p. 18 
14 Auerswald's decree, dated May 22, 1848, and published on May 23, 1848, in 
the Preussische Staats-Anzeiger No. 21, p. 215, included Raveaux's proposal (see 
Note 10). p. 19 

=====第637页=====
Notes 607 
The article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx, On 
Revolution, ed. by S. K. Padover, New York, 1971 ("The Karl Marx Library" 
series),  Vol. 1. p. 20 
16 
18 
19 
20 
22 
23 On May 22, 1815, Frederick William III who, during the war with Napoleonic 
France, had to respond to the demand for a Constitution, issued a decree in which 
he promised "popular representation", that is, to set up Provincial Assemblies of 
the Estates in Prussia and to convoke an all-Prussia representative body. All that 
ever resulted from these promises, however, was the law of June 5, 1823, which 
created Provincial Assemblies of the Estates with limited, advisory functions. 
The German Confederation—see Note 13. p. 20 
Lazzaroni—a contemptuous nickname for declassed proletarians, primarily in the 
Kingdom of Naples. They were repeatedly used by the absolutist Government in 
the struggle against liberal and democratic movements. p. 25 
The reference is to the "cordial agreement" (entente  cordiale)  between France and 
England in the early period of the July monarchy (1830-35). The "agreement", 
however, proved unstable and was soon followed by intensified contradictions. 
p. 25 
Sanfedists (from santa jede—holy faith) — supporters of the papacy who joined 
terrorist gangs to fight against the Italian national liberation movement, p. 25 
On August 10, 1792, the monarchy in France was overthrown by a popular 
uprising in Paris. The sculpture of a dying lion by Thorwaldsen was installed in 
Lucerne some time later, to commemorate the Swiss guards who were killed 
defending the royal palace. 
On July 29, 1830, the Bourbons were overthrown in France. 
In July 1820, the Carbonari, aristocratic and bourgeois revolutionaries, rose in 
revolt against the absolutist regime in the Kingdom of Naples and succeeded in 
having a moderate liberal Constitution introduced. Intervention by the powers of 
the Holy Alliance, however, led to the restoration of the absolutist regime in 
Naples. 
On all these occasions Swiss mercenaries were used by the counter-revolutionary 
forces. p. 26 
The reference is to treaties concluded between the middle of the fifteenth and the 
middle of the nineteenth centuries between Swiss cantons and European states for 
the supply of Swiss mercenaries. p. 26 
An article dealing with this subject was originally written by Heinrich Bürgers, but 
Marx editorially deleted half of it and rewrote the rest (see Marx's letter to 
Ferdinand Lassalle of September 15, 1860). 
An English translation of this article was first published in the collections: Karl 
Marx and Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972, and Karl Marx, The Revolutions of 1848. 
Political Writings, Vol. 1, London, Penguin Books, 1973. p. 27 
In 1848-49 the advocates of a bourgeois constitutional system in Germany called 
the republican democrats "agitators" (Wühler) and these in turn called their 
opponents "wailers" (Heuler). p. 28 

=====第638页=====
608 Notes 
On March 29, 1848, the Camphausen Government in which Hansemann held the 
post of the Minister of Finance replaced the Government of Count Arhim-
Boitzenburg, which had been formed on March 19, 1848, when revolution broke 
out in Prussia. 
In writing this and other articles concerning the Prussian National Assembly, 
the authors made use of the stenographic reports, which later came out as a 
separate edition entitled Verhandlungen der constituirenden Versammlung für 
Preussen 1848, Berlin, 1848. 
The article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx, The 
Revolutions of 1848. Political Writings, Vol. 1, London, Penguin Books, 1973. 
p. 30 
The United Diet— an assembly of representatives from the eight Provincial Diets 
of Prussia, similarly based on the estate principle. The United Diet sanctioned new 
taxes and loans, discussed new Bills and had the right to petition the King. 
The First United Diet, which opened on April 11, 1847, was dissolved in June, 
following its refusal to grant a new loan. The Second United Diet met on April 2, 
1848,  when the Camphausen Ministry was in office. It passed a law on the 
elections to a Prussian National Assembly and sanctioned the loan. The United 
Diet session was closed on April 10, 1848. p. 32 
See Note 10. p. 33 
According to tradition, around 390 B. C. the Gauls captured Rome with the 
exception of the Capitol, whose defenders were warned of the approaching enemy 
by the cackling of the geese from the Temple of Juno. p. 33 
In this article Engels describes one of the episodes in the war between Germany 
and Denmark over Schleswig and Holstein. 
By the decision of the Congress of Vienna (1815) the duchies of Schleswig and 
Holstein were incorporated into the Kingdom of Denmark in spite of the fact that 
Germans constituted the majority of the population in Holstein and in Southern 
Schleswig. Under the impact of the March revolution, the national liberation 
movement of the German population grew in strength and assumed a radical and 
democratic nature, becoming part of the struggle for the unification of Germany. 
Volunteers from all over the country rushed to the aid of the local population 
when it rose up against Danish rule arms in hand. Prussia, Hanover and other 
states of the German Confederation sent to the duchies federal troops, under the 
command of the Prussian General Wrangel, who entered Jutland on May 2. The 
Prussian Government, however, declined to take a firm stand on the Schleswig-
Holstein issue, for it feared a popular outbreak and an intensification of the 
revolution. The liberal majority of the Frankfurt National Assembly also 
cherished secret hopes of an agreement with the Danish ruling circles, at the 
expense of national unity. Things were complicated by the intervention of Britain, 
Sweden and Russia in favour of Denmark, and their demand that federal troops 
be withdrawn from the duchies. (In this connection, Engels alludes to the Note of 
May 8, 1848, which Chancellor Nesselrode handed in to the Berlin Cabinet and in 
which this demand was accompanied by the threat of a break between Russia and 
Prussia.) 
All these circumstances had a negative effect on the military operations against 
Denmark undertaken by the German federal troops and volunteer detachments. 

=====第639页=====
Notes 609 
The report on the defeat of the German federal troops appeared on May 30, 
1848,  in No. 11179 of the Börsen-Halle, and was then reprinted in most of the 
German papers. In English it appeared on June 3 in The Times No. 19880. 
29 P- M 
The reference is to the presidents of the Provincial Diets of the Estates, which were 
formed in 1823 and consisted of heads of princely families, representatives of the 
nobility (the latter enjoying the greatest influence), and representatives of towns 
and rural communities. The competence of the Diets was limited to local economic 
and administrative problems. They could also express opinions on government 
Bills submitted for discussion. p. 36 
30 See Note 25. p. 36 
31 The article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx, The 
Revolutions of 1848. Political Writings, Vol. 1, London, Penguin Books, 1973. 
p. 39 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 An allusion to the speech which the French lawyer André Dupin addressed to the 
Duke of Orléans (representative of the younger branch of the Bourbons), made 
King of the French by the July revolution of 1830. In his speech, Dupin 
emphasised that the Duke of Orléans was elected "not  because  he was a Bourbon 
but although he was a Bourbon". This was an answer to the question whether the 
King should adopt the name of Philippe VII or Louis Philippe. p. 40 
Concerning the German-Danish war over Schleswig-Holstein see Note 28. 
p. 42 
The army of the anti-French coalition, in which Prussian forces participated, 
defeated Napoleon's army in the vicinity of Berlin at the battles of Grossbeeren 
(August 23, 1813) and Dennewitz (September 6, 1813). p. 42 
Excerpts from an announcement published in the supplement to the Berliner 
Zeitungs-Halle No. 128, June 4, 1848, under the title "Berliner Tagesgeschichte" 
[Sicherheits-Ausschutz], are quoted in this article with some digressions, p. 46 
In February 1846, the Prussian police in Posen tracked down the leaders of 
preparations for a national liberation uprising in Poland and carried out wholesale 
arrests. As a result, a general uprising aimed at restoring Poland's independence 
was staved off and only sporadic outbursts occurred (among them an unsuccessful 
attempt bv a group of Polish revolutionaries to capture the Posen fortress on 
March 3). Only in the Republic of Cracow, which since the Congress of Vienna had 
been under the joint control of Austria, Russia and Prussia, did the insurgents 
gain power on February 22 and create a National Government of the Polish 
Republic, which issued a manifesto abrogating all feudal obligations. The Cracow 
uprising was suppressed in early March 1846 and, in November, Austria, Prussia 
and Russia signed a treaty incorporating the free city of Cracow into the Austrian 
Empire. p. 47 
In late April and early May 1848, Berlin was the scene of a compositors' strike for 
higher wages and shorter working hours. The workers disregarded the threat of 
deportation, and succeeded in forcing their employers to abandon an attempt to 
make them sign, as a condition of agreement, a statement in which the workers 
would acknowledge their "errors" and repent. p. 47 

=====第640页=====
610 Notes 
38 The article was first published in English in the collections: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972, and Karl Marx, The Revolutions of 1848. Political 
Writings, Vol. 1, London, Penguin Books, 1973. Excerpts from it appeared earlier 
in the collection: Karl Marx, On Revolution, ed. by S. K. Padover, New York, 1971, 
under the title "A United German State", which was supplied by the editors. 
p. 48 
39 The*Left wing of the Frankfurt National Assembly consisted of two factions: the 
Left (Robert Blum, Karl Vogt and others), and the extreme Left known as the 
radical-democratic party (Arnold Rüge, Friedrich Wilhelm Schlöffel, Franz Zitz 
and others). Though the sympathies of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung were with the 
extreme Left wing rather than with more moderate groups of democrats, it 
criticised the former for their vacillations and halfway stand on the basic problems 
of the German revolution — abolition of feudal survivals and unification of the 
country. . p. 48 
42 See Note 13. p. 49 
The Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation was founded in 962 and lasted till 
1806.  At different times, it included the German, Italian, Austrian, Hungarian 
and Bohemian lands, Switzerland and the Netherlands, forming a motley 
conglomeration of feudal kingdoms and principalities, church lands and free cities 
with different political structures, legal standards and customs. p. 50 
The agreement debates (Vereinbarungsdebatten) was the name given by Marx and 
Engels to the debates in the Prussian National Assembly, which met in Berlin in 
May 1848 to draft a Constitution "by agreement with the Crown" according to the 
formula proposed by the Hansemann-Camphausen Government. Marx and 
Engels labelled the Berlin Assembly, which adopted this formula and thereby 
rejected the principle of popular sovereignty, the "Agreement Assembly" and its 
deputies "the agreers". p. 53 
The reference is to the treaty signed by Russia and Prussia on March 29, 1830, on 
the extradition of deserters, prisoners of war and criminals. A secret declaration 
adopted simultaneously with the agreement made persons guilty of political 
offences also subject to extradition. The governments of both countries used this 
convention in their struggle against the Polish national liberation movement. 
p. 53 
Abbreviation for Preussische Seehandlungsgesellschaft (Prussian Sea Trade Society). 
This trade credit society, founded in 1772, enjoyed a number of important state 
privileges. It offered large credits to the Government and actually played the part 
of banker and broker. In 1904 it was made the Prussian State Bank. p. 54 
45 According to the Verordnung wegen der künftigen Behandlung des gesammten 
Staatsschulden-Wesens (Decree on the Future Handling of All Government Debts), 
issued in Prussia on January 17, 1820, new loans and government debts had tobe 
guaranteed by the forthcoming Prussian Assembly of the Estates, as well as by the 
Government. p. 55 
After the March revolution of 1848, an insurrection of the Poles broke out in the 
Duchy of Posen for liberation from the Prussian yoke. The Polish peasants and 
artisans took an active part in this together with members of the lesser nobility. 

=====第641页=====
Notes 611 
The Prussian Government was forced to promise that a committee would be set up 
to carry through the reorganisation of Posen (creation of a Polish army, 
appointment of Poles to administrative and other posts, recognition of Polish as an 
official language etc.). Similar promises were given in the Convention of April 11, 
1848,  signed by the Posen Committee and the Prussian Commissioner. On April 
14, 1848, however, the King of Prussia ordered that the Duchy of Posen be 
divided into an eastern Polish part and a western "German" part, which was not to 
be "reorganised". During the months following the suppression of the Poles by 
Prussian troops that broke the Convention, the demarcation line was pushed 
further and further east and the promised "reorganisation" was never carried 
out. p. 57 
In the table of contents of this issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, the article is 
listed under the title "A New Partition of Poland", but the text itself begins with 
the heading "The Seventh Partition of Poland". This refers to the decree issued 
on June 4, 1848, by General Pfuel, the commander of Prussian troops in Posen, 
which further extended the territory of the western "German" part of the duchy 
at the expense of its eastern "Polish" part, which was to be "reorganised" as 
promised by the Government, but never was (see Note 46). This was the fourth 
time that the line of demarcation was pushed further east to the detriment of the 
Polish population (the three previous occasions were April 14, April 22 and May 
2, 1848). Ironically calling this the "seventh partition of Poland", Engels shows it 
to be a continuation of the policy of appropriation of Polish lands by the European 
powers. This found reflection in the three partitions of Poland (by Prussia, Austria 
and Russia) at the end of the eighteenth century (1772, 1793, 1794-95); in the 
transfer to Russia (by Napoleon, under the Peace Treaty of Tilsit concluded in 
1807) of a part of Polish territory in exchange for recognition of the Duchy of 
Warsaw, created by Napoleon as a vassal state; in the decision of the Congress of 
Vienna (1815), which abolished the Duchy of Warsaw and once again sanctioned 
the annexation of the Polish lands by Prussia, Russia and Austria, and also in 
Austria's annexation of the free city of Cracow in 1846. p. 64 
The reference is to the return of the Prince of Prussia to Berlin (on June 4, 1848) 
from England, where he had fled during the March revolution. p. 67 
Following the unsuccessful revolutionary action of the Paris workers on May 15, 
1848,  the Constituent Assembly adopted a decree on the reorganisation of 
national workshops, and steps were taken to abolish them altogether; a law was 
passed banning gatherings in the streets, a number of democratic clubs were 
closed and other police measures taken. p. 68 
Repealers—supporters of the repeal of the Anglo-Irish Union of 1801, which 
abrogated the autonomy of the Irish Parliament. Ever since the 1820s, the 
demand for the repeal of the Union became a mass issue in Ireland. In 1840, a 
Repeal Association was founded whose leader, Daniel O'Connell, proposed a 
compromise with the English ruling circles. In January 1847 its radical elements 
broke away from the Association and formed an Irish Confederation; representa­
tives of its Left revolutionary wing stood at the head of the national liberation 
movement and in 1848 were subjected to severe repression. p. 68 
The Committee of Fifty was elected by the Preparliament (see Note 12) in April 1848, 
mainly from among the representatives of its constitutional-monarchist majority, 
with moderate republicans receiving only 12 seats. The Committee rejected the 

=====第642页=====
612 Notes 
52 proposal of the Federal Diet (see Note 13) to create a directory of three men to 
constitute a provisional Central Authority of the German Confederation. 
At the beginning of June 1848, a similar proposal was submitted to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly. As a result of the debate, the Assembly decided on 
June 28 to form a provisional Central Authority composed of an Imperial Regent 
and an Imperial Ministry. p. 68 
The "property of the entire nation" — the words inscribed by armed workers in 
Berlin on the walls of the palace of the Prince of Prussia, who had fled to England 
during the March revolution of 1848. p. 68 
The reference is to the republican insurrection in Baden, led by the petty-
bourgeois democrats Friedrich Hecker and Gustav Struve, which was crushed in 
April 1848. The main regions of the insurrection were the Lake district (Seekreis) 
and the Black Forest (Schwarzwald). p. 68 
See Note 23. p. 70 
On June 9, 1848, the Frankfurt National Assembly rejected a Bill bringing the 
approval of any future peace treaty with Denmark within the Assembly's 
jurisdiction. The Assembly thus avoided taking any responsibility for the final 
settlement of the Schleswig-Holstein question and allowed the Federal Diet 
complete freedom of action on this issue. p. 72 
Part of this article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. p. 73 
The decree on the press, by Frederick William IV, published on March 18, 1848, 
cancelled the censorship of periodicals and introduced caution money (from 500 
to 2,000 talers) instead as a guarantee against the publication of anti-government 
articles; this system existed in Prussia until the adoption of thé 1874 press law. 
p. 73 
This was how the conflict between the King and the United Diet (see Note 25) in 
1847 was described in government circles. p. 73 
On March 24, 1848, soldiers and non-commissioned officers killed on the night of 
March 18 during the popular insurrection were buried at the Invaliden Cemetery 
in Berlin. In their public announcements the authorities deliberately underesti­
mated the number of casualties in order to disguise the extent of the fighting and 
to cover up the fact that the troops had been beaten by the people. p. 74 55 
56 
60 
62 Among the Left deputies of the Prussian National Assembly were Johann Jacoby, 
Georg Jung, Karl d'Ester and Benedikt Waldeck. p. 75 
On June 3, 1848, the Berlin National Assembly debated a motion that members of 
the Assembly should join the march, organised by students, to the grave of the 
revolutionary fighters who had fallen in March; the motion was rejected by a 
majority vote. p. 76 
On May 15 and 26, 1848, there was a popular armed uprising in Vienna to defend 
the gains achieved during the March revolution. This forced the Austrian 

=====第643页=====
Notes 613 
67 
68 
69 Emperor Ferdinand I to proclaim the manifestos of May 16 and June 3, in which 
he made a number of new concessions; among other things, he gave the status of 
Constituent Assembly to the Imperial Diet, which was about to be convened. 
p. 79 
Wends—the German name for the Labe Slavs who, in the early Middle Ages, 
occupied the territory between the Elbe (Labe) and the Oder (Odra). In the 
middle of the eleventh century, while fighting against German and Danish 
expansion, they formed an early feudal confederation, which existed till the first 
third of the twelfth century; it also comprised a group of West-Slavonian tribes 
living on the Baltic coast (future Pomerania), who were ethnically close to the 
Wends. p. 82 
In this article the outcome of the Cologne by-election of June 14, 1848, is 
compared with that of the general election that had taken place on May 10, 1848. 
Both were elections of deputies to the Frankfurt National Assembly. 
The article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx, The 
Revolutions of 1848. Political Writings, Vol. 1, London, Penguin Books, 1973. 
p. 87 
Citizens'  associations  (Bürgervereine), consisting of moderate liberal elements, arose 
in Prussia after the March revolution. Their aim was to preserve "law and order" 
within the framework of a constitutional monarchy, and to combat "anarchy", i. e. 
the revolutionary-democratic movement. p. 87 
The Democratic Society in Cologne, which met in Franz Stollwerk's Café, was 
founded in April 1848. Among its members were small proprietors, workers and 
artisans. Marx and Engels took an active part in the management of the Society. At 
the meetings, Marx, Engels and other members of the editorial staff of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung managed to get certain resolutions adopted which unmasked 
the anti-revolutionary policy of the Prussian Government and condemned the 
irresolute conduct of the Berlin and Frankfurt Assemblies. A year later, when 
Marx and his followers took practical steps to create an independent mass party of 
the proletariat, they decided to sever all organisational links with petty-bourgeois 
democrats, and withdrew from the Democratic Society. Nevertheless they 
continued to give support to the revolutionary actions of democratic forces in 
Germany. p. 87 
Enraged by the disavowal of the March revolution by the Prussian National 
Assembly (see this volume, pp. 73-86), workers and artisans from Berlin stormed 
the arsenal on June 14, 1848, in "order to arm the people in readiness to defend the 
gains of the revolution. This was, however, a spontaneous and unorganised action 
and military reinforcements as well as civic militia detachments quickly dispersed 
and disarmed the people. p. 89 
Influenced by the revolutionary action of the working people of Berlin, the 
Prussian National Assembly adopted a resolution of June 15, 1848, which declared 
that the Assembly "does not need the protection of the armed forces but instead 
places itself under the protection of the people of Berlin". p. 89 
During the night of August 4, 1789, the French Constituent Assembly, under the 
impact of the growing peasant unrest, announced the abrogation of a number of 
feudal obligations which had already been abolished by the insurgent peasants. 
p. 89 

=====第644页=====
614 Notes 
70 On March 21, 1848, Frederick William IV, frightened by the barricade fighting in 
Berlin, issued an appeal "To My People, and the German Nation" in which he 
promised to set up a representative institution based on the estate principle, and to 
introduce a Constitution, ministerial responsibility, public trials, juries etc. 
p. 89 
71 This article was first published in English in the magazine Labour Monthly, 1948, 
Vol. XXX, No. 4, and also in the collections: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, 
Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 
1972,  and Karl Marx, The Revolutions of 1848. Political Writings, Vol. 1, London, 
Penguin Books, 1973. p. 91 
72 See Note 46. p. 91 
73 The Slav Congress met in Prague on June 2, 1848. It was attended by 
representatives of the Slav countries forming part of the Austrian Empire. The 
Right, moderately liberal wing, to which Palacky and Safarik, the leaders of the 
Congress, belonged, sought to solve the national problem through autonomy of 
the Slav countries within the framework of the Habsburg monarchy. The Left, 
radical wing (Sabina, Fric, Libelt and others) wanted to act in alliance with the 
revolutionary-democratic movement in Germany and Hungary. Radical delegates 
took an active part in the popular uprising in Prague (June 12-17, 1848), which 
was directed against the arbitrary rule of the Austrian authorities, and were 
subjected to cruel reprisals. On June 16, the moderate liberal delegates declared 
the Congress adjourned for an indefinite period. p. 91 
After the suppression of the Prague uprising, the Czech liberals took the lead of 
the national movement, which they turned into an instrument against the 
revolutionary-democratic forces of Germany and Hungary, and into a prop for 
the Habsburg monarchy and, indirectly, for Russian Tsarism. This was the reason 
why the Neue Rheinische Zeitung denounced this movement in the months that 
followed. p. 93 
75 See Note 59. p. 98 
The reference is to the wars waged by the peoples of Europe against Napoleonic 
France in 1813-14 and 1815, following the defeat of Napoleon's army in Russia in 
1812.  These were, indeed, of a contradictory nature and their character was 
affected by the counter-revolutionary aims and expansionist policy of the ruling 
circles in the feudal monarchical states fighting on the side of the anti-French 
coalition. But especially in 1813, when the struggle was aimed at liberating 
German territory from French occupation, they turned into a genuinely popular 
national liberation war against foreign oppression. In this passage, Engels 
ridicules the over-patriotic zeal with which the representatives of Germany's ruling 
classes speak of the 1813-14 and 1815 wars. Later, when once again considering 
that period of the history of Germany, Engels in a series of articles entitled "Notes 
on the War" (1870) stressed the progressive nature of the people's resistance to 
Napoleon's rule and in his work The Role of  Force  in History (1888) wrote: "The 
peoples' war against Napoleon was the reaction of the national feeling of all the 
peoples, which Napoleon had trampled on." 
The battle of the nations at Leipzig (October 16-19, 1813) ended with victory for 
the Russian, Prussian, Austrian and Swedish troops over Napoleon's forces. 
At the battle of Waterloo (June 18, 1815) Napoleon's forces were defeated by 
British and Prussian troops commanded by Wellington and Blücher. p. 98 

=====第645页=====
Notes 615 
77 
Most Prussian fortresses capitulated to the French without a fight after the defeat 
of the Prussian troops at Jena and Auerstedt (October 14, 1806). The fortress of 
Ciistrin, for instance, surrendered to a small French detachment on November 10, 
1806,  and Magdeburg, with its many-thousand-strong garrison and artillery, was 
surrendered by General Kleist on November 8, 1806, after the first salvo fired by 
the French from light field mortars. p. 99 
Code civil—French code of civil law of 1804 known as the Code Napoleon. This 
Code was introduced by Napoleon into the conquered regions of Western and 
South-Western Germany and remained the official law of the Rhineland even 
after that region's union with Prussia. p. 103 
79 
The Prussian General Pfuel ordered the heads of captured insurrectionists in 
Posen in 1848 to be shaved and their arms and ears branded with lunar caustic (in 
German Höllenstein, i. e. stone of hell). This was how he got die nickname "von 
Höllenstein". p. 104 
The assault upon the arsenal on Jane 14, 1848 (see Note 67) led to a ministerial 
crisis in Prussia and the downfall of the Camphausen Government. The 
conservative and aristocratic members of the Government, Kanitz, Schwerin and 
Arnim, resigned on June 17. An attempt to reorganise the Government failed and 
on June 20 the entire Ministry resigned. 
The article was first published in English in the collections: Karl Marx, On 
Revolution, ed. by S. K. Padover, New York, 1971 ("The Karl Marx Library" 
series),  and Karl Marx, The Revolutions of 1848. Political Writings, Vol. 1, London, 
Penguin Books, 1973. p. 107 
The Camphausen Government began its activities on March 30, 1848. At about the 
same time, a national liberation uprising broke out in Posen and was cruelly 
suppressed by this Government (see Note 46). p. 107 80 
82 
83 
84 The reference is to the national liberation war against Austrian domination. On 
March 18, 1848, a popular armed uprising broke out in Milan, the capital of 
Lombardy; and after five days of bitter fighting the Austrian troops were driven 
out. The Austrians were also driven out of the Venice region, where a republic was 
proclaimed. On March 25, Charles Albert, King of Sardinia (Piedmont), declared 
war on Austria in the hope of exploiting the patriotic movement in his own 
dynastic interests. In April, the Italian army won a number of minor victories in 
the vicinity of Verona, but the hesitant policy of Charles Albert resulted in a 
serious defeat for the Italians at Custozza on July 25, 1848, and the Austrian army 
under the command of Field Marshal Radetzky reoccupied Milan on August 6. On 
August 9, Charles Albert concluded an armistice, which aroused vehement 
popular protests. Once again Lombardy found itself under the yoke of the 
Austrian Empire. 
Fighting was resumed in March 1849, but the Sardinian forces were routed on 
March 21-23 at the battles of Mortara and Novara. p. 109 
The Provisional Government of Lombardy was formed on March 22, 1848, after 
the Austrian troops had been driven out of Milan; its members were mainly 
moderate liberals. p. 109 
Pandours—soldiers of the Austrian army, whose irregular infantry units were 
recruited mainly in the South-Slav provinces of the Austrian Empire. p. 109 

=====第646页=====
616 Notes 
85 
86 
87 
90 
93 
94 The article was written a few days before a new Government which replaced the 
Camphausen Ministry was finally formed. The formal head of the new 
Government—the so-called Government of Action (June 26-September 21, 
1848) — was Rudolf von Auerswald, a dignitary close to the Court; Hansemann, 
one of the candidates for the post of Prime Minister, remained the Minister of 
Finance just as he had been under Camphausen, but was the actual leader of the 
Government. Representatives of the Right groups, such as Milde and Gierke, 
entered the Ministry together with some of the former Ministers. Karl Rodbertus, 
one of the leaders of the Left Centre, was also a member of the Government, but 
he soon resigned from his post. p. Ill 
An allusion to the speech from the throne made by Frederick William IV at the 
opening of the United Diet on April 11, 1847. The King said he would never agree 
to grant a Constitution which he described as a "written scrap of paper". 
The words "bourgeois grain and wool merchants" refer to Camphausen who, in 
his youth, engaged in oil and corn trading, and to Hansemann who started his 
commercial career as a wool merchant. p. 115 
An English translation of this article was first published in the collection: Karl 
Marx, On Revolution, ed. by S. K. Padover, New York, 1971 ("The Karl Marx 
Library" series), under the title "Prussia's Feudal Reforms". p. 117 
Liege money—dues which the feudal lord was entiüed to receive on the 
selling of a vassal estate. p. 117 
See Note 69. p. 118 
Patrimonial jurisdiction—the right of landlords to pass judgment upon their 
peasants and to fine them; limited in Germany in 1848 and abolished in 1877. 
p. 118 
The Bill on the establishment of mortgage banks envisaged the founding of 
annuity-offices for the realisation of the redemption of peasant obligations under 
terms extremely favourable to the landlords. The bank was to advance 
compensation to the landlords amounting to eighteen times the value of the 
annual obligations of the peasants, the latter having to pay back this sum within 41 
years.  p. 118 
Between 1807 and 1811, the Ministers Stein and Hardenberg carried out certain 
agrarian reforms in Prussia. In October 1807, serfdom was abolished but all the 
feudal obligations of the peasants remained. In September 1811, the peasants 
received the right to redeem their obligations on the condition that they 
surrendered up to half of their land to the landlord or paid a corresponding sum 
of money. In 1845, the amount of the redemption payment was established at 
twenty-five times the value of annual feudal dues. p. 118 
The article was first published in "English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. p. 119 
Following the revolutionary action of the Viennese masses on May 15, 1848, 
Emperor Ferdinand and his Court fled to Innsbruck, a small town in Tyrol, which 
became the mainstay of feudal aristocratic counter-revolution. 

=====第647页=====
Notes 617 
96 
97 
98 
100 Engels is referring to the spontaneous rising of textile workers in Prague 
towards the end of June 1844. The revolt, in the course of which mills were 
destroyed and machines smashed, was brutally crushed by Austrian troops. 
p. 119 
The full title of this Committee, which was set up in Vienna during the 
revolutionary events of May 1848, was the Committee of Citizens, the National 
Guard and Students for Maintaining Safety and Order and Defending the Rights 
of the People. p. 120 
By referring to Windischgrätz as the Tilly of Prague Engels is comparing him with 
Johann Tilly, the army commander of the Catholic League during the Thirty 
Years'  War, famous for the savage way he dealt with the Protestant population of 
conquered towns as well as for his military pillage. p. 120 
The national guard—an armed civic militia that was formed in Paris at the 
beginning of the French revolution of 1789-93 and existed, with intervals, till 
August 1871. During the February revolution of 1848, a considerable section of 
the national guard took the side of the insurgents, but in the course of the Paris 
uprising in June 1848 the Provisional Government employed the national guards 
of bourgeois districts in the fight against the workers. p. 121 
In the Neue Rheinische Zeitung this item was followed by a report on the events 
in Paris printed in smaller type and based, apparently, on the French news­
papers which had just arrived. Part of it read: "The immediate cause of the new 
uprising was measures directed at abolishing the national workshops — censuses 
of the workers, expulsion of workers who were not born in Paris to their native 
parts or to Sologne to build canals, introduction of piecework in the remaining 
workshops etc.— as well as the law on reintroduction of caution money for 
journals, open attacks (see today's issue of our paper, 'Paris', June 22) on the 
popular press, debates in the National Assembly so closely resembling those in the 
Chamber of Peers under Louis Philippe that even the noble knight Montalembert, 
in his speech at the session on the 22nd, said the same things, in a somewhat 
different form, which he had said shortly before the February revolution in 
defence of money-bags, the law against street gatherings etc." 
The report quoted at length the French newspaper Journal des Débats politiques et 
littéraires'^ account of the events of June 22 in Paris. It was hostile towards the 
insurgents and misrepresented their conflict with the Minister of Public Works, 
Marie, a moderate republican and spokesman of the Government. For this reason 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung's report ended with a warning: "It should not be 
forgotten that the Journal des Débats, which printed this report, is an old Court 
sheet and Marie  is an advocate of the law against street gatherings and the man of 
the National." p. 121 
This refers to the address sent by the electors of Berncastel to August 
Reichensperger, their deputy in the Prussian National Assembly, expressing their 
indignation at his conduct, and that of other deputies from the Rhine Province, 
during the debate on the revolution: their vote to pass on to the agenda was 
considered repudiation of the revolution. p. 122 
The reference is to the Labour Commission that met at the Luxembourg Palace 
under the chairmanship of Louis Blanc. This was set up on February 28, 1848, by 
the Provisional Government under pressure from the workers, who demanded a 

=====第648页=====
618 Notes 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 Ministry of Labour. The Commission, in which both workers and employers were 
represented, acted as mediator in labour conflicts, often taking the side of the 
employers. The revolutionary action of Paris workers on May 15, 1848, led to the 
end of the Luxembourg Commission, since the Government disbanded it next 
day. 
National workshops were instituted by a government decree immediately after 
the February revolution of 1848. The Government thus sought to discredit Louis 
Blanc's ideas on the organisation of labour in the eyes of the workers and, at the 
same time, to utilise the workers of the .national workshops organised on military 
lines in the struggle against the revolutionary proletariat. Revolutionary ideas, 
however, continued to gain ground among workers employed in the national 
workshops, and the Government took steps accordingly to limit the number of 
workers employed in them, to send some off to public works in the provinces etc. 
This caused great indignation among the Paris proletariat and was one of the 
reasons for the June uprising. After its suppression, the Cavaignac Government 
issued a decree disbanding the national workshops (July 3, 1848). 
On June 7, 1848, the Constituent Assembly passed a law against gatherings. 
Any violation of this law was punishable by imprisonment of up to ten years. 
p. 124 
The mobile guard was set up by a decree of the Provisional Government on 
February 25, 1848, to fight against the revolutionary masses. These armed units 
consisted mainly of lumpenproletarians and were used to crush the June uprising 
in Paris. p. 125 
The Palais Royal was the residence of Louis XIV from 1643; in 1692 it became 
property of the Orléans branch of the Bourbons. Following the February 
revolution of 1848 it was proclaimed state property and its name was changed to 
Palais National. p. 125 
The reference is to the Café Tortoni on the boulevard des Italiens; when the Stock 
Exchange was closed, business transactions were carried on in this café and its 
vicinity. As distinct from the official Stock Exchange, the Café Tortoni and the 
adjacent district became known as the "small Stock Exchange". p. 125 
The municipal guard of the republic (also known as the republican guard) — a 
detachment of 2,600 men subordinated to the Prefect of Police—was formed on 
May 16, 1848, by decree of the French Government, frightened by the 
revolutionary action of the Paris workers on May 15. The republican guard 
fulfilled police functions in Paris. p. 126 
This article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. p. 128 
An article published in The Northern Star No. 557, June 24, 1848, under the title 
"The New Rhenish Gazette" stated: "Neue Rheinische Zeitung is the title of a new 
daily journal lately started at Cologne. This journal, which announces itself 'the 
organ of the democracy', is conducted with singular ability and extraordinary 
boldness; and we hail it as a worthy, able, and valiant comrade in the grand 
crusade against tyranny and injustice in every shape and form. The principal 
editor is Dr. Marx, one of the ablest of the defenders of Labour's rights in Europe. 
The assistant editors include W.  Wolff,  of Breslaw, a sterling democrat; Dr. 

=====第649页=====
Notes 619 
107 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 Dronke, of Coblentz, ex-state prisoner; F.  Wolff,  of Cologne (was ten years in 
Paris);  H. Bürgers (of Cologne, a favourite popular orator, and member of the 
first popular assembly at Frankfort); Frederick Engels, whose able writings have 
often graced the columns of the Star, and George Weerth, a name honourably 
known to our readers as the unmasker of the Freetrade delusionists at the 
celebrated Brussels Conference. We wish our contemporary a long career of 
usefulness and victory." p. 129 
Words from the French patriotic song based on the Song of the Girondists from 
Chevalier de Maison-Rouge, a play by Alexandre Dumas (father) and Auguste 
Maquet which was staged in 1847. The words and music of the refrain are taken 
from Rouget de Lisle. The song won wide popularity not long before the 1848 
revolution and was known as "the second Marseillaise". p. 130 
See Note 76. p. 131 
The Society of the Rights of Man and the Citizen was a democratic organisation that 
arose during the July monarchy. Led by Armand Barbes, Aloysius Huber and 
others, the Society united a number of clubs in the capital and the provinces and 
fought for the implementation of the Jacobin Declaration of the Rights of Man 
and the Citizen adopted in 1793. Some of the members of this Society were leaders 
of the June uprising. For instance, the retired officer Kersausie, Chairman of the 
Society's Committee of Action, drew up a plan for an armed uprising which was 
partially carried out during the June' events in Paris. p. 133 
The reference is to the heroic defence of Saragossa during the Spanish'people's 
war of liberation against Napoleon's rule. The city was twice besieged by the 
French (from June to August 1808 and from December 1808 to February 1809) 
and it was only after the second siege, during which over 40,000 of its defenders 
perished, that Saragossa surrendered to the superior forces of the French. 
p. 135 
The municipal guard of Paris, formed after the July revolution of 1830, was 
subordinate to the Prefect of Police and used to suppress popular uprisings. 
Following the February revolution of 1848, the municipal guard was disbanded. 
p. 138 
The lie Louvier, separated from the right bank by a narrow branch of the Seine, 
was connected with the mainland in 1844, forming a stretch between the 
boulevard Morland and the Henry IV embankment. p. 142 
An allusion to the fact that, in suppressing the proletarian uprising, the republican 
guard undertook police functions similar to those of the monarchist municipal 
guard. p. 142 
A passage from this article by Marx was later included in the first article of the 
series "From 1848 to 1849" (subsequently published by Engels under the title The 
Class Struggles in France), printed in the journal Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-Ökonomische Revue in 1850. 
An English translation of this article was first published in 1851 under the title 
"June 29, 1848" in No. 16 of the Chartist weekly Notes to the People which was 
edited by Ernest Jones. Later translations appeared in England and the United 

=====第650页=====
620 Notes 
115 
120 
121 
122 
123 
124 States between the 1920s and the 1940s. In 1972 the article was published in the 
collection: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress Publishers, Moscow, and in 1973 in the collection Karl 
Marx, The Revolutions of 1848. Political Writings, Vol. 1, London, Penguin Books. 
p. 144 
The party which formed around the daily paper Le National in the 1840s was 
composed of moderate republicans headed by Armand Marrast; it was supported 
by the industrial bourgeoisie and a section of the liberal intellectuals. 
The party that supported the French daily La Réforme consisted of democrats 
and republicans headed by Ledru-Rollin; petty-bourgeois socialists led by Louis 
Blanc were also associated with it. p. 144 
The Executive Committee (the Commission of the Executive Government) — the 
Government of the French Republic set up by the Constituent Assembly on May 
10, 1848, to replace the Provisional Government which had resigned. It survived 
until June 24, 1848, when Cavaignac's dictatorship was established. p. 144 
The dynastic opposition—an oppositional group in the French Chamber of 
Deputies during the July monarchy (1830-48). The group headed by Odilon 
Barrot represented the views of the liberal industrial and commercial bourgeoisie, 
and favoured a moderate electoral reform, which they regarded as a means of 
preventing revolution and preserving the Orléans dynasty. p. 147 
The legitimists were supporters of the Bourbon dynasty, which was overthrown in 
1830.  They upheld the interests of the big hereditary landowners. p. 147 
See Note 49. p. 148 
The reference is to an official poster which appeared in the streets of Paris on 
June 26 announcing that "the insurgents have been defeated, the struggle has 
ceased, and order has triumphed over anarchy". p. 152 
This article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. p. 157 
The reference is to the Paris uprising of June 5-6, 1832, prepared by the Left wing 
of the republicans as well as by members of secret societies including the Society of 
the Friends of the People. The uprising flared up during the funeral of General 
Lamarque, an opponent of Louis Philippe's Government. The insurgent workers 
threw up barricades which they defended with great courage and persis­
tence, p. 158 
The royalist uprising in Paris on 12 and 13 Vendémiaire (October 4 and 5), 1795, 
was suppressed by the republican troops under the command of General 
Bonaparte. p. 161 
An abridged English translation of this article was first published in the magazine 
Labour Monthly, London, 1923, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp.  32-33.  The article was published 
in full in the collection: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung", 1848-49, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972. p. 165 

=====第651页=====
Notes 621 
127 
128 On July 25, 1792, the Duke of Brunswick, commander-in-chief of the 
Austro-Prussian army fighting against revolutionary France, issued a manifesto, 
in which he threatened to raze the whole of Paris to the ground. p. 165 
In 1785 an uprising against the rule of the aristocracy and the Catholic clergy who 
supported William of Orange broke out in the Netherlands. The uprising, which 
was led by the republican bourgeoisie, deposed William of Orange. Two years 
later, however, with the help of Prussian troops, he again became the Stadholder 
of the Netherlands. p. 165 
Under an agreement between Britain, France and Russia concluded at the 
London Conference of 1830, Greece, whose people rose in revolt against Turkish 
rule in 1821 and won national independence, was to become a monarchy. The 
Bavarian Prince Otto was made King of Greece in 1832 while still a minor. He 
arrived in Greece accompanied by Bavarian troops and high officials and ruled as 
Otto I. This rule was strongly opposed by the Greek people. p. 165 
At the Congress of the Holy Alliance (a covenant of European monarchs founded 
on September 26, 1815, on the initiative of the Russian Emperor Alexander I and 
the Austrian Chancellor Metternich), which began in Troppau in October 1820 
and ended in Laibach in May 1821, the principle of intervention in the internal 
affairs of other states was officially proclaimed. Accordingly, the Laibach 
Congress decided to send Austrian troops into Italy to crush the revolutionary and 
national liberation movements there. French intervention in Spain with similar 
aims was decided at the Congress of Verona in 1822. 
Ypsilanti was a Greek patriot who made an unsuccessful attempt to raise a revolt 
against Turkish rule in March 1821. He fled to Austria, was arrested and 
imprisoned until 1827. p. 165 
In the 1820s and 1830s Austria and Prussia supported the clerical and feudal 
party headed by Dom Miguel, which opposed any measures designed to restrict 
absolutism in Portugal. p. 165 
Austria and Prussia supported Don Carlos, who in 1833 started a civil war in Spain 
in order to win the throne with the help of the clerical and feudal par­
ty, p. 165 
See Note 36. p. 166 
See Note 83. p. 167 
The party of the National—see Note 115. 
The party of Thiers united bourgeois politicians with royalist tendencies 
supporting the Orléans dynasty and voicing their opinions in the newspaper La 
Constitutionnel. Before February 1848, they upheld a monarchy with republican 
institutions and thereafter a republic with monarchical institutions. 
The dynastic opposition—see Note 117. p. 168 
The Executive Committee— see Note 116. 
The September Laws—see Note 8. p. 168 
The reference is to the clashes between Prussian troops stationed at Trier and its 
citizens on May 2, 3 and 4, 1848, provoked'by the authorities. On the order of 133 

=====第652页=====
622 Notes 
Schreckenstein, commander of the 2nd Army Corps, the civic militia of Trier was 
disbanded. p. 171 
136 See Note 8. p. 171 
137 The Holy Hermandad—a league of Spanish cities founded at the end of the 
fifteenth century with the co-operation of the royal authorities who wanted to 
make use of wealthy townspeople in their fight against the feudal magnates in an 
attempt to establish royal absolutism. From the middle of the sixteenth century the 
armed forces of the Holy Hermandad carried out police functions. Thus the 
police in general has often been ironically labelled the "Holy Herman­
dad". p. 177 
138 Anneke spoke at the meeting of the Cologne Workers' Association (see Note 245) 
which took place at the Gürzenich Hall on June 25, 1848, to debate the setting up 
of a united commission which was to consist of representatives from the three 
democratic organisations of Cologne: the Democratic Society, the Workers' 
Association and the Association for Workers and Employers. p. 178 
139 The Code pénal —the penal code adopted in France in 1810 and introduced into 
the regions of Western and South-Western Germany conquered by the French. 
The Code pénal and the Code civil remained in effect in the Rhine Province even 
after the region was annexed by Prussia in 1815. The Prussian Government 
attempted to reduce the sphere of its application and reintroduce the Prussian 
Penal Code: a whole series of laws and decrees were promulgated designed to 
guarantee feudal privileges. These measures, which met great opposition in the 
Rhineland, were annulled after the March revolution by the decrees issued on 
April 15, 1848. p. 178 
140 On March 3, 1848, Anneke was arrested together with Gottschalk and Willich 
because they had helped to organise a mass meeting in Cologne. All three were 
accused of "incitement to revolt and founding an illegal association". They were 
released from prison on March 21, 1848, on the royal amnesty. p. 178 
The Köslin address—on May 23, 1848, junkers and officials of the town of Köslin 
(Pomerania) issued an appeal to the Prussian population to march on Berlin to 
crush the revolution. p. 181 
142 
143 
144 
145 These countries were the chief markets for Prussia's spinning and weaving 
industry. They were lost even before the revolution of 1848 and 1849. p. 182 
The Prussian General Pfuel ordered the heads of captured Polish insurgents in 
Posen to be shaved in order to humiliate them. p. 182 
During the summer of 1848, a special detachment of armed men dressed in 
civilian clothes was set up in Berlin: These persons were to be used in addition to 
the regular police to break up street gatherings and mass demonstrations. 
Another of their functions was to gather intelligence. These special policemen 
were called "constables" by analogy with the special constabulary employed in 
England to disperse the Chartist demonstration on April 10, 1848. p. 185 
At the close of the session of July 4, 1848, the Prussian National Assembly decided 
to grant the committee investigating the events at Posen unlimited authority. 
Contrary to all parliamentary rules, representatives of the Right attempted to 

=====第653页=====
Notes 623 
146 
147 organise a vote on a motion to limit the powers of the committee. The deputies of 
the Left walked out of the Assembly in protest. The Right made use of this to pass 
the motion prohibiting the committee from travelling to Posen and interrogating 
witnesses and experts on the spot. Thus the Assembly's original decision was 
illegally annulled. For debates on the Posen committee see this volume, pp.  57-61, 
195-98 and 200-07. p. 188 
On April 8, 1848, during a secret mission on behalf of the King of Prussia Major 
Wildenbruch handed a Note to the Danish Government. It stated that Prussia was 
not fighting in Schleswig-Holstein in order to rob Denmark of the duchy but 
merely in order to combat "radical and republican elements in Germany". The 
Prussian Government tried every possible means to avoid official recognition of 
this compromising document. p. 191 
The article was published in a special supplement to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
No. 39, and also in No. 40 of this newspaper where it was dated "Cologne, 
July 9". p. 199 
See Note 145. p. 201 
The Thirty Years' War, 1618-48—a European war, in which the Pope, the Spanish 
and Austrian Habsburgs and the German Catholic princes rallied under the 
banner of Catholicism and fought against the Protestant countries: Bohemia, 
Denmark, Sweden, the Republic of the Netherlands and a number of German 
states.  The rulers of Catholic France — rivals of the Habsburgs — supported the 
Protestant camp. Germany was the main arena for this struggle, the object of 
plunder and territorial claims. The Treaty of Westphalia (1648) sealed the 
political dismemberment of Germany. p. 202 
The Long Parliament (1640-53)—the English Parliament which was convened 
by Charles I and became the constituent body of the English revolution. 
p. 206 
On October 20, 1842, the Rheinische Zeitung published a Bill on divorce which was 
being secretly prepared in government quarters. This started a broad public 
discussion of the Bill in the newspapers. The publication of the Bill in the 
Rheinische Zeitung and the blunt refusal of its editors to name the person who had 
sent in the text of the Bill was one of the reasons for the suppression of the 
Rheinische Zeitung. For details see present edition, Vol. 1, pp. 274-76 and 
307-10. p. 208 
Kamptz—member of the Central Investigation Commission in Mainz (see Note 
308),  which was instituted in 1819 by decision of the conference of German states. 
He was one of the instigators of the campaign against the representatives of the 
opposition among students, intelligentsia and other liberal elements; known as the 
"demagogues", they upheld Germany's unity and constitutional reforms. 
Black, red and gold—the colours of the national liberation movement in 
Germany. p. 208 
153 See Note 139. p. 209 150 
151 
152 
154 On the motion of the Democratic Society (see Note 66), the popular meeting that 
gathered in Cologne at the Gürzenich Hall on July 9, 1848, adopted an address to 

=====第654页=====
624 Notes 
the Prussian National Assembly in which the activities of the Auerswald-
Hansemann Government were denounced and the Prussian Assembly was asked 
to declare the Ministry "divested of the confidence of the country". p. 210 
155 See Note 149. p. 212 
Svornost—the Czech national militia formed after the revolutionary events of 
March 1848 in the Austrian Empire. It was recruited mainly from among 
students. Its main detachment guarded the Czech Museum in Prague where the 
Slav Congress was in session (see Note 73). During the June uprising in Prague, 
this detachment was disarmed and arrested by government troops. The Austrian 
authorities disbanded the national militia even though it was commanded by 
moderate representatives of the Czech movement (Baron Karel Villâny) who 
disapproved of the insurgents. p. 213 
Fictitious purchases—business transactions concluded for a definite period during 
which no transfer of goods or securities takes place. The speculative element arises 
from the difference between rates of exchange on the market and commodity 
prices. p. 224 
158 See Note 44. p. 229 
The first article, dated "Cologne, July 17", from the cycle "The Debate on 
Jacoby's Motion", was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. All the other articles in this cycle are published in 
English for the first time. p. 232 
160 
165 
166 On June 28, 1848, the Frankfurt National Assembly decided to set up a 
provisional Central Authority consisting of the Imperial Regent (Archduke John 
of Austria) and an Imperial Ministry. Since the Central Authority had neither a 
budget nor an army of its own, it possessed no real power. 
In the Prussian National Assembly the formation of a provisional Central 
Authority was debated at the session of July 11, 1848, when Johann Jacoby tabled 
this motion on behalf of the Left deputies. p. 232 
See Note 13. p. 232 
See Note 12. p. 234 
The Customs Union (Zollverein) of the German states, which established a common 
customs frontier, was founded in 1834 and headed by Prussia. Brought into being 
by the necessity for an all-German market, the Union embraced all the larger 
German states with the exception of Austria. p. 236 
Vendée —a department in Western France; during the French Revolution the 
centre of a largely peasant-based royalist uprising. The word "Vendée" came to 
denote counter-revolutionary actions. p. 237 
See Note 149. p. 238 
The Anti-Corn Law League was founded in 1838 by the Manchester factory owners 
Cobden and Bright. By demanding unrestricted free trade, the League fought for 
the abolition of the Corn Laws, which established high tariffs on imported 

=====第655页=====
Notes 625 
167 
168 
169 
170 
171 agricultural produce in order to maintain high prices on the home market. In this 
way, the League sought to weaken the economic and the political position of the 
landed aristocracy, as well as to cut workers' wages. The struggle between the 
industrial bourgeoisie and the landowning aristocracy over the Corn Laws 
culminated in their repeal in 1846. p. 238 
On April 2, 1848, the republican minority headed by Friedrich Hecker and 
Gustav Struve walked out of the Preparliament (see Note 12), to show its 
opposition to the policy of compromises pursued by the liberal majority. They 
counted on support among broad circles of the revolutionary-minded population 
in Southern and Western Germany, particularly in Baden. Frightened by the 
growth of the republican movement, the Baden Government decided to increase 
its army, asked for military assistance from neighbouring German states and 
issued an order for the arrest of the republican Joseph Fickler, who was 
denounced by the liberal Karl Mathy. These measures led to the republican 
uprising on April 12, 1848, under the leadership of Hecker and Struve. 
Ill-prepared and lacking organisation, the uprising was crushed by the end of 
April. p. 239 
In most German states elections to the Frankfurt National Assembly were indirect. 
Under the law of April 8, 1848, the Prussian National Assembly too was elected by 
two-stage voting. p. 248 
See Note 13. p. 249 
An English translation of this article was first published in the collection: Karl 
Marx, The Revolutions of 1848. Political Writings, Vol. 1, London, Penguin Books, 
1973.  p. 250 
In June 1848, Danish and Prussian plenipotentiaries met at Malmö (Sweden) to 
negotiate an armistice in the war over Schleswig-Holstein (see Note 28). An 
agreement was reached on July 8 and approved by the King and the Prussian 
Government, but the commander-in-chief, General Wrangel, refused to sign it 
because it was obviously disadvantageous to the German side. The armistice was 
signed in a modified form on August 26, 1848 (see Note 271). p. 253 
See Note 41. p. 253 
An ironical allusion to the Magna Carta Libertatum — a deed which the insurgent 
barons of England forced King John to sign on June 15, 1215. Magna Carta 
introduced certain limitations on the royal prerogative, primarily to the advantage 
of the big feudal lords. Some concessions were also granted to the knights and the 
townspeople. p. 257 
See Note 17. p. 259 
On the armistice negotiations with Denmark see Note 171. 
The article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. p. 266 
See Note 13. p. 266 
22* 

=====第656页=====
626 Notes 
177 
178 
179 
184 The Sound tax was a toll which, from 1425 to 1857, Denmark collected from all 
foreign vessels passing through the Sound. p. 268 
The Workers'  Congress  met in Berlin between August 23 and September 3, 1848, on 
the initiative of several workers' organisations. At this Congress, many workers' 
associations united into the Workers' Fraternity. The programme of the Congress 
was drawn up under the influence of Stephan Born and set the workers the task of 
implementing narrow craft-union demands, thereby diverting them from the 
revolutionary struggle. A number of its points bore the stamp of Louis Blanc's and 
Proudhon's Utopian ideas. The editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung did not 
approve of the general stand taken by Born, but they refrained from criticising his 
views in the press, bearing in mind the progressive nature of the endeavour to 
unite workers' associations. The programme of the Workers' Congress was 
published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (No. 31, July 1, 1848) as a report from 
Berlin without editorial comment. p. 271 
On April 6, 1848, the Posen Assembly of the Estates rejected the proposal of the 
Prussian Government to incorporate the Grand Duchy of Posen into the German 
Confederation (see Note 13). p. 273 
The government Bill on the compulsory loan was submitted to the Prussian 
National Assembly on July 12, 1848. p. 278 
Sliding  scale—  a way of regulating tariffs on imported grain products practised in 
England during the operation of the Corn Laws, a system of raising or lowering 
tariffs in proportion to the fall or rise of grain prices on the home market. One set 
of sliding-scale regulations was introduced by the Peel Ministry in 1842. 
p. 281 On special  constables  see Note 144. 
On Fickler's arrest see Note 167. p. 288 
The First Democratic  Congress  in Frankfurt am Main was held between June 14 and 
17, 1848; it was attended by delegates from 89 democratic and workers' 
associations from different towns in Germany. The Congress decided to unite all 
democratic associations and to set up district committees headed by the Central 
Committee of German democrats, with headquarters in Berlin. Fröbel, Rau and 
Kriege were elected members of the Central Committee and Bayrhoffer, Schütte 
and Anneke — their deputies. Even after this decision, the democratic movement 
in Germany still lacked unity and organisation because of the weakness and 
vacillations of its petty-bourgeois leaders. 
The Congress discussed the political programme and organisational structure 
of the democratic party. A programme point that ran as follows was adopted: 
"There is only one acceptable constitution for the German people: a democratic 
republic, i.e. a system under which the whole society is responsible for the 
freedom and welfare of its every member." However, nothing definite was said 
about the ways to attain this aim. p. 289 
Moderate liberal elements in Germany, adherents of the constitutional monarchy, 
began to unite into constitutional associations and clubs, headed by the 
Constitutional Club in Berlin, and into citizens' associations (see Note 65). 
Associations of Right-wing forces sprang up alongside them, particularly in 
Prussia, such as the Prussian associations (Preussenvereine) and the counter­
revolutionary Association for the Protection of Property and the Well-Being of All 

=====第657页=====
Notes 627 
189 
190 
192 Classes. Catholic organisations in the Rhine Province — associations of Pius IX 
(Piusvereine)— which campaigned for a moderate constitutional programme 
resorting to demagogical phraseology, joined either the liberal or the reactionary 
camp.  p. 289 
This article was first published in English in the collections: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972, and Karl Marx, The Revolutions of 1848. Political 
Writings, Vol. 1, London, Penguin Books, 1973. p. 290 
Feudalism was abolished, and juries and the Code Napoleon were introduced in the 
Rhine Province during the French Revolution and Napoleon's Empire. Feudal 
relations were not restored in the Rhineland even after its incorporation into 
Prussia (1815) where remnants of feudalism survived in spite of the reforms of 
1807-11,  allowing redemption of feudal obligations. 
The Bill abolishing feudal obligations was submitted to the Prussian National 
Assembly by the Minister of Agriculture Gierke on July 11, 1848, and discussed on 
July 18. p. 290 
See Note 88. p. 293 
See Note 69. p. 295 
This article was first published in English in the magazine Labour Monthly, 1948, 
Vol. XXX, No. 8, and later in the collection: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, 
Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 
1972.  p. 296 
Under the Poor Law of 1834 the only relief available to the poor who were fit for 
work was admission to a workhouse. These were dubbed "Poor Law Bas­
tilles",  p. 296 
In 1824, under mass pressure the English Parliament repealed the ban on trade 
unions. However, in 1825 it passed a Bill on workers' associations confirming the 
repeal of the ban on the trade unions but vigorously limiting their activities. 
Merely to urge workers to join a union and take part in a strike was considered, 
for example, as "coercion" and "violence" and was liable to criminal prosecu­
tion p. 297 
This refers to bloody clashes between workers and police in Birmingham, 
Glasgow, Newcastle and Sunderland in 1839. The most significant event was the 
Newport rising in November 1839, due to the deplorable conditions of the 
South-Wales miners and growing discontent after Parliament had turned 
down the Chartist petition and a number of popular Chartist agitators 
(Henry Vincent and others) were arrested. The leaders of the insurrection 
intended it to lead to a general armed struggle for the People's Charter. 
Three poorly armed insurgent detachments (numbering 3,000 men) entered 
Newport at dawn on November 4 but were dispersed by troops and police 
who had been brought in advance. On January 13, 1840, the leaders of the 
insurgents were sentenced to capital punishment which was commuted to 
transportation as a result of a protest campaign. 
When Parliament rejected the second Chartist petition in August 1842 in 
conditions of economic crisis and growing poverty, disturbances broke out in some 

=====第658页=====
628 Notes 
194 
195 
198 of the industrial districts in England. In Lancashire and in a considerable part of 
Cheshire and Yorkshire strikes assumed a general nature and in some places 
(Stockport, Preston and others) they turned into spontaneous revolts. The 
Government responded with mass arrests and severe sentences for Chartist 
leaders. p. 297 
See Note 166. p. 299 
The fight for legislative restriction of the working day to ten hours began in 
England as early as the end of the eighteenth century, and from the 1830s on 
large sections of the workers became involved in it. In an attempt to use this 
popular slogan against the industrial bourgeoisie, representatives of the landed 
aristocracy supported the Ten Hours' Bill in Parliament. The Bill limiting work­
ing hours for women and young children was passed by Parliament on June 8, 
1847.  p. 299 
This refers to the battle of Custozza, near Verona, between the Austrian army, 
under the command of Radetzky, and Piedmont troops under the command of 
King Charles Albert. The fighting went on for three days, from July 23 to 25, 
without bringing decisive victory to either side. Eventually the Austrian command 
mustered superior forces and dealt a heavy blow at the Piedmont troops, who 
were scattered largely due to poor generalship which doomed them to inaction at 
the decisive moment. p. 305 
In the battle of Curtatone (five kilometres from Mantua) on May 29, 1848, the 
Austrian troops forced the Tuscany corps, which fought on the side of the 
Piedmont army, to retreat. The resistance offered by this corps, however, enabled 
the Piedmont troops to regroup their forces and on May 30, in the battle of Goito, 
to hurl back the Austrians to their former positions. Nevertheless, the Piedmont 
command failed to make use of this success. p. 305 
This article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx, The 
Revolutions of 1848. Political Writings, Vol. 1, London, Penguin Books, 1973. 
In this article the phrase "secret treaties with Napoleon" refers to the Treaty  of 
Tilsit signed in July 1807 by France, Russia and Prussia. In an attempt to split the 
defeated powers, Napoleon made no territorial claims on Russia and even 
managed the transfer of part of the Prussian monarchy's eastern land to Russia. 
He consolidated an alliance with Alexander I when the two emperors met in 
Erfurt in the autumn of 1808. At the same time, this treaty imposed harsh terms 
on Prussia, which lost nearly half its territory to the German states dependent on 
France, had to pay indemnities, had its army limited etc. However, Russia, as well 
as Prussia, had to sever alliance with England and, to her disadvantage, join 
Napoleon's Continental System. Napoleon formed the vassal Duchy of Warsaw on 
Polish territory seized by Prussia during the partitions of Poland at the end of the 
eighteenth century, and planned to use the duchy as a springboard in the event of 
war with Russia. Sharp contradictions between France and Russia led to 
Napoleon's campaign against Russia in 1812. p. 307 
This refers to the "Appeal to the Germans" issued on March 25, 1813, in Kalisch 
after the defeat of Napoleon's Grand Army in Russia in 1812. The Russian Tsar 
and the King of Prussia called upon the Germans to fight Napoleon and 
demagogically promised them freedom and independence. It later transpired that 
the monarchs' intention was to use the national liberation movements to 
strengthen the feudal monarchies and privileges of the nobility. p. 308 

=====第659页=====
Notes 629 
199 
202 
204 
205 For the  congresses  of the Holy Alliance held in Laibach and Verona, see Note 128. 
The delegates of the states forming the German Confederation held a 
conference in Carlsbad in August 1819. On the initiative of the Austrian 
Chancellor Metternich and with the approval of the Russian Tsar, measures of 
struggle against the opposition movement were worked out. The decisions of the 
conference were approved by the Federal Diet (see Note 13) on September 20, 
1819.  The Carlsbad decisions envisaged the introduction of preliminary 
censorship in all German states, strict supervision ol universities, prohibition of 
students' societies, establishment of an investigation commission to suppress 
so-called demagogues. p. 308 
See Note 164. p. 309 
See Note 12. p. 310 
The first partition of Poland took place in 1772 between Prussia, Austria and 
Russia. p. 310 
See Note 146. p. 310 
This refers to the Polish national liberation uprising of November 1830-October 1831. 
The majority of its participants were revolutionary nobles (the  szlachcics)  and its 
leaders came from the ranks of the aristocracy. It was suppressed by Russian 
troops, with the support of Prussia and Austria. In spite of its defeat, the uprising 
was of major international significance because it diverted the forces of 
counter-revolution and thwarted their plans regarding the bourgeois revolution 
of 1830 in France and the 1830-31 revolution in Belgium. p. 311 
This refers to the rescripts by Frederick William IV of February 3, 1847, 
convening the United Diet, in which the King referred to the laws on estates 
representation promulgated in Prussia between the 1820s and the 1840s. The 
convocation of the United Diet (see Note 25) was presented by the King as 
implementation of his earlier promises to introduce a Constitution. p. 311 
An allusion to the suppression of the Cracow national liberation uprising in 1846 
by Austrian troops and the abolition of the status of the free city of Cracow ("the 
Cracow Republic") by decision of the three powers — Austria, Prussia and Russia 
(see Notes 36 and 47). p. 311 
In the summer of 1848, the anti-feudal movement and the struggle for complete 
liberation from the yoke of the Turkish Sultan grew in intensity in the Danube 
principalities (Moldavia and Wallachia), which formally remained autonomous 
possessions of Turkey. The movement in Wallachia grew into a bourgeois 
revolution. In June 1848, a Constitution was promulgated, a liberal Provisional 
Government was formed and George Bibesco, the ruler of Wallachia, abdicated 
and fled from the country. 
On June 28, 1848, twelve-thousand Russian troops entered Moldavia and in 
July of the same year, Turkish troops also invaded the country. Intervention 
helped to restore the feudal system and the subsequent entry of Turkish troops 
into Wallachia, with the consent of the Tsarist Government, brought about the 
defeat of the bourgeois revolution. p. 311 
Grave economic difficulties (almost universal crop failure) and natural calamities 
(cholera epidemics and devastating fires) exacerbated the class contradictions in 

=====第660页=====
630 Notes 
Russia in the spring and summer of 1848. This year witnessed the rise of the 
peasant movement, cholera "riots" in St. Petersburg and Riga and popular revolts 
in some gubernias, for example, in Vladimir Gubernia. An important seat of 
revolutionary ferment was the Kingdom of Poland. p. 312 
The item was printed in the column "French Republic". It deals with the Press Bill 
submitted to the French Constituent Assembly at the end of July 1848 and widely 
discussed in the German press. The Bill provided for severe punishment for 
insult, in the press, of the authorities, attacks on property, religion and family 
principles. It was passed by the Assembly on August 9-11, 1848. p. 314 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung of July 6, 1848, carried a report received from 
Ewerbeck, its Paris correspondent, under the heading "Bakunin". The author 
reported the current rumour that Mikhail Bakunin was in the secret service of 
Nicholas I and that George Sand was in possession of evidence to this effect. Such 
rumours circulated among Polish emigrants even before the 1848 revolution. On 
July 16, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung reprinted Bakunin's statement to the editors 
of the Allgemeine Oder Zeitung in which he refuted these accusations. It also carried 
Bakunin's letter to George Sand asking her to make a public statement testifying 
to the falsity of the rumour, which discredited him as a revolutionary. On August 
3, Marx received George Sand's letter to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung through the 
Polish democrat Koscielski and immediately published it with an introductory 
note from the editors. 
In 1853 certain English newspapers accused Marx of having used the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung to spread insinuations against Bakunin. Early in September 
1853 Marx refuted these charges — the authors of which were emigrants hostile to 
proletarian revolutionaries — in statements to the editors of the Morning Advertiser 
and the People's Paper (see present edition, Vol. 12). In the statement to the 
Morning Advertiser he recalled that the Neue Rheinische Zeitung had published 
Bakunin's letters of self-acquittal and the relevant letter of George Sand; he also 
quoted the editors' introductory note to this letter. 
Subsequently, in his letter to Lassalle written on March 3, 1860, Marx gave the 
following description of this episode: "I printed in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung a 
denunciation of Bakunin received from two different sources in Paris, the one 
being a Pole I knew and the other — the Paris lithographic bulletin, which would 
anyway have circulated this denunciation to all papers even if /had not printed it. 
The fact that the accusation was made publicly was in the interest of the cause as 
well as of Bakunin  himself.  I reprinted immediately Bakunin's refutation which 
appeared in the Neue Oder Zeitung. Koscielski, whom Bakunin sent to Cologne in 
order to challenge me to a duel, examined the letters from Paris and became 
convinced that as an editor I was in duty bound to have the denunciation printed (it 
appeared as a report with no comments). Thereupon he wrote to Bakunin 
informing him that he could no longer represent his interests. Koscielski became 
one of the best and most treasured friends of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. I gave 
public satisfaction to Bakunin in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung and made it up with 
him when we met in Berlin in August 1848. Subsequently (in 1851) I broke a lance 
defending him in the Tribune." (This refers to "Revolution and Counter-
Revolution in Germany", an article which Engels wrote for Marx and in which 
he highly praised Bakunin as a participant in the Dresden uprising of May 
1849.) p. 315 

=====第661页=====
Notes 631 
211 
M3 
M4 
217 
218 
219 
220 
221 An allusion to the closest entourage of Frederick William IV (the Gerlach 
brothers, Radowitz and other prominent figures with counter-revolutionary 
aspirations). p. 320 
Proudhon's speech is set forth and quoted in this article according to newspaper 
reports. The full text of Proudhon's speech at the session of the French National 
Assembly on July 31, 1848, was published in Compte rendu  des séances  de l'Assemblée 
nationale, Vol. II, Paris, 1849, pp. 770-82. p. 321 
The Inquisition proceedings—a form of criminal proceedings under absolutism, 
which allowed extremely wide powers to judges, who combined the functions of 
prosecutor and examining magistrate, trial in camera, and the use of torture to 
obtain evidence. The Inquisition proceedings became particularly notorious in 
Catholic Church courts and especially those of the Holy Inquisition which 
examined crimes of heresy. p. 325 
Lettres de  cachet,  i.e. warrants for arrest signed by the King of France at the time of 
the absolute monarchy. Any person could be imprisoned without investigation or 
court proceedings. p. 326 
See Note 92. p. 328 
The threshing gardeners  (Dreschgärtner)  — the name applied in some places in 
Germany, particularly in Silesia, to dependent peasants who rented a plot of land 
with a house from the landowner and, in return, had to work for him (mainly 
harvesting) for a small payment in cash or in kind. p. 330 
Banalities (the original has Zwangs- und  Bannrechte)  — feudal lords' right to impose 
taxes on peasants for the obligatory use of flour mills, wine presses etc. owned by 
feudal lords. p. 331 
Traditional holidays with carnivals in Belgium to celebrate its separation from 
Holland and its independence proclaimed at the time of the 1830 revolu­
tion, p. 336 
The debates on the Grand Duchy of Posen were held in the Frankfurt National 
Assembly on July 24-27, 1848. p. 337 
See Note 47. p. 337 
Engels refers to the repeated promises of Frederick William III to introduce a 
Constitution in Prussia based on the estate principle. p. 338 
This refers to the cowardly and servile conduct of the Prussian bureaucracy after 
the defeat of Prussia by Napoleonic France in the battles of Jena and Auerstedt in 
October 1806 (see also Note 77). p. 342 
The treaties signed by Russia, Prussia and Austria in Vienna on May 3, 1815, and 
the Final Act of the Congress of Vienna signed on June 9, 1815, which legalised 
the abolition of the Duchy of Warsaw established in 1807 by Napoleon and a new 
partition of the Polish lands between Austria, Prussia and Russia, pledged that 
representative bodies and national political institutions would be set up in all 

=====第662页=====
632 Notes 
225 Polish lands. In Posen this resulted in the convocation of an assembly of the estates 
endowed with advisory functions. p. 343 
See Note 36. p. 344 
The Convention of Jaroslawiec was concluded between the Posen Committee of 
Polish insurgents and the Prussian Commissioner General Willisen on April 11, 
1848.  It stipulated that the Polish insurgents were to lay down their arms and 
disband. In return, the Poles were promised the "national reorganisation" of 
Posen, i.e. the formation of a Polish army, the appointment of Poles to 
administrative and other posts and recognition of Polish as an official language. 
However, the Convention was treacherously violated by the Prussian administra­
tion, and the national liberation movement in Posen was brutally suppressed by 
Prussian troops. The border between the western ("German") part of the Duchy 
of Posen, which was not liable to reorganisation, and the eastern (Polish) one, was 
shifted further to the east. The promised "reorganisation" was never carried 
out. p. 346 
226 See Note 149. p. 346 
227 
229 The chambers of reunion  (chambres  de réunion) were set up by Louis XIV in 1679-80 
to justify and provide legal and historical grounds for France's claims to certain 
lands in neighbouring states, primarily in the territory of Germany; these lands 
were subsequently occupied by French troops. p. 347 
The Polish Constitution of 1791 expressed the aspirations of the progressive 
sections of the nobility and urban bourgeoisie. It abolished the liberum veto (the 
principle that resolutions of the Diet could only be passed unanimously) and the 
elective monarchy, provided for a Government responsible to the Diet and 
granted the urban bourgeoisie various political and economic rights. The 
Constitution was directed against feudal anarchy and aimed at strengthening the 
Central Authority; it also alleviated to some extent the position of peasant serfs by 
recognising the legal force of commutation agreements between landowners and 
peasants. As a result of the revolt of the nobility and the interference on the part 
of Catherine II of Russia and Frederick William II of Prussia, the Constitution was 
repealed in 1792-93 and a second partition of Poland between Russia and Prussia 
took place. p. 351 
The majority of deputies to the Frankfurt National Assembly were members of 
the liberal Centre which, in its turn, was split into two factions — the Right Centre 
(Dahlmann, Gagern, Bassermann, Mathy, Mevissen and others) and the Left 
Centre (including Mittermaier, Werner and Raveaux). The deputies of both 
centres were supporters of the constitutional monarchy. p. 354 
On August 6, 1848, troops of all German states were, by an order issued by the 
Imperial Minister of War Peucker on July 16, 1848, to take the oath of allegiance 
to the Imperial Regent Archduke John at the celebration parade. Frederick 
William IV, who himself claimed to be the Supreme Commander of the Armed 
Forces of the German Confederation, cancelled the parade in Prussia appointed 
for August 6. p. 359 
Janiszewski apparently quoted the following words by Jean Jacques Rousseau 
addressed to the Poles: "If you cannot prevent the enemy from swallowing you 

=====第663页=====
Notes 633 
232 
233 
234 
235 
236 
238 
239 
240 up, try at least to prevent him from digesting you." See also his work Considérations 
sur le gouvernement de Pologne, et sur sa reformation  projette.  p. 366 
At a session of the Frankfurt National Assembly on August 7, 1848, Deputy 
Brentano spoke in favour of amnesty for the participants in the Baden republican 
uprising and for their leader Hecker. The Right-wing deputies kept interrupting 
Brentano and finally forced him to leave the rostrum. p. 368 
Paragraph 6 of the Fundamental Rights of the German People worked out by the 
Frankfurt National Assembly as part of the future Constitution (it was adopted on 
August 2, 1848) abolished all estates privileges and all titles not connected with 
office. p. 368 
Don Carlos who, in 1833, appeared as a pretender to the Spanish throne against 
Isabella, daughter of King Ferdinand VII, referred to the 1713 law prohibiting 
succession to the throne along the female line. In 1838-40, Lichnowski took part in 
the civil war unleashed by Don Carlos and was promoted to the rank of 
brigadier-general. p. 370 
Wasserpolacken—original name of ferrymen on the Oder who were mainly natives 
of Upper Silesia; subsequently it became widespread in Germany as a nickname of 
Silesian Poles. p. 370 
The Albigensian ivars (1209-29) were waged by the feudal magnates of Northern 
France, together with the Pope, against the movement of townspeople and the 
lesser nobility, supported by peasants, in Languedoc, in the south, who were 
seeking independence from the north. This movement took the form of a 
"heresy", being directed against the power and doctrine of the Catholic Church as 
well as against the secular power of the feudal state. And its adherents were called 
"Albigenses" from the city of Albi, one of their main centres. The Albigensian 
heresy was wiped out after twenty years of war, and a considerable part of 
Languedoc annexed to the lands of the French kings. The whole of Languedoc 
was annexed to France in 1271, retaining, however, a measure of self-government 
which was finally abolished at the time of the absolute monarchy. p. 372 
See Note 73. p. 374 
During the Cracow national liberation uprising in 1846 (see Note 36) the Austrian 
authorities provoked clashes in Galicia between Ukrainian peasants and 
detachments of Polish insurgents. When the uprising was suppressed, the 
participants in the peasant movement in Galicia were severely persecuted. 
p. 375 
The Wahl-Manifest der radicalen Reformpartei für Deutschland written by Ruge and 
published in Die Reform No. 16, April 16, 1848, proclaimed "the editing of the 
rationale of events" as the main task of the National Assembly. p. 377 
The reference is to one of the legends woven round the foundation of the Swiss 
Confederation, the origin of which dates back to the agreement of the three 
mountain cantons of Schwyz, Uri and Unterwaiden in 1291. According to this 
legend, representatives of the three cantons met in 1307 in the Grütli (Rütli) 
meadow and took an oath of loyalty in the joint struggle against Austrian 
rule.  p. 377 

=====第664页=====
634 Notes 
241 
242 
243 This refers to a system of general treaties set up by the Vienna Congress 
(September 1814-June 1815) which embraced the whole of Europe, with the 
exception of that part then incorporated in Turkey. The decisions of the Congress 
helped to restore feudal order, perpetuated the political fragmentation of 
Germany and Italy, sanctioned the incorporation of Belgium into Holland and the 
partitions of Poland and outlined measures to combat the revolutionary 
movement. p. 378 
Lamartine's manifesto (of March 4, 1848) — a circular of the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs on the foreign policy principles and goals of the Provisional Government 
of the French Republic. p. 378 
On July 27, 1848, the Frankfurt National Assembly approved the decision passed 
earlier by the Federal Diet (see Note 13) to include a number of regions of the 
Grand Duchy of Posen into the German Confederation, sanctioned the powers 
vested in the twelve deputies elected from these regions (though the Polish 
population had refused to take part in elections to the Frankfurt Parliament), 
confirmed the demarcation line established by General Pfuel in Posen after the 
repeated transference of this line further east and obliged the Prussian 
Government "to guarantee the security of Germans residing in Posen". 
This decision aroused strong indignation in democratic circles in Germany. For 
example, on August 11, a general meeting of the Cologne Democratic Society, 
presided over by Marx, adopted a resolution of protest against the Frankfurt 
Assembly decisions on the Polish question and sent it to the Assembly (see this 
volume, pp. 564-65). p. 381 
244 See Note 230. p. 383 
' For the Cologne Democratic Society, see Note 66. 
The Cologne Workers' Association—a workers' organisation founded by Andreas 
Gottschalk on April 13, 1848. Its 300 members had increased to 5,000, the 
majority of whom were workers and artisans, by the beginning of May. The 
Association was led by the President and the committee, which consisted of 
representatives of various trades. The newspaper Zeitung des Arbeiter-Vereines zu 
Köln was the organ of the Association, but from October 26 it was replaced by the 
Freiheit, Brüderlichkeit, Arbeit. There were a number of branches of the 
Association. After Gottschalk's arrest, Moll was elected President on July 6 and he 
held this post till the state of siege was proclaimed in Cologne in September 1848, 
when he had to emigrate under threat of arrest. On October 16, Marx agreed to 
assume this post temporarily at the request of Association members. In November 
Röser became acting President and on February 28, 1849, Schapper was elected 
President and remained in this post until the end of May 1849. 
The majority of the leading members (Gottschalk, Anneke, Schapper, Moll, 
Lessner, Jansen, Röser, Nothjung, Bedorf) were members of the Communist 
League. 
During the initial period of its existence, the Workers' Association was 
influenced by Gottschalk who, sharing many of the views of the "true socialists", 
ignored the historical tasks of the proletariat in the democratic revolution, carried 
on sectarian tactics of boycotting indirect elections to the Federal and Prussian 
National Assemblies and came out against support of democratic candidates in 
elections. He combined ultra-Left phrases with very legalistic methods of struggle 
(workers' petitions to the Government and the City Council etc.) and supported 
the demands of the workers affected by craft prejudices etc. From the very 

=====第665页=====
Notes 635 
beginning, Gottschalk's tactics were resisted by the supporters of Marx and 
Engels. At the end of June a change-over took place under their influence in the 
activities of the Workers' Association, which became a centre of revolutionary 
agitation among the workers, and from the autumn of 1848 onwards, also among 
the peasants. Members of the Association organised democratic and workers' 
associations in the vicinity of Cologne, disseminated revolutionary literature, 
including the "Demands of the Communist Party in Germany", and carried on 
among themselves education in scientific communism through the study of Marx's 
writings. The Association maintained close contact with other workers' and 
democratic organisations. 
When, in the spring of 1849, Marx and Engels took steps to organise the 
advanced workers on a national scale and actually started preparing for the 
creation of a proletarian party, they relied to a considerable extent on the Cologne 
Workers' Association. 
The mounting counter-revolution and intensified police reprisals prevented 
further activities of the Cologne Workers' Association to unite and organise the 
working masses. After the Neue Rheinische Zeitung ceased publication and Marx, 
Schapper and other leaders of the Association left Cologne, it gradually turned 
into an ordinary workers' educational society. p. 384 
Paragraph 1 of Article 1 of the Fundamental Rights ofthe German  People  worked out 
by the Frankfurt National Assembly was adopted at its session of July 21, 1848, 
with the following wording: "Every German possesses the general German right 
of citizenship from which it accrues that a citizen of every separate state enjoys all 
rights of a naturalised citizen of another state." p. 384 
After the battle of Custozza (see Note 195) the Piedmont troops retreated. On 
August 4, 1848, they were defeated near Milan, into which the Austrian army of 
Radetzky entered on August 6. On August 9, 1848, an armistice was concluded 
under which Piedmont undertook to withdraw its armed forces from the cities and 
fortresses of Lombardy and Venice, thus surrendering them to the Austrians. 
This article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. p. 385 
Carbonari—members of bourgeois and aristocratic revolutionary secret societies 
which appeared in Italy in the early nineteenth century. They fought for national 
independence and unification of Italy and at the same time demanded 
liberal-constitutional reforms. The Carbonari played an important role in the 
revolutionary developments in the kingdoms of Naples and Sardinia early in the 
1820s and also during the revolutionary struggle in Italy against Austrian rule and 
local feudal monarchies in the 1830s. 
During the revolution of 1821 in Piedmont, Prince Charles Albert of Carignano 
made overtures to the Carbonari and they appointed him regent. However, afraid 
to lose his right to the Sardinian Crown if events took an unfavourable turn, he 
fled from Turin, abdicated his regency and helped to suppress the move­
ment, p. 386 
The battle of Goito (May 30, 1848) was part of the hostilities between the allied 
Italian forces and Austrian vassals, which started with the battle of Curtatone (see 
Note 196). 
The battle of Mozambano (July 24, 1848) was an episode in the battle of Custozza 
(see Note 195) between the Piedmont and Austrian armies. 

=====第666页=====
636 Notes 
251 
253 
255 
258 
260 In both cases, the Piedmont Command proved incapable of energetic action 
against the enemy and of taking advantage of successes achieved at separate 
sectors along the front. p. 388 
See Note 248. p. 389 
Quotations are taken from the rescript of Frederick William IV dated March 18, 
1848,  on the speeding up of the convocation of the United Diet (see 
Note 25). p. 390 
See Note 246. p. 391 
This is a list of the battles between the Austrians and the French during the 
French Revolution, the Directory, the Consulate and the Empire, in which the 
Austrian army was defeated at Jemappes (November 6, 1792), at Fleurus (June 26, 
1794),  at Miîlesimo (April 13-14, 1796), at Rivoli (January 14-15, 1797), at 
Neuwied (April 18, 1797), at Marengo (June 14, 1800), at Hohenlinden 
(December 3, 1800), at Ulm (October 17, 1805), at Austerlitz (December 2, 1805), 
at Wagram (July 5-6, 1809). p. 396 
Sonderbund —a separatist union formed by the seven economically backward 
Catholic cantons of Switzerland in 1843 to resist progressive bourgeois reforms 
and defend the privileges of the church and the Jesuits. The decree of the Swiss 
Diet of July 1847 on the dissolution of the Sonderbund served as a pretext for the 
latter to start hostilities against other cantons early in November. On November 
23, 1847, the Sonderbund army was defeated by federal forces. p. 396 
On the defeat of the Piedmont army at Custozza on July 25, 1848, see Note 195. 
On July 26-27 the Austrians routed the Piedmont troops at Volta and on August 
6, 1848, occupied Milan. p. 396 
See Note 238. p. 396 
The revolution of 1848 in Italy, followed by revolutionary events in other 
European countries, was started by the people's uprising of January 12 in Palermo 
and the successful armed struggle in Sicily against the absolute monarchy of the 
Neapolitan Bourbons. p. 397 
This article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. p. 399 
For the storming of the arsenal, see Note 67. 
On August 21, 1848, meetings and demonstrations were held in Berlin against 
the assault, engineered by reactionary forces, on members of the Democratic Club 
in Charlottenburg (then a suburb of Berlin). The demonstrators demanded the 
resignation of the Auerswald-Hansemann Ministry and the punishment of those 
involved in the incidents in Charlottenburg; they also threw stones at the building 
in which Auerswald and other Ministers met. The Government retaliated with 
further repression. p. 400 
This refers to Prussia's participation in the wars of the anti-French coalition 
against Napoleon in 1813-14 and 1815 (see Note 76). p. 400 

=====第667页=====
Notes 637 
262 
263 
264 
265 
266 
267 
268 See Note 235. p. 400 
This article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. p. 402 
The armistice between Sardinia and Austria concluded on August 9, 1848 (see 
Note 247), was originally to last six weeks but was prolonged. It was annulled on 
March 12, 1849, but soon after hostilities were resumed the Sardinian army was 
defeated, Charles Albert abdicated and Victor Emmanuel II, the new King, again 
concluded an armistice with the Austrians on March 26. p. 402 
On August 21, 1848, workers' disturbances started in Vienna, caused by the 
growth of unemployment and the Government's decree on the reduction of 
wages. On August 23 the national guards of bourgeois and aristocratic districts 
opened fire on unarmed workers who were protesting against this measure. The 
counter-revolutionaries who supported Emperor Ferdinand (who returned to 
Vienna from Innsbruck on August 12) and his court camarilla, and were 
preparing to attack the achievements of the revolution, took advantage of the 
situation, which had undermined the unity of the democratic forces. p. 402 
This article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. p. 404 
The so-called Risquons-Tout trial, held in Antwerp from August 9 to 30, 1848, was 
a fabrication of the Government of Leopold, the King of the Belgians, against the 
democrats. The pretext was a clash, which took place on March 29, 1848, between 
the Belgian Republican Legion bound for its home country from France and a 
detachment of soldiers near the village of Risquons-Tout not far from the French 
border. Mellinet, Ballin, Tedesco and other principal accused were sentenced to 
death, but this was later commuted to 30 years imprisonment, and still later they 
were pardoned. p. 404 
The German Workers' Association was founded by Marx and Engels in Brussels at 
the end of August 1847, with the aim of politically educating German workers 
residing in Belgium and spreading the ideas of scientific communism among 
them. Its best cadres were members of the Communist League and it maintained 
contacts with Belgian workers' and democratic associations. Its activities ceased 
soon after the February revolution of 1848 in France when its members were 
arrested and deported by the Belgian police. p. 406 
On his arrival in Cologne on April 11, 1848, Marx successfully applied to the 
Cologne City Council for citizenship. However, the decision was subject to 
approval by the local royal authorities who were slow in answering. At the 
beginning of August 1848, after four months' delay, Marx was informed that his 
application had been turned down. The conduct of the Cologne authorities 
aroused indignation in the city's democratic circles. The Cologne Democratic 
Society sent a deputation demanding that police measures against Marx should 
cease (see this volume, pp. 562-63). In reply to Marx's complaint, the Prussian 
Minister of the Interior Kühlwetter approved the decision of the local authorities 
on September 12, 1848 (see this volume, p. 581). Although the protest campaign 

=====第668页=====
638 Notes 
prevented reactionary circles from carrying out their schemes with regard to Marx 
immediately, he was in danger of being deported from Prussia as a "foreigner". 
Subsequently, the Prussian Government deported Marx for alleged "violation of 
the right of hospitality". This act and repressive measures against other editors of 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung caused the newspaper to cease publication in May 
1849.  ( p. 407 
269 Under the impact of the March revolution in the German states, the Federal Diet 
(see Note 13) established by its special decision of March 30, 1848, the 
representation quota to the German National Assembly. On April 7, an 
amendment to this decision was approved which extended the right to vote and to 
be elected to political refugees who returned to Germany and were reinstated in 
German citizenship. p. 408 
270 
271 
272 See Note 12. p. 408 
On August 26, 1848, an armistice for the term of seven months was signed 
between Denmark and Prussia in the Swedish city of Malmö. The armistice 
provided for a ceasefire between Prussia and Denmark, replacement of the 
provisional authorities in Schleswig by a new Government to be formed by the two 
contracting parties (the representatives of the Danish monarchy predominant), 
separation of the troops of Schleswig and Holstein, and other onerous terms for 
the national liberation movement in the duchies. The revolutionary-democratic 
reforms which had been introduced were now virtually eliminated. Though the 
Prussian ruling circles had waged the war against Denmark in the name of the 
German Confederation, they sacrificed all-German interests to dynastic and 
counter-revolutionary considerations when they concluded the armistice. They 
were also prompted by the desire to avoid complications with Russia and Britain, 
which supported Denmark. Nonetheless, as Engels foresaw, on September 16, the 
Frankfurt National Assembly approved by a majority vote the armistice concluded 
in Malmö. p. 411 
This editorial note was published in parentheses at the end of the article "The 
Financial Project of the Left" in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. It gave the following 
information: 
"Berlin, Sept, 6. The deputies Waldeck, Zenker, Anwandter, Krackrügge, 
Reuter, d'Ester, Stein, Eisner, ,Otto, Behrends, Jacoby, Schultz and others on the 
Left have placed the following financial plan before the National Assembly: 
"The Ministry is empowered to issue paper money to the sum of — million 
talers at 3 /$ per cent interest and to be redeemed in twenty consecutive years 
against an annual sum of — million talers. 
"This paper money will bear the name 'Prussian interest-bearing notes'." 
The author then lists the terms of issue and circulation of the above-mentioned 
"interest-bearing notes" and quotes the opinion of the Left-wing deputies on the 
advantages of their financial project. The following consideration is given 
particular mention: 
"The above plan will provide the Government with the means it needs to meet 
the requirements of the state and save it from resorting either to the hated 
measure of a compulsory loan or the expensive one of a loan from individual 
bankers.... 
"By issuing smaller denominations the interest-bearing notes plan will satisfy 
the pressing need for a freer circulation of capital, which does not occur in the 

=====第669页=====
Notes 639 
273 
274 
277 
278 case of a loan ... make it possible to exchange government bonds, which are 
sluggish in circulation and exposed to big fluctuations in exchange, for 
interest-bearing notes; it will also give the private individual and every worker the 
chance to invest his savings at interest without losing his disposal of them and free 
him from the cumbersome savings-banks and from the intermediary of bankers 
with their usual deductions for commission. 
"The interest-bearing notes plan will entice out of its hiding-place and bring 
into circulation the ready cash at present lying unproductively in the hands of 
timid capitalists and as a necessary consequence promote the flow of ready cash 
back to the state banks, while at the same time impeding the export abroad of 
coined metal. This can only be to the benefit of the country.... 
"The same security that in any case would have to be put up by the Government 
for any loan will form the security for the Prussian interest-bearing notes, but this 
plan spares the Government the humiliation of having to haggle with foreign 
bankers over the amount to be gained by the latter at the expense of Prussia; the 
plan also gives the Government a favourable opportunity to show the world that 
Prussia possesses sufficient means within itself to pay for its requirements, thereby-
reinforcing the confidence of the Prussian people in their own strength and 
emancipating them from the arbitrary power of foreign usurers." p. 416 
On August 9, 1848, in view of the frequent sorties of Prussian officers, the 
Prussian National Assembly voted for the proposal of Stein, a deputy of the Left, 
requesting the Minister of War to issue an army order to the effect that officers 
opposed to a constitutional system were bound to quit the army. Despite the 
National Assembly's decision, Schreckenstein, the Minister of War, did not issue 
the order; so Stein tabled his motion for the second time at the session of the 
National Assembly on September 7. As a result of the voting, the Auerswald-
Hansemann M.nistry had to resign. Under the Pfuel Ministry that followed,the 
order though in modified form was issued on September 26, 1848, but this also 
remained on paper. p. 417 
This refers to the visit of Frederick William IV to Cologne on August 13-15, 1848, 
in connection with the festivities to mark the sixth centenary of the laying of the 
cornerstone of St. Peter's Church. p. 420 
This article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. p. 421 
See Note 146. p. 424 
Re August 10, 1792, see Note 20. 
During May 31-June 2, 1793, the Girondist Government representing the 
republican circles of the industrial and commercial bourgeoisie, which strove to 
prevent the further development of the revolution, was overthrown by the masses 
in Paris. Twenty-nine Girondist leaders were expelled from the National 
Convention (later on, many of them took part in counter-revolutionary 
conspiracies and riots), and the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the 
Jacobins was established in France. p. 425 
The second, third and fourth articles of this series (dated September 12, 13 and 
15) were published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung under the title "Crisis!' 

=====第670页=====
640 Notes 
280 
281 
283 Excerpts of the third article were first published in English in the magazine Labour 
Monthly, 1948, Vol. XXX, No. 9, and in the collection: Karl Marx, On Revolution, 
ed. by S. K. Padover, New York, 1971; all these articles were published in English 
in full in the collections: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972, and Karl Marx, 
The Revolutions of 1848. Political Writings, Vol. 1, London, Penguin Books, 
1973.  p. 427 
Decrees (ordonnances) issued by the King of France on July 26, 1830, abolished 
freedom of the press, dissolved Parliament and changed the electoral law, 
reducing the electorate by seventy-five per cent. These emergency measures taken 
by Charles X's Government led to the July 1830 bourgeois revolution in France as 
a result of which the Bourbon monarchy was replaced by the Louis Philippe liberal 
monarchy. 
On February 24, 1848, the Louis Philippe monarchy was overthrown and the 
Second Republic proclaimed in France. p. 430 
In his message of September 10, 1848, Frederick William IV agreed with the view 
of his Ministers that the resolution passed by the Prussian National Assembly on 
September 7, 1848 (see Note 273), was an infringement of the "principle of 
constitutional monarchy", and approved their decision to resign as a protest 
against the Assembly's action. p. 430 
This refers to Stein's proposal accepted by the Prussian National Assembly on 
August 9 on the resignation of reactionary officers (see Note 273). The Assembly 
passed a resolution couched in rather mild terms after it had discussed the 
situation in the army following the shooting down on July 31 by the garrison of the 
Schweidnitz fortress in Silesia of the civil guard and townspeople, as a result of 
which 14 people were killed and 32 seriously wounded. The Minister of War was 
asked to warn officers to abstain from "reactionary tricks", and it was recommen­
ded that they resign from the army if they disagreed with the resolution. The 
Auerswald-Hansemann Ministry raised no objection because it was sure the 
deputies would not demand the faithful implementation of the resolution. But the 
Minister of War's non-observance of the Assembly's recommendations led to a 
conflict between the Government and the Assembly and to a ministerial crisis. 
p. 432 
Vendée —see Note 164. 
The Constituent Assembly in France (Constituante) held its sessions from July 9, 
1789,  to September 30, 1791. p. 432 
On September 13, 1848, a clash took place between the soldiers and officers of the 
1st and 2nd Regiments of the Guards stationed in Potsdam. This was provoked by 
the Command detaining a letter written by the soldiers to Deputy Stein and the 
National Assembly thanking them for adopting the September 7 resolution on the 
resignation of reactionary officers. During these disturbances the lower ranks at 
one point resorted to building barricades. Cuirassiers of the Guards stationed in 
Nauen refused to obey their officers and attack the civil population. p. 433 
In 1648 Frederick William, the Elector of Brandenburg, supported the 
candidature of John Casimir to the Polish throne; in 1656, after taking advantage 
of the King of Poland's difficult situation he concluded a military pact with 
Charles Gustav, King of Sweden, and supported his claims to the Polish crown. In 

=====第671页=====
Notes 641 
286 
287 
288 
289 
290 the war of 1655-60 between Sweden and Poland, he manoeuvred between the 
warring parties and thus secured the final incorporation of Eastern Prussia in 
Brandenburg. 
On April 5, 1795, in Basle, Prussia concluded a separate peace treaty with 
France, the first anti-French coalition having already begun to disintegrate. 
In November 1805, Russia and Prussia concluded a convention in Potsdam on 
joint action against Napoleonic France. The Prussian Government undertook to 
join the third anti-French coalition (Britain, Austria, Russia and Naples), but after 
the defeat sustained by the Austrian and Russian armies at Austerlitz, it 
renounced its obligations. p. 435 
This refers to the debate in the Frankfurt National Assembly in the summer and 
autumn of 1848 on the status of Limburg, a province of the Kingdom of the 
Netherlands, then part of the German Confederation. Numerous explanations on 
this subject were offered to the Assembly by representatives of the so-called 
Central Authority (the Imperial Ministry). p. 435 
This article was first published in English in the collections: Karl Marx, On 
Revolution, ed. by S. K. Padover, New York, 1971, and Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress Publishers, 
Moscow, 1972. p. 436 
After the Ministers sent in their resignation, Frederick William IV, in his message 
of September 10, 1848, while expressing his agreement with their motives for 
resigning, asked them to carry out their duties pending the appointment of 
successors. p. 436 
This article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. " p. 439 
On September 16, 1848, the Frankfurt National Assembly ratified the Malmö 
armistice by a majority vote. This evoked profound indignation among 
democratic circles and the broad masses. On September 17 the citizens of 
Frankfurt and the surrounding neighbourhood held a mass protest meeting at 
which they demanded that the Assembly be dissolved and a new representative 
body set up. The Imperial Government countered by summoning Prussian and 
Austrian troops to Frankfurt. An insurrection broke out the next day, but the 
poorly armed people sustained a defeat despite their stubborn barricade fighting. 
Unrest in many parts of Germany, particularly in the Rhineland, and another 
attempt at a republican uprising in Baden on September 21, were an echo of the 
Frankfurt events. 
The first article on the Frankfurt uprising had no title because it was published 
in the supplement to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung which had no table of contents. 
The article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1972. p. 442 
On September 21, 1848, a Ministry headed by Pfuel was formed in Prussia by 
royal order. It consisted of top officials and high-ranking officers. Outwardly its 
attitude towards the National Assembly was one of loyalty, but actually the Pfuel 
Ministry sought to organise and unite the counter-revolutionary forces. Pfuel and 

=====第672页=====
642 . Notes 
his colleagues paved the way for the overtly counter-revolutionary Government of 
Count Brandenburg (November 8, 1848), which accomplished a coup d'état in 
Prussia. p. 448 
291 See Note 23. p. 448 
The Committee of Public Safety consisting of 30 people was formed by the 
democratic and workers' organisations of Cologne at their mass meeting on 
September 13, in view of the ministerial crisis in Prussia, the menace of a 
counter-revolutionary coup and the increasing popular unrest in the Rhine 
Province aroused by the armistice with Denmark concluded at Malmö. The editors 
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, including Marx, Engels,  Wolff,  Dronke and 
Bürgers, as well as the leaders of the Cologne Workers' Association Schapper and 
Moll, were elected among its members. The Committee of Public Safety became a 
guiding centre of the Cologne solidarity movement with the Frankfurt insurgents 
and of the mass struggle against encroachments on the revolutionary gains and 
democratic freedoms by the Prussian authorities, who started openly to persecute 
members of democratic and proletarian organisations. p. 450 
The public meeting at Worringen (near Cologne), at which, besides the 
townspeople, peasants from the neighbouring villages were present, was called by 
the workers' and democratic organisations on September 17, 1848. It played an 
important part in rallying the masses to fight against the counter-revolution. The 
meeting recognised the Committee of Public Safety in Cologne, adopted an 
address supporting the protest made by democratic circles against the armistice 
between Prussia and Denmark and declared for a democratic social republic in 
Germany. For details on the meeting see this volume,pp. 586-87. p. 451 
294 See Note 23. p. 452 
295 See Note 137. p. 452 
The Cologne authorities, frightened by the upsurge of the revolutionary-
democratic movement, resorted to police persecution and on September 26, 1848, 
placed the city in a state of siege "to safeguard the individual and property". The 
military commandant's office issued an order prohibiting all associations that 
pursued "political and social aims", cancelled all meetings, disbanded and 
disarmed the civic militia, instituted courts martial and suspended publication of 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung and a number of other democratic newspapers. On 
October 2 the protest campaign made the Cologne military authorities lift the state 
of siege, and on October 3 subscription to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was 
resumed. However, Marx was not able to resume publication of the newspaper 
until October 12 because of lack of funds and because Engels and Dronke had had 
to leave Cologne, under threat of arrest. p. 455 
In English, this article was first published in an abridged form in the magazine 
Labour Monthly, 1948, Vol. XXX, No. 10, and in full in the collections: Karl Marx, 
On Revolution, ed. by S. K. Padover, New York, 1971, Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress Publishers, 
Moscow, 1972, and Karl Marx, The Revolutions of 1848. Political Writings, Vol. 1, 
London, Penguin Books, 1973. p. 457 
A popular uprising that took place in Vienna on October 6-7, 1848, was sparked 
off by the orders of the Austrian Government to dissolve the Hungarian Diet and 

=====第673页=====
Notes 643 
299 
301 
304 
305 
306 
308 send Austrian troops to the Croatian Ban Jellachich who, supported by the 
Imperial Court, had started a counter-revolutionary campaign against Hungary 
but sustained defeat at the hands of the Hungarian revolutionary troops on 
September 29. The masses, headed by the petty-bourgeois democrats, prevented 
the Vienna garrison from marching on Hungary and, after fierce fighting, 
captured the city. The Austrian Emperor and his court fled to Olmütz (Olomouc) 
on October 7, 1848, and were later followed by the Ministry. The majority of 
Czech deputies to the Austrian National Assembly (Reichstag) who belonged to the 
national-liberal party departed for Prague in haste. p. 457 
The reference is to the holidays held in September 1848 to mark the eighteenth 
anniversary of the Belgian revolution of 1830. p. 459 
This article was first published in English in the collections: Karl Marx, On 
Revolution, ed. by S. K. Padover, New York, 1971, and Karl Marx, The Revolutions 
of 1848. Political Writings, Vol. 1, London, Penguin Books, 1973. p. 462 
At the session of the Prussian National Assembly on September 29, 1848, Deputy 
d'Ester demanded that the Government lift the siege of Cologne and call the 
Cologne Garrison Headquarters to account for unlawful actions. p. 462 
On October 2, 1848, a group of counter-revolutionary bourgeois in Cologne 
(Stupp, Ammon and others) handed an address to the Prussian National Assembly 
in which they stated that the demand that the siege of Cologne be lifted put 
forward by d'Ester and supported by the Rhine Province deputies Borchardt and 
Kyll allegedly "does not reflect the mood and opinions of the burgh­
ers",  p. 462 
See Note 245. p. 463 
For Stein's Army Order see Note 273. 
On September 17, 1848, the commander of the Brandenburg military area, 
General Wrangel, issued an army order which demanded that "public law and 
order" be secured, threatened "elements who were against law" and called upon 
the soldiers to rally around their officers and the King. p. 463 
When the popular unrest in Cologne provoked by the arrests of democratic and 
workers' leaders on orders of the Cologne authorities was at its highest, Marx and 
his associates called upon the workers to refrain from premature armed actions 
and from succumbing to provocation in a situation unfavourable for the 
revolutionary forces. Marx uttered this warning at the meeting of the Cologne 
Workers' Association in the Kranz Hotel on September 25, 1848, and later at a 
popular meeting in the Eiser Hall attended by members of the Cologne 
Democratic Society. p. 464 
Thiers' work published in the newspaper La Constitutionnel in September and 
October 1848, was later printed in pamphlet form under the title De la propriété, 
Paris,  1848. p. 467 
Thiers' speech was a reply to the proposal made by Deputy Turck to found a state 
mortgage bank with a fixed rate of exchange. p. 467 
The Direct Commission of Mainz was founded in 1819 by decision of the Carlsbad 
conference of German states (see Notes 152 and 199) to investigate "tricks of the 

=====第674页=====
644 Notes 
309 demagogues", i.e. for the struggle against the opposition movement in the 
German states. The Commission, whose members were appointed by the 
individual governments of the German states, was authorised to hold direct 
inquiries and make arrests in all the states of the German Confedera­
tion, p. 472 
The reference is to the "law on the protection of the Constituent National 
Assembly and the officials of the Central Authority" according to which offences 
against National Assembly deputies and the officials of the Central Authority were 
punishable by imprisonment. This law was a repressive measure adopted by the 
Frankfurt National Assembly majority and the Imperial Government on October 
9, 1848, i.e. after the September uprising in Frankfurt. 
Black-red-golden—a symbolic combination of colours signifying the unity of 
Germany. p. 473 
In September 1848 Turkish troops supported by the Tsarist Government 
occupied Wallachia to suppress the national liberation movement. In Bucharest, 
they were guilty of bloody outrages against the civil population. The proclamation 
published by the Turkish government commissioner Fuad Effendi declared the 
necessity of establishing "constitutional order" and "eliminating all vestiges of the 
revolution". p. 473 
311 See Note 86. p. 474 
312 See Note 273. p. 476 
313 
315 
317 On events of August 23 in Vienna see Note 264. 
On October 5, 1848, it became known in Vienna that Austrian troops were to be 
sent to suppress the Hungarian national liberation movement and that a battalion 
of grenadiers had received marching orders. This news caused general 
indignation and a popular uprising on October 6 and 7. p. 477 
See Note 133. p. 478 
On May 15, 1848, a popular uprising in Naples, caused by King Ferdinand II's 
infringement of constitutional rights, was savagely crushed (see this volume, 
pp. 24-26), declassed elements (lazzaroni) being active in its suppression. 
Early in September 1848 Neapolitan troops sent by Ferdinand II to suppress 
the revolutionary movement in Sicily bombarded the town of Messina for four 
days and, having captured it, committed violent outrages. Ferdinand earned for 
himself the derisive nickname "Bomba". 
The capture of Milan by Austrian troops on August 6, 1848, was accompanied 
by outrages against the population. p. 481 
See Note 18. p. 481 
In the summer of 1848 the Cologne Public Prosecutor's office was already trying 
to start legal proceedings against the editors and the publisher of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, accusing them of insulting the Public Prosecutor and police in 
connection with the newspaper's defence of the arrested leaders of the Cologne 
Workers' Association Gottschalk and Anneke (see this volume, pp. 176-79). In the 
autumn, the Cologne Public Prosecutor Hecker issued orders to bring to trial 
Marx, the editor-in-chief, and  Korff,  the newspaper's responsible publisher, for 

=====第675页=====
Notes 645 
320 
321 printing a number of articles, including the proclamation "To the German 
People" written by the republican Friedrich Hecker. Despite the negative findings 
of the examining magistrate, who in October 1848 stated that there were 
insufficient grounds for prosecution, the Public Prosecutor's office insisted on 
pressing its accusations and, in addition, put forward new ones (see Marx's article 
"Three State Trials against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung", present edition, Vol. 8). 
Another charge was brought against Marx for his participation in the 
revolutionary movement as a leader of the Cologne democratic organisa­
tion, p. 485 
See Note 310. p. 485 
See Note 139. p. 486 
The reference is to the opposition of Marx and his followers in March 1848 to the 
plan of the German legion of volunteers to enter Germany with the aim of starting 
a revolution; this plan was supported by Herwegh, Bornstedt and others (see Note 
2). ' p. 488 
The Deutsche Volkszeitung for April 17, 1848, published a report from Paris which 
322 
323 censured the German communists' negative attitude towards Herwegh's 
plan. p. 488 
325 This article was first published in English in the collections: Karl Marx, On 
Revolution, ed. by S. K. Padover, New York, 1971, and Karl Marx, The Revolutions 
of 1848. Political Writings, Vol. 1, London, Penguin Books, 1973. p. 490 
The reference is to the Second Democratic  Congress  which was held in Berlin from 
October 26 to 30, 1848. Here, a new Central Committee of German democrats 
(d'Ester, Reichenbach, Hexamer) was elected, the question of constitutional 
principles was discussed and the "Declaration of the Rights of Man" adopted. 
However, the motley composition of the Congress led to discord and differences 
on the main issues. In response to the proposal of the Left-wing representatives to 
appeal to the people to support the Viennese insurgents, the majority of the 
delegates, who were against it, walked out. But the appeal was adopted by the rest 
of the delegates. Though worded in a bombastic style, it actually contained merely 
an appeal for aid from German governments which were manifestly hostile to 
revolutionary Vienna. On the whole, instead of adopting resolute measures to 
mobilise the masses for struggle against counter-revolution, the Congress limited 
itself to passing sterile and contradictory resolutions. 
It took a more consistent and radical position during the discussion of the social 
question on October 30. Several points of the "Demands of the Communist Party 
in Germany" were made the basis of the practical proposals of the reporter on this 
question (the reporter being a delegate from the Cologne Workers' Association 
Beust) which were submitted for discussion by the Congress to all democratic 
societies. p. 490 
See Note 23. p. 491 
This article was first published in English in the collections: Karl Marx, On 
Revolution, ed. by S. K. Padover, New York, 1971, and Karl Marx and Frederick 

=====第676页=====
646 Notes 
Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress Publishers, 
Moscow, 1972. p. 493 
326 An ironical allusion to the previous political activities of Brüggemann who for his 
participation in the student opposition movement and his support for freedom of 
the press at the Hambach festivities (1832), was sentenced to death for "high 
treason". This sentence was later commuted to life imprisonment. During the 
amnesty in 1840 Brüggemann was pardoned. p. 497 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung gives reports on events in Vienna from the 
above-mentioned Preussische Staats-Anzeiger, and the Allgemeine Oder-Zei­
tung, p. 497 
This article was first published in English in the collections: Karl Marx, On 
Revolution, ed. by S. K. Padover, New York, 1971, and Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49, Progress Publishers, 
Moscow, 1972. p. 498 
Slovanskâ Lipa—a Czech national society founded at the end of April 1848. The 
leadership of the society in Prague was in the hands of moderate liberals (Safafîk, 
Gaue),  who joined the counter-revolutionary camp after the Prague uprising in 
June 1848, whereas the provincial branches were mostly led by radicals, p. 498 
During the French Revolution, Koblenz was the centre for the counter-revoluti­
onary émigrés. p. 499 
331 See Note 238. p. 499 
This article was first published in English in the collection: Karl Marx, On 
Revolution, ed. by S. K. Padover, New York, 1971. p. 503 
The Academic Legion—a student military organisation set up in Vienna in March 
1848.  Each faculty of the University formed a detachment divided into companies. 
The majority of the Legion were radical democrats. Lecturers and professors of 
the University as well as writers, poets, journalists and doctors, made up part of 
the Legion. The Legion played an important part in the revolutionary movement 
in Austria in 1848. p. 503 
334 See Note 101. p. 505 
335 Frederick Engels' travel notes "From Paris to Berne" have survived in the form of 
an unfinished fair copy. Prior to his trip the following events took place: On 
September 26, 1848, a state of siege was declared in Cologne and an order to 
arrest some of the editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Engels among them (see 
this volume, p. 593), was issued. Engels emigrated to Belgium and, together with 
Dronke who joined him en route, arrived in Brussels; but the Brussels police 
arrested both of them and, on October 4, deported them from Belgium (see this 
volume, pp. 459-60). On October 5, Engels and Dronke arrived in Paris. After a 
few days, Engels, who had almost no ready money, started on foot for Switzerland. 
About November 9 he reached Berne via Geneva and Lausanne, where he stayed 
for a while. Engels began writing his travel notes in Geneva, as evidenced by the 
original title to the manuscript, "From Paris to Geneva". The manuscript is 
appended with two sheets of sketches drawn by Engels en route (see illustrations 
between pages 508 and 509 of this volume) between Auxerre (France) and Le 
Locle (Switzerland). 

=====第677页=====
Notes 647 
338 On the first sheet there are the following designations (in angular brackets are 
names crossed out by Engels; in square brackets — inexact names of localities in 
the manuscript): 
1) Route from Auxerre to Chalon with marks: 
"Auxerre— Saint-Bris — Vermenton — Pont aux Alouette — Lucy le Bois —Aval-
Ion—(Rouvray) —Saulieu —^in the direction of Dijon) —Chanteaux — Rouv-
rav — in the direction of Dijon — Arnay-le-Duc — Château — (a long vil­
lage) — here I went to the post-office — coal mines — an inn — a beautiful valley, 
wine — the same — Chagny—Chalon." 
2) Route from Beaufort to Geneva with marks: 
"Beaufort — Orgelet —Ain — Moirans— Pont du Lizon [in the manuscript 
Pt. d'Ison]—Saint-Claude — La Meure —Mijoux — Gex — Ferney—Succony— 
Geneva." 
On the same sheet there are several drawings, including one of a rider in the 
Hungarian uniform. There are also discernible names: 
Czechs \ Croats | Serbians J Poles 1 
Magyars J. Illyrians? Bosnians > Rutheniansl 
Slovaks I SlovenesJ Bulgarians J 
On the second sheet there are the following designations: 
1) Route from Auxerre to Geneva with marks: 
"Auxerre—-Saint-Bris — Vermenton — Pont aux Alouette —Lucy le Bois — Aval-
Ion —(Rouvray) —Saulieu — Arnay-le-Duc — a long village — Ivry — La Cange — 
Chagny — Chalon — Saint-Marcel — Louhans — Beaufort— Orgelet — Ain — Moi-
rans — two mountains — Pont du Lizon [in the manuscript Pt. d'Ison] — 
Saint-Claude — La Meure — Mijoux — Gex — Geneva. " 
2) Route from Moirans to Saint-Claude with marks: 
"Moirans — wind mills — Pont du Lizon [in the manuscript Pt. d'Ison] — Saint-
Claude." 
3) Route from Geneva to Le Lode with marks: 
"Geneva — Bellerive — Coppet — Nyon — Rolle — Aubonne — Morges — Cosso-
nay — La Sarraz — Orbe — Yverdon — Saint-Croix — Fleurier — Travers — Les 
Ponts — Le Locle." 
An ethnographie note and drawings appended to the manuscript suggest that 
Engels stopped writing his travel notes when, at Marx's request, he started on an 
article "The Struggle in Hungary" (see present edition, Vol. 8). p. 507 
Chant du départ (A Marching Song) — one of the most popular songs of the French 
Revolution. It also remained popular later. 
Mourir pour la patrie —see Note 107. p. 513 
See Note 100. p. 517 
The maximum  laws  and the law against buying up food supplies (June 26, 1793; in the 
manuscript Engels uses the German transliteration Akkapareurs for the French 
word accapareur —meaning "usurer", "profiteer") were adopted by the Conven­
tion under pressure from the masses, who were demanding fixed prices and 
effective measures against profiteers in food at a time of deepening food crisis and 
rising prices. The first maximum adopted on May 4, 1793, introduced fixed prices 
for grain; the decree of September 11, 1793, fixed a single price for grain and 
flour; on September 29, 1793, fixed prices on other staple goods (second 
maximum) were introduced. p. 520 

=====第678页=====
648 Notes 
All the three receipts are in Engels' handwriting. p. 533 
The address "To All Workers of Germany" on behalf of the Mainz Workers' 
Educational Association was drafted by the emissary of the Communist League 
who arrived from Paris, member of the Central Authority Karl Wallau, and 
Communist League member Adolf Cluss. The address was published in several 
democratic newspapers. On April 8, 1848, on their way to Cologne, Marx and 
Engels stopped at Mainz where, together with the local communists, they 
discussed the further plan of action aimed at preparing ground for a mass party of 
the German proletariat with the Communist League forming its nucleus. 
p. 535 
On December 1, 1845, Marx, then residing in Brussels, asked officially to be 
relieved of his Prussian citizenship with the intention of depriving the Prussian 
authorities, who were making attempts to get him expelled from Belgium, of any 
opportunity to interfere in his affairs. After the March revolution of 1848 in 
Germany Marx returned to his homeland and applied for Prussian citizenship. 
He wrote his application to the police office on the second day after his arrival in 
Cologne. The rough copy of the application has also survived. The fair and the 
rough copy of the application are written in an unknown hand; the signature, 
place and date are in Marx's handwriting. The fair copy differs considerably in 
some places from the rough one, which mentions Marx's intention to publish the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Apparently Marx thought better about informing the 
police of this. 
On April 18 Marx was summoned to Police Inspector Hiinermund who wrote 
an account of Marx's statement. From the text of the account (see next document) 
it is evident that Marx declined once again to reveal to the police his plans to 
publish a newspaper. 
Subsequent events showed that Marx had good reason not to trust the police. 
The Cologne regional police office deliberately delayed answering his application 
and, after the publication of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, it firmly rejected it. In a 
report to the Minister of the Interior, the regional police office described the 
editors of the newspaper as very dangerous revolutionaries who were striving to 
overthrow the existing system. Oberpräsident of the Cologne Province Eichmann 
called Marx the "soul" of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, stressing that he was "the 
most prominent figure among the republicans of Cologne". The Prussiani 
Government did their best to induce the Cologne police to take measures against 
the activities of the editor-in-chief of the revolutionary newspaper. This was why 
Marx was refused Prussian citizenship (see this volume, pp. 407-10). p. 537 
This document is not included among those kept in the police archives, connected 
with granting Marx Prussian citizenship. Apparently it was given back to 
Marx. p. 538 
This document reflects events prior to the publication of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung and gives new information on the situation in which Marx and his 
followers were campaigning for the foundation of a truly revolutionary 
proletarian organ. Before his arrival in Cologne, Marx, who was already planning 
this publication, got to know from Georg Weerth's letter that Hess and Anneke, 
members of the Cologne communities of the Communist League, intended to 
found a democratic newspaper of the same title. An announcement of the 
publication of a new paper printed in the Kölnische Zeitungon April 7, 1848, above 
their signatures showed that it was going to be an ordinary local petty-bourgeois 

=====第679页=====
Notes 649 
paper, having nothing to do with the class struggle of the proletariat and lacking 
any understanding of the true tasks of the German revolution. The announce­
ment evoked different responses: various rich bourgeois offered financial advice, 
petty-bourgeois intellectuals offered to collaborate, Communist League members 
expressed astonishment at the paper's programme. Marx and Engels hastened 
their return to Germany. 
On April 11, 1848, they arrived in Cologne and at once started to discuss the 
idea of a newspaper with Communist League members. Marx and his followers 
succeeded in strengthening their position. Hess, who was barred from taking part, 
left Cologne for Paris. 
Much effort was made to settle issues with the democrats who, as one of the 
conditions for supporting the newspaper, demanded a repudiation of republican 
propaganda; financial problems were also acute, since the cautious attitude of the 
Rhenish bourgeois towards Marx and Engels' convictions greatly reduced the 
financial sources for the newspaper. In mid-April, Engels went to Barmen, 
Elberfeld and other towns to seek out shareholders. 
The decision to include Heinrich Bürgers, who was prone to the petty-
bourgeois influence, on the editorial board of the newspaper was a compromise. 
Bürgers wrote the prospectus, published here, in the spirit of petty-bourgeois 
socialism, in a moderate and ellusive tone (even the bourgeois Elberfelder Zeitung 
mentioned on April 30, 1848, the "indefinite expressions" of this "socialist 
republican document"). The prospectus, however, expressed the intention of 
publishing an all-German political newspaper rather than a local sheet and the 
necessity of paying attention to the social question and the condition of the 
"workers' estate". It also proved the importance of choosing Cologne — the centre 
of the Rhine Province, the most progressive in Germany — as the place of its 
publication. The names of the editors were not mentioned. Although by that time 
it had already been decided that Marx would be editor-in-chief, the composition 
of the editorial board was not yet settled. 
Displaying great resourcefulness and persistence in overcoming political and 
financial difficulties, Marx succeeded in enlisting on the editorial board true 
proletarian revolutionaries, thus ensuring a clear revolutionary line for the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. In a brief space of time he completed the formidable 
organisational preparations for a daily political newspaper. At the end of May, the 
newspapers of the Rhine Province and other parts of Germany announced that 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung would begin publication on June 1, 1848. p. 539 
Before the March revolution of 1848, there existed in Cologne a Communist 
League community which included d'Ester, Daniels, Bürgers, Anneke, Gottschalk 
and others, the majority being under the influence of the "true socialists". At the 
beginning of April 1848, the community was joined by Communist League 
members who had returned from emigration. As seen from the minutes published 
in this volume, soon after the arrival of Marx and Engels in Cologne sharp 
differences arose between them and Gottschalk. This document is signed by 
Bürgers and Moll, the leaders of the community; Marx was present at the sitting as 
the President of the Central Authority of the Communist League. p. 542 
The meeting of the shareholders who financed the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was 
held at the end of May 1848, and a provisional committee was elected consisting of 
Hermann  Korff,  Karl Wächter and Georg Weerth who apparently undertook the 
final editing of the Articles. The document was discussed at meetings of 
shareholders on June 18 and 21; in July, the Articles, printed as a separate 
pamphlet by Wilhelm Clouth, were sent to the shareholders. 

=====第680页=====
650 Notes 
From the very beginning, differences arose between shareholders and editorial 
board. Many of the shareholders, displeased at the revolutionary trend of the 
newspaper, refused their contributions. They were particularly disturbed by the 
articles in defence of the proletarian uprising in Paris in June 1848. This led to the 
editor-in-chief, Marx, seeking other financial sources (the aid of the German and 
Polish democrats etc.) including his own personal means. p. 543 
Hermann Becker, one of the leaders of the Cologne Democratic Society, despite 
Marx's objections, invited Wilhelm Weitling who had returned from emigration to 
address a general meeting. 
In his speech delivered on July 21, 1848, Weitling, who called himself "a 
democrat, socialist and communist", proclaimed as a vital task of the revolution 
the establishment of a dictatorial Provisional Government consisting of a narrow 
circle of persons—"very keen people", having in mind himself as the sole dictator. 
Like Gottschalk, Weitling ignored the bourgeois-democratic character of the 
revolution and called for immediate and revolutionary fulfilment of his Utopian 
plans for social transformation, considering that political questions merely 
distracted from the main aim. At the next meeting of the Democratic Society on 
August 4, Marx gave his reply. We can only judge the contents of his speech from 
this newspaper report. The author of this highly imperfect report, apparendy, did 
not clearly understand the meaning of Marx's speech and some propositions are 
therefore presented in very confusing and inexact manner. 
In his speech, Marx dealt especially with the peculiarities of the German 
revolution and its vital task: to eliminate the remnants of feudalism. In his 
controversy with Weitling, Marx stressed the close connection between political 
and social struggle, the inseparability and interdependence of political and social 
demands. The principal difference between Marx's position and that of Weiding 
was also manifest in the issue of the form of government which should be 
established after the victory of the revolution. Emphatically rejecting the idea of a 
one-man dictatorship, Marx saw the necessity to establish a revolutionary-
democratic dictatorship founded on the union of those classes which had 
accomplished the revolution — proletariat, peasantry and petty bourgeoi­
sie, p. 556 
The First Rhenish District Congress of Democratic Associations was held in 
Cologne on August 13 and 14, 1848. Marx and Engels took part in the work of the 
Congress. 
It was proposed that regional committees should be organised of 
representatives of democratic associations, with their headquarters in a number of 
cities.  The Regional Committee of the Rhine Province and Westphalia was to have 
its seat in Cologne. The Central Committee of the three democratic associations in 
Cplogne (see Note 348), which was organised prior to the Congress, was 
confirmed as the Rhenish Regional Democratic Committee, which included, 
besides its President Schneider II, Marx, Schapper and Moll. Under the influence 
of the Communist League members — deputies to the Congress — a resolution 
was passed on the necessity of conducting work among the factory proletariat and 
also among the peasants. The Congress recommended that every possible support 
be rendered to the democratic press (this primarily concerned the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung).  p. 558 
The Central Committee of the three democratic associations of Cologne — the 
Democratic Society, the Workers' Association and the Association for Workers 
and Employers — was organised at the end of June on a decision of the First 

=====第681页=====
Notes 651 
351 
352 
353 
354 Democratic Congress in Frankfurt am Main. This Committee functioned as the 
Regional Committee until the convocation of the Rhenish Congress of Democrats. 
Marx was its member. p. 558 
The document is written in an unknown hand, but signed by Marx. p. 561 
This protest was made on August 11, 1848, at a general meeting of the Cologne 
Democratic Society. The meeting was presided over by Marx (see this volume, 
p. 562). ' p. 564 
In its address "To the German People" on April 6, 1848,the Committee of Fifty, 
which was elected by the Preparliament in April 1848 (see Note 51) and consisted 
mostly of liberals, called for support for activities aimed "at returning Poles their 
homeland". This call was, however, very vaguely worded. p. 564 
Marx went to Vienna to strengthen ties with the democratic workers' organisations 
and to collect funds for the publication of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in view of 
the refusal of many shareholders to subsidise the newspaper after it came out in 
defence of the Paris insurgents. Marx left Cologne on August 23, and stayed for a 
few days in Berlin, where he met Left-wing deputies of the Berlin National 
Assembly, the Russian revolutionary Mikhail Bakunin and other democrats. 
Marx arrived in Vienna on August 27. The next day, at a meeting of the 
Democratic Association, he spoke against the representative of the Berlin Central 
Committee of Democrats, Julius Fröbel, who supported the proposal to petition 
the Emperor to dismiss Minister of Labour Schwarzer — the main culprit in the 
bloody clashes between the bourgeois national guard and the workers in Vienna 
on August 23, 1848. Marx was opposed on principle to conciliating monarchs. On 
August 30 Marx delivered a lecture to the first Vienna Workers' Association on 
the June insurrection in Paris, noting that German emigrant workers had taken 
part in it, and on September 2 lectured on wage labour and capital. During his talk 
with the leader of the German-Bohemian faction in the Austrian National 
Assembly (Reichstag) Borros, he was convinced that the national antagonism 
between Czechs and Germans did not extend to relations between the workers of 
the two nationalities since these were united by common class interests. 
On his way back, Marx visited Dresden and again Berlin. Here he attended 
sessions of the Prussian National Assembly and met the Polish revolutionary 
Koscielski who in the name of the Polish democrats later sent him two thousand 
talers for the publication of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. About mid-September 
Marx returned to Cologne. p. 568 
Reference to Paris is apparently made because of the passport Marx had on him, 
issued by the Paris police office on March 30, 1848 (see illustrations between pages 
408 and 409 of this volume). p. 569 
This excerpt was in the retrospective review signed PBS and published in the 
supplement to the Wiener Zeitung. The author of the review wrote with overt 
hostility about the "encroaches" of the Left organisations, criticising "a certain 
association" — this refers to the Vienna Democratic Association — because it let 
foreign politicians "drastically criticise" the measures of the Austrian Government 
and breed "distrust". Having cited Marx, the author exclaims: "For me these 
words are unforgettable as they reflect all the chasm, all plans of this 
party." p. 571 

=====第682页=====
652 Notes 
355 
356 
357 
358 
360 On September 8, 1848, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung published the following note 
by its Vienna correspondent Müller-Tellering concerning this report: "At today's 
sitting of the first Vienna Workers' Association Marx delivered a speech on the 
social-economic question." p. 573 
In a series of satirical articles, Georg Weerth ridiculed the Prussian reactionary 
Prince Lichnowski under the name of the knight Schnapphahnski. The articles 
"Life and Deeds of the Famous Knight Schnapphahnski" were published 
unsigned in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in August-September and December 
1848.  p. 575 
The public meeting in Cologne at which this address was adopted in connection 
with the debates on the ratification of the armistice at Malmö (see Note 289) in the 
Frankfurt National Assembly, was convened on the initiative of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, as may be judged from the extant handwritten notes which 
Marx wrote later (at that time he was away). Engels apparently took part in the 
drafting of the address. The editorial board of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
published the text of the address in the editorial marked "Cologne, September 8" 
and supplied it with the following note: "Last night a public meeting was held in 
Rauch's Riding School to protest against the Prussian-Danish armistice and against 
the Prussian civic militia law which has been partially passed. Although the posters 
announcing the meeting were put up only late in the morning, the large hall, 
which holds no fewer than two and a half thousand people, was filled to 
overflowing, and at least twice that number were turned away because there was 
no room...." p. 577 
During the summer of 1848, the Cologne Workers' Association discussed the 
social question. Marx's followers (Schapper, Moll and others) were trying to 
explain to the workers the groundlessness of Utopian plans to transform society on 
the basis of existing capitalist relations, like Louis Blanc's scheme to create a 
workers' association with the aid of the state ("organisation of labour"), and other 
similar petty-bourgeois socialist projects. Engels made a detailed report, but its 
content was not noted in the minutes. The Cologne discussion on the social 
question was of great importance for the dissemination of the ideas of scientific 
communism among the workers. p. 580 
See Note 100. p. 580 
On July 15, 1848, an Artisans' Congress opened in Frankfurt to work out the 
Trade Rules. As apprentices were not admitted to the Congress by the 
worker-masters, the former convened their own congress on July 20 and invited 
representatives from the workers' associations. The work of the Apprentices' 
Congress lasted,with intervals, till September 20. At the Congress along with the 
protest against the narrow position of the Artisans' Congress and the criticism of 
the Trade Rules the following ideas were widespread: the ideas of the German 
economist Winkelblech (who took part in the work of both congresses) on the 
re-establishment of guilds, his theory of "federal socialism", and the desire to 
evade political questions. The Apprentices' Congress supported the idea of 
establishing the all-German Workers' Union with the aim of improving the 
workers' conditions and proposed to the National Assembly that a "social 
Parliament" be convoked and a "social Ministry" be formed. p. 580 

=====第683页=====
Notes 653 
A copy of this letter sent to the Cologne regional administration is extant. The 
postscript runs as follows: "The copy of the above-mentioned instruction is sent to 
the royal regional administration for information, being at the same time a reply 
to the notice of the 20th of last month on remission of the applica­
tion." p. 581 
In his letters to Görtz, the Chief Burgomaster of Trier, of October 17 and 
November 10, 1845 (see present edition, Vol. 4), Marx supported his request to be 
released from Prussian citizenship by stating his intention to emigrate to the 
United States of America (no other documents testifying to this intention are 
available). In accordance with this, the letter of Regierungspräsident of Trier von 
Auerswald to Oberpräsident of the Rhine Province and the Minister of the Interior 
of November 6, 1845, concerning Marx's release from citizenship mentions the 
same motive. Officially Marx was released from Prussian citizenship on December 
1, 1845. p. 581 
363 Qn  tne election of Marx, Engels and other editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
to the Cologne Committee of Public Safety see Note 292. p. 582 
364 Yhe Citizens' Association—see Note 65. 
Waiters— see Note 23. p. 583 
On September 11, 1848, soldiers of the 27th Regiment billeted in Cologne clashed 
with citizens supported by the democratic part of the civic militia. p. 584 
This proclamation was published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung without title and 
also as a separate leaflet the tide of which is given here. The text of the leaflet 
differs somewhat from the version printed in the newspaper. Different wording is 
given in the footnotes. p. 588 
Because of its lack of funds and other difficulties the publication of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung was resumed not on October 5 but 12, 1848. p. 591 366 

=====第684页=====
654 
NAME INDEX 
A 
Abegg, Bruno Eberhard (1803-1848) — 
Prussian official; deputy to the Prus­
sian National Assembly (Centre) in 
1848.—243 
Abramowicz, Ignacy (1793-1867) — Polish 
officer, Chief of Police in Warsaw from 
1844.—309 
Adam—French worker, Blanquist; in 
1848 Vice-President of the Club de la 
Fiaternité in Paris; after the June 
uprising emigrated to Belgium and 
then to London; in 1850 signed an 
agreement of the Blanquists with the 
Communist League.— 459 
Alcibiades (c. 450-c. 404 B. C.)—Athe­
nian politician and general.—512 
Alinari, L.— Italian democrat, member 
of the editorial board of the newspaper 
I : Alba.— 167 
Amnion von—Prussian official; Public 
Prosecutor at Düsseldorf  ( 1848).— 488 
Anneke, Friedrich (1818-1872) — Prussian 
artillery officer, discharged from the 
army for his political views; member of 
the Communist League, one of the 
founders of the Cologne Workers' As­
sociation (1848), editor of the Neue  Köl­
nische Zeitung, member of the Rhenish 
District Committee of Demo­
crats.—176-78, 186, 326, 554, 555, 
566, 582 
Anneke, Mathilde Franziska (1817-1884) — German writer, contributed to 
democratic journals in 1848 and 1849; 
wife of Friedrich Anneke.— 177, 178, 
566 
Appius Claudius Caesus (died c. 448 
B. C.) — Roman consul and cen­
sor.—304 
Archimedes (c. 287-212 B.C.) —Greek 
mathematician and engineer.— 293 
Ariosto, Lodovico (1474-1533) — Italian 
poet of the Renaissance, author of 
"L'Orlando furioso".— 359, 364 
Aristotle (384-322 B. C.) — Greek 
philosopher.— 264 
Arndt, Ernst Moritz (1769-1860) — 
German writer, historian and philolo­
gist; took part in the liberation strug­
gle against Napoleon's rule; deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Right Centre) in 1848.—371 
Arnim-Boytzenburg, Adolf Heinrich, Count 
von ( 1803-1868) — Prussian statesman, 
junker, Minister of the Interior (1842-
45) and Prime Minister (March 19-29, 
1848).—208 
Arnim-Suckow, Heinrich Alexander, Baron 
von ( 1798-1861  ) — Prussian statesman, 
moderate liberal, Minister of Foreign 
Affairs from March 21 until June 19, 
1848.—54, 56, 74 
Arntz, Aegidius Rudolph Nicolaus (1812-
1884) — German lawver and journal-

=====第685页=====
Name Index 655 
ist; deputy to the Prussian National As­
sembly (Left Centre) in 1848.—207 
Aschoff von — Prussian general, comman­
dant of Berlin; during April and May 
1848 commanded the Berlin civic 
militia.— 46,47 
d'Aspre, Constantin, Baron (1789-
1850) — Austrian general, took part in 
suppressing the 1848-49 revolution in 
Italy.—386 
Attila (d. 453) —King of the Huns (433-
53).—387 
Auersperg, Karl, Count von  (1783-
1859) —Austrian field marshal, com­
mander of the troops in Lower Austria 
during the revolution of 1848-49; took 
part in suppressing the Vienna upris­
ing in October 1848.—491, 503 
Aucrswald, Alfred von (1797-1870) — 
Prussian Minister of the Interior 
(March-June 1848).—19 
Auerswald, Rudolf von (1795-1866) 
—Prussian statesman, liberal aristo­
crat, Prime Minister and Minister 
of Foreign Affairs (June to September 
1848).—38,  96, 106, 170, 172, 174, 
183-85,  191, 194, 210, 217, 229, 
240, 267, 269, 303, 417, 430, 435, 583 
Augusta, Marie Luise Katharina  (1811-
1890) —wife of William, Prince of 
Prussia.— 106 
B 
Bakunin, Mikhail (1814-1876) — Russian 
revolutionary and writer, an ideologist 
of the Narodnik trend and of 
anarchism.— 315 
Ballin, Felix (born c. 1802) — Belgian 
democrat, member of the Democratic 
Association in Brussels, one of the de­
fendants at the Risquons-Tout 
trial.—405,406 
Baltzer, Wilhelm Eduard (1814-
1887) — German preacher; deputy to 
the Prussian National Assemblv (Left 
wing) in 1848.—243 Barbarossa —see Frederick I(" Barbarossa" 
or "Redbeard") 
Barbes, Armand (1809-1870)—French 
revolutionary, a leader of secret socie­
ties during the July monarchy; depu­
ty to the Constituent Assembly in 1848; 
sentenced to life imprisonment for his 
participation in the popular insurrec­
tion of May 15, 1848, and pardoned 
in 1854; emigrated to Belgium.—155 
Barrot, Camille Hyacinthe Odilon  (1791-
1873) — French politician, leader of 
the liberal dynastic opposition until 
February 1848; from December 1848 
to October 1849 headed the Ministry, 
which relied on a monarchist coali­
tion.— 440 
Bassermann, Friedrich Daniel  (1811-
1855) — German politician, rep­
resented the Baden Government in the 
Federal Diet during the 1848-49 rev­
olution; deputy to the Frankfurt Na­
tional Assembly (Right Centre).— 17, 
237, 313, 464, 489 ' 
Bastide, Jules (1800-1879) —French 
politician and journalist, an editor of 
the newspaper Le National (1836-46); 
moderate republican, Minister of 
Foreign Affairs from May until De­
cember 1848.—135, 377, 480, 481 
Baudin, Charles (1784-1854) —French 
admiral.— 25 
Bauer (died c. 1850) — Prussian official 
in Krotoschin (Posen); deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
Centre) in 1848.— 196, 197 
Bauer, Heinrich (b. 1813) — prominent 
figure in the German and interna­
tional working-class movement, a 
leader of the League of the Just, 
member of the Central Authority of 
the Communist League; shoemaker.— 
7, 9, 533 
Bauerband, Johann Joseph (1800-
1878) — German lawyer; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing) in 1848.— 207, 302 
Baumstark, Eduard (1807-1889) 
—German professor; deputy to the 
23-3447 

=====第686页=====
656 Name Index 
Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing) in 1848.— 198, 219, 242-46, 250. 
302,  303,  336 
Bavay, Charles Victor de (1801-1875) 
—Belgian officer of justice; Public 
Prosecutor-General at the Brussels 
Court of Appeal from 1844.—188, 
405, 459 
Bayard,  Pierre Terrail, Seigneur de 
(c. 1475-1524)—French warrior 
called by his contemporaries the 
"chevalier sans peur et sans reproche". — 
184, 368 
Beaumarchais, Pierre Augustin Caron de 
(1732-1799)—French dramatist.—264 
Becker, Félix —French poet and rev­
olutionary, took part in the Polish up­
rising of  1830-31;  an organiser of the 
Belgian Legion formed in Paris in Feb­
ruary and March 1848.— 406 
Becker, Hermann Heinrich (1820-
1885) — German lawyer and journal­
ist, a leader of the Cologne Association 
for Workers and Employers, member 
of the Rhenish District Committee of 
Democrats, editor of the Westdeutsche 
Zeitung (horn May 1849 to July 1850); 
member of the Communist League 
from 1850.—452, 463, 558, 582, 585, 
587 
Becker, Nikolaus (1809-1845) —German 
poet.— 154 
Beckerath, Hermann von (1801-1870) — 
German banker, moderate liberal; 
deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Right Centre) in 1848; 
Minister of Finance in the Imperial 
Government (August and September 
1848).—427, 430,433, 583 
Bedeau, Marie Alphonse (1804-1863) 
—French general and politician, 
moderate republican in 1848.— 137 
Behnsch—deputy to the Prussian Nation­
al Assembly (Left wing) in 1848.— 183, 
191,219,228,230 
Berends, Julius (b. 1817) — owner of a 
printing-press at Berlin; deputy to the Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.—72, 75, 77, 78, 79, 82-
84, 100, 173, 230 
Berg, Philipp Karl Peter von (1815-
1866) — Prussian Catholic priest; dep­
uty to the Prussian National Assembly 
(Left Centre) in 1848.— 189, 195, 238-
41,419 
Berly, Karl Peter (1781-1847) — German 
journalist, editor of the Frankfurter 
Oberpostamts-Zeitung (1829-47), secret 
agent of the French Government dur­
ing the July monarchy.— 471 
Bernigau (d. 1849) — Cologne democrat, 
member of the Committee of Public 
Safety in Cologne.— 585 
Beseler, Wilhelm Hartwig (1806-
1884) — Schleswig-Holstein politician, 
in 1848 head of the Provisional Gov­
ernment of Schleswig-Holstein, deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Right Centre).—269 
Besser —Prussian official, liberal; deputy 
to the Prussian National Assembly 
(Left Centre) in 1848.—227-28 
Beurmann, Karl Moritz von (1802-
1870) — Prussian official, Oberpräsident 
of Posen (1848).— 104, 357 
Beust— Baroness.— 569 
Beust, Friedrich von (1817-1899) — 
Prussian officer, member of the Com­
mittee of the Cologne Workers' 
Association (1848); an editor of the 
Neue Kölnische Zeitung (September 
1848-February 1849); delegate to 
the Second Democratic Congress in 
Berlin (October 1848); in 1849 
took part in the Baden-Palatinate up­
rising.—597 
Biedermann, Friedrich Karl (1812-
1901) — German historian and liberal 
journalist; deputy to the Frankfurt Na­
tional Assembly (Centre) in 
1848.—237, 313 
Birk,  Johann —Prussian official, acting 
Regierungspräsident of Cologne from 
September 1848.—497 

=====第687页=====
Name Index 657 
Bixio,  Jacques Alexandre (1808-1865) 
—French journalist, moderate repub­
lican, an editor of the newspaper 
Le National, Vice-President of the 
Constituent Assembly (1848), deputy 
to the Legislative Assembly (1849).— 
137 
Blanc, Jean Joseph Louis 0811-1882) — 
French petty-bourgeois socialist, his­
torian; in 1848 pursued a policy of 
conciliation with the bourgeoisie.— 
298, 512 
Blank, Joseph Bonavita (1740-1827) — 
German Catholic priest, professor 
of natural sciences at Würzburg Uni­
versity.—337 
Blanqui, Louis Auguste (1805-1881) — 
French revolutionary, Utopian com­
munist, organised several secret so­
cieties and plots; during the 1848 rev­
olution adhered to the extreme Left 
of the democratic and proletarian 
movement.— 155 
Blesson, Johann Ludwig Urbain (1790-
1861) — German military writer, com­
mander of the Berlin civic militia in 
June 1848.—47 
Bloem,  Anton (1814-1885) —German 
lawyer; deputy to the Prussian National 
Assembly (Left wing, later Left Centre) 
in 1848.-58,201 
Blum (Junior)  — secretary of the Cologne 
Workers' Association (from September 
11, 1848).—426, 579 
Blum,  Robert (1807-1848) —German 
democrat, journalist, leader of the Left 
in the Frankfurt National Assembly; 
took part in the defence of Vienna in 
October 1848; court-martialled and 
executed.—19, 359, 366 
Bodelschwingh, Ernst, Baron von (1794-
1854) — Prussian conservative states­
man, Minister of Finance from 1842, 
Minister of the Interior  ( 1845 to March 
1848).—36, 80, 229, 250, 274, 276, 
317, 318 
Böker —member of the Cologne Town 
Council.—500 
23* Borchardt, Friedrich —German democrat, 
lawyer from Cologne; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.—302, 303, 462 
Bornemann, Friedrich Wilhelm Ludwig 
( 1798-1864) — Prussian lawyer, liberal, 
Minister of Justice (March-June 1848); 
deputy to the Prussian National Assem­
bly (Right wing) in 1848.— 106, 111 
Bornstedt, Adalbert von (1808-1851) — 
German journalist, founded and 
edited the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zei-
tung (1847-48); a leader of the Ger­
man Democratic Society in Paris; 
member of the Communist League 
until he was expelled in March 1848; a 
secret agent of the Prussian police dur­
ing the 1840s.—9, 10 
Borries, l'on— Prussian official; deputy 
to the Prussian National Assembly 
(Right wing) in 1848.—217, 226 
Bourbons—French royal dynasty (1589-
1792,  1814-15 and 1815-30).—24, 40, 
96, 429, 520 
Bourbons—royal dynasty in Naples 
(1735-1806 and 1814-60).—23-26 
Boyen, Leopold Hermann Ludwig von 
(1771-1848) —Prussian general, or­
ganiser of an army reserve during the 
war against Napoleon, Minister of War 
(1814-19, 1841-47).—36, 228, 229 
Bréa, Jean Baptiste Fidèle (1790-
1848) — French general, took part in 
suppressing the June uprising of 1848, 
shot down by the insurgents.— 137 
Bredt—Prussian official; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing, later Right Centre) in 
1848.—304 
Brehmer—German teacher; deputy to 
the Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing) in 1848.—78 
Brentano, Lorenz Peter (1813-1891) — 
Baden democrat, lawyer; deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Left wing) in 1848; headed the Baden 
Provisional Government in 1849.— 
368 

=====第688页=====
658 Name Index 
Bright, John (1811-1889) —English man­
ufacturer, a leader of the free traders 
and founder of the Anti-Corn Law 
League.—151 
Brill—German democrat; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.— 190, 191, 303 
Brisbane, Albert (the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung gives his name as Henry)  ( 1809-
1890) — American journalist, follower 
of Fourier.— 587 
Brodowski, Alexander von (1794-1865) — 
Polish landowner; in 1848 mem­
ber of the Posen National Commit­
tee and deputy to the Prussian Na­
tional Assembly (Left wing).— 273 
Brüggemann, Karl Heinrich (1810-
1887) — German journalist, moderate 
liberal; editor-in-chief of the Kölnische 
Zeitung  ( 1845-55).— 150, 152-53, 156, 
242, 396, 464, 497 
Brunswick, Karl Wilhelm  Ferdinand,  Duke 
of (1735-1806) — German general; in 
1792-94 was in command of the Aus-
tro-Prussian armies fighting against 
France.—165 
Brutus, Marcus Junius (c. 85-42 B.C.) — 
Roman politician, republican, an ini­
tiator of the conspiracy against Julius 
Caesar.—234, 489 
Bucher, Lothar (1817-1892) —Prussian 
official, journalist; deputy to the Prus­
sian National Assembly (Left Centre) in 
1848.-274,276 
Bückler, Johann (c. 1780-1803) —German 
robber whose nickname was Jack the 
Skinner (Schinderhannes). — 498 
Bugeaud de la Piconnerie, Thomas Robert 
(1784-1849)—French marshal, mem­
ber of the Chamber of Deputies dur­
ing the July monarchy, Orleanist; dep­
uty to the Legislative Assembly 
(1848-49).—154 
Buquoy (Buquoi), Jifi Frantisek August de 
Longueval (1781-1851) — Czech count 
of French descent; in 1848 represented 
the liberal wing of the national move­ment; arrested after the June uprising 
in Prague.— 214 
Bürger, Gottfried August (1747-1794) — 
German poet.— 45 
Bürgers, Heinrich  ( 1820-1878) — German 
radical journalist, contributed to the 
Rheinische Zeitung (1842-43); member 
of the Cologne Community of the 
Communist League (1848); an editor 
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. —15, 
452, 541, 542, 563, 582, 593 
Bussmann —landowner from Posen; 
deputy to the Prussian National As­
sembly (Right wing) in 1848.—197 
C 
Cabet,  Etienne (1788-1856) — French writ­
er, advocate of Utopian communism, 
author of Voyage en Icarie.— 8, 298 
Camphausen, Ludolf (1803-1890) — 
German banker, a leader of the 
liberal bourgeoisie in the Rhineland; 
Prussian Prime Minister (March to 
June 1848), Prussian envoy at the 
Central Authority (July 1848-April 
1849).—30-33,  36-40, 43-45,  57-63, 
66, 67, 72, 73, 74, 78, 79, 80, 83,89,96, 
97, 104-08, 111, 115, 117, 122, 170, 
174, 194, 200, 202, 206, 232,  238,  400, 
408,  413. 414, 419, 424, 428, 429,  431, 
466 
Campobasso—  police official in Naples be­
fore the 1848 revolution.— 24 
Carlos, Don (Carlos Maria Isidro) (1788-
1855) — pretender to the Spanish 
throne, supported by the feudal aris­
tocracy and the clericals who unleashed 
a civil war in Spain (1833-40).—165, 
311, 370 
Carnot, Lazare Hippolyte (1801-1888,— 
French journalist and politician, 
moderate republican; Minister of 
Education in the Provisional Govern­
ment, deputy to the Constituent As­
sembly (1848).—168 
Catiline (Lucius Sergius Catilina) (c. 108-
62 B. C.) — Roman politician, patri-

=====第689页=====
Name Index 659 
cian, organiser of the conspiracy 
against the aristocratic republic.— 234 
Cato,  Marcus Porcius (the Elder) (234-149 
B. C.) — Roman statesman and writer, 
upheld aristocratic privileges * censor in 
184 B.C.—  246,  304 
Caussidière, Marc (1808-1861) — French 
democrat, took part in the Lyons upris­
ing of 1834; Prefect of Police in Paris 
after the February 1848 revolution, 
deputy to the Constituent Assembly; 
emigrated to England in June 
1848.-169,298,518 
Cavaignac, Louis Eugène (1802-1857) — 
French general and politician, mod­
erate republican, took part in con­
quering Algiers; following the Feb­
ruary 1848 revolution became gover­
nor of Algiers; War Minister of France 
from May 1848; played a leading part 
in suppressing the June uprising, head 
of executive power (June-December 
1848).—  128, 132-36,  139-41,  147, 152-
55, 160-63, 170, 171, 377, 379, 402, 
440. 445, 457, 459, 462, 478,  481,  513, 
515 
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de (1547-
1616) —Spanish author.—282, 286, 
360, 365, 380, 448, 467 
Cham (Amédée de Noé) (1819-1879) — 
French cartoonist, contributed to the 
satirical journal Le Charivari.— 58 
Chambord,  Henri Charles Ferdinand Marie 
Dieudonne, Comte de (1820-1883) — 
representative of the elder Bourbon 
line, pretender to the French throne 
under the name of Henry V.— 155 
Charles II (Charles Louis de Bourbon) 
(1799-1883) —Duke of Lucca (1815-
47), Duke of Parma from 1847, abdi­
cated in 1849.—24 
Charles X (1757-1836) —King of France 
(1824-30).—153 
Charles Albert (Carlo Alberto) (1798-
1849) —King of Sardinia  (1831-
49).—41,  305, 306, 385-89, 395, 396 
Chazal, Pierre Emanuel Félix, Baron (  1808-
1892) — Belgian general, took part in the 1830 revolution; War Minister 
(1847-50, 1859-66); originally a cloth 
merchant in Brussels.— 336 
Chezy, Helmina (Helmine) von  (1783-
1856) — German romantic au­
thoress.— 516 
Christian Karl Friedrich August (1798-
1869) —Duke of Schleswig-Hol­
stein. — 255 
Cieszkowski, August (1814-1894) — Polish 
philosopher and economist; deputy to 
the Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.-198,219 
Cincinnatus, Lucius Quinctius (5th cent. 
B.C.)  — Roman politician and general, 
patrician, model of virtue and sim­
plicity.—234 
Clemens, Friedrich Jacob (1815-1862) — 
German philosopher and theolo­
gian; deputy to the Frankfurt Na­
tional Assembly in 1848.—367 
Clouth, Wilhelm —owner of the Cologne 
printshop in which the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitungwas printed from June 1 to Au­
gust 27, 1848.-208,541,553 
Cluss, Adolf  (d. after 1889) — German en­
gineer, member of the Communist 
League; secretary of the Workers' Edu­
cational Association in Mainz (1848); in 
1849 emigrated to the United States 
where he stood as a disciple and fol­
lower of Marx and Engels. — 535 
Cobden, Richard (1804-1865) —English 
manufacturer, a leader of the free 
traders and founder of the Anti-Corn 
Law League.—151, 238, 299 
Coburg —descendants of the Sachsen-
Coburg-Gotha dynasty, occupied 
thrones in Belgium, Portugal and other 
European countries.— 166 
Cockerill, John (1790-1840) —English 
manufacturer.— 340 
Colomb, Friedrich August von (1775-
1854) — Prussian general who com­
manded the Prussian Army Corps in 
Posen (1843-48).—92, 104, 210, 313. 
491 

=====第690页=====
660 Name Index 
Congreve, Sir William (1772-1828) 
—English officer and military inven­
tor.—134 
Corday d'Armont, Marie Anne Charlotte 
(1768-1793) — participant in a coun­
ter-revolutionary conspiracy during 
the French Revolution, assassin of 
Marat, executed on the decision of the 
Revolutionary Tribunal.—154 
Gripps.— 278 
Cromwell, Oliver (1599-1658) — a leader 
of the English revolution; became Lord 
Protector of England, Scotland and 
Ireland in 1653.—80, 237, 439 
Crüger, Friedrich —member of the Com­
munist League, took part in the activity 
of the Workers' Brotherhood founded 
by Stephan Born. — 534 
D 
Dahlmann, Friedrich Christoph (1785-
1860) — German liberal historian and 
politician; deputy to the Frankfurt Na­
tional Assembly (Right Centre) in 
1848.-237,414 
Damesa, Steriol— merchant.— 569 
Damesme, Edouard Adolphe Marie (1807-
1848) — French general, commanded 
the mobile guard during the suppres­
sion of the June 1848 uprising.— 136, 
137, 160 
Dane—deputy to the Prussian National 
Assembly (Right wing) in 1848.—330 
Daniels, Roland (1819-1855) — German 
physician, member of the Cologne 
Community of the Communist 
League, friend of Marx and En-
gels.—  541 
Danton, Georges Jacques (1759-1794) — 
prominent figure in the French 
Revolution; leader of the Right wing 
of the Jacobins.— 237 
Davenant, Charles ( 1656-1714) — English 
economist and statistician, mercan­
tilist.— 477 Deckker,  C.—  grocer, member of the 
Cologne civic militia.— 574 
Del Carretto, Francesco Saverio (c. 1777-
1861) — Italian politician, Minister of 
the Police in the Neapolitan Kingdom 
(1831-January 1848).—24 
Delescluze, Louis Charles (1809-
1871) — French revolutionary; Gov­
ernment Commissioner of the Depart­
ment du Nord (1848); member of the 
Paris Commune (1871).—404 
Delolme, Jean Louis (1741-1806) — Swiss 
statesman and lawyer, advocate of 
constitutional monarchy.— 430 
Denjoy, Jean François Polinis (1809-
1860) — French politician, monarch­
ist; deputy to the Constituent Assem­
bly (1848-49); later deputy to the 
Legislative Assembly.— 525 
Dierschke—Prussian judicial official; 
deputy to the Prussian National As­
sembly (Left wing) in 1848.—82, 181, 
182, 327, 328, 330, 331 
Doblhoff,  Anton, Baron von (1800-1872) — 
Austrian statesman, moderate liber­
al; Minister of Trade (May 1848) 
and Minister of the Interior (from July 
to October 1848).—570 
Dolleschall —police official at Co­
logne.—393 
Dombasle, Christophe Joseph Alexandre 
Matthieu de (1777-1843) —French 
agronomist.— 469 
Domes, Auguste (1799-1848) — French 
journalist and politician, moderate re­
publican; deputy to the Constituent 
Assembly (1848).—137 
Dronke, Ernst (1822-1891) —German 
writer, at first "true socialist", later 
member of the Communist League 
and an editor of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung.— 15, 459, 560, 566, 580, 582, 
586, 594 
Duchâtel, Charles Marie Tanneguy, Comte 
(1803-1867) —French statesman, Or-
leanist; Minister of the Interior (1839 
and 1840-February 1848).—38, 60, 
111, 122, 199, 220, 221, 250, 419 

=====第691页=====
Name Index 661 
Ducoux, François Joseph (1808-1873) — 
French physician and politician, 
moderate republican; deputy to the 
Constituent Assembly (1848); after 
the June uprising became Prefect of 
Police in Paris.— 148 
Duesberg, Franz von (1793-1872) — 
Prussian Minister of Finance (1846-
March 1848).—36 
Dufaure, Jules Armand Stanislas (1798-
1881) — French lawyer, Orleanist; de­
puty to the Constituent Assembly 
(1848),  Minister of the Interior (Oc­
tober-December 1848) in the Cavaig-
nac Government.—168 
Dumont, Joseph (1811-1861) — German 
journalist, moderate liberal; in 1831 
became owner of the Kölnische 
Zeitung.— 150, 152-54, 156, 395, 462, 
497, 501 
Duncker—Prussian official; in 1848 a 
leader of the Left Centre in the 
Prussian National Assembly.—  37, 58, 
241, 242, 419 
Duvernoy, Heinrich Gustav (1802-1890) 
—Württemberg statesman, Minister 
of the Interior (1848-49) in the lib­
eral Government.—249 
Duvivier, Franciade Fleurus (1794-
1848) — French general, took part in 
suppressing the June 1848 insurrec­
tion.—136, 137, 142, 162 
E 
Eisenmann, Gottfried (1795-1867) — 
German journalist, physician; deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Centre, later Left wing) in 1848.— 
237 
Eisner, Karl Friedrich Moritz (1809-
1894) — Silesian radical journalist; 
deputy to the Prussian National As­
sembly (Left wing) in 1848.—82, 85, 
100, 182 
Engels, Frederick (1820-1895).—7, 15, 
511-18,  522, 524-29, 560, 563, 567, 
575, 582, 586, 593, 594 Engels, W. — tailor, member of the Co­
logne civic militia.— 574 
Esselen, Christian (1823-1859) — German 
writer, democrat; in 1848 a leader of 
the Workers' Association in Frank­
furt, editor of the Allgemeine Arbeiter-
Zeitung. — 18 
Esser, Christian Joseph (born c. 1809) — 
German worker, member of the 
Cologne Workers' Association; in 
1849 editor of its newspaper Freiheit, 
Brüderlichkeit, Arbeit.— 178, 587 
Esser I, Johann Heinrich Theodor —Prus­
sian official, lawyer, clerical; Vice-
President of the Prussian National 
Assembly (Centre) in 1848.—57, 85, 
173, 185 
d'Ester, Karl Ludwig Johann  (1813-
1859) — German socialist and demo­
crat, physician; member of the Co­
logne community of the Communist 
League; deputy to the Prussian Na­
tional Assembly (Left wing) in 1848; in 
October 1848 became a member of the 
Central Committee of Demo­
crats.—86, 173-75, 182-84, 216, 462 
F 
Fay, Gerhard (1809-1889) —German 
lawyer, liberal.— 87 
Feldhaus —German teacher; deputy to 
the Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing) in 1848.—229 
Ferdinand I (1793-1875) —Emperor of 
Austria (1835-48).—456, 499, 570 
Ferdinand II (1810-1859) —King of Sici­
ly and Naples (1830-59).—24-26, 143, 
385-86,  471, 483 
Fernbach — German democratic stu­
dent.—176 
Feuerstein, Anton—merchant.— 569 
Fickler, Joseph (1808-1865) —German 
democratic journalist, a leader of the 
Baden democratic movement in 1848-
49.-239,  288 

=====第692页=====
662 Name Index 
Fischer, J. A.— cap-maker, member of 
the Cologne civic militia.— 574 
Flottwell, Eduard Heinrich von (1786-
1865) — Prussian statesman, Minister 
of Finance (1844-46), Oberpräsident of 
Posen and later of Westphalia; deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Right wing) in 1848.—356, 357, 368 
Forstmann —German merchant; deputy 
to the Prussian National Assembly 
(Right wing) in 1848.—195, 223, 225 
Fould,  Achille (1800-1867) —French 
banker and politician, Orleanist, sub­
sequently Bonapartist; Minister of Fi­
nance several times in the period 
between 1849 and 1867.—125 
Fouquier-Tinville, Antoine Quentin (1746-
1795) — leading figure in the French 
Revolution; Public Prosecutor of 
the Revolutionary Tribunal (1793).— 
405 
Fox, Charles  James  ( 1749-1806) — English 
statesman, leader of the Whig 
Party.—102 
Francis V (1819-1875) —Duke of Mod-
ena (1846-59).—387 
Frederick I ("Barbarossa" or ' l Redbeard') 
(c. 1123-1190) —German King from 
1152,  Holy Roman Emperor (1155-
90); waged several campaigns against 
Italy.—395,  396 
Frederick II (the Creat) (1712-
1786) —King of Prussia (1740-
86).—242, 340, 341 
Frederick VII (Frederik Carl Christian 
VII) (1808-1863) —King of Denmark 
(1848-63).—255, 268, 422-24, 434, 
435 
Frederick William (1620-1688) —Elector 
of Brandenburg (1640-88).—244, 
245, 435 
Frederick William II (1744-1797) — King 
of Prussia (1786-97).—348, 349 
Frederick William III (1770-1840) — King 
of Prussia (1797-1840).—338, 343, 
355, 411, 449 
Frederick William IV ( 1795-1861) — King 
of Prussia (1840-61).—20, 54, 62, 63, 73, 77, 106, 194, 255, 273, 275, 287, 
311, 390, 391, 420, 430, 474, 476, 564, 
583 
Freiligrath, Ferdinand (1810-1876) — 
German poet; member of the Com­
munist League; one of the Neue Rhei­
nische Zeitung editors in 1848-49.— 
395-97,  456 
Frencken—Prussian official; deputy to 
the Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing) in 1848.—207 
Friedrich Christian August (1829-
1880) —Duke of Schleswig-Holstein 
(Prince from 1863); officer of the 
General Staff of the Schleswig-
Holstein army (1848).—192, 255 
Fröbel, Julius (1805-1893) —German 
radical writer and publisher; deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.—570 
Fuad Pasha Mehemmed (1814-1869) — 
Turkish statesman, government 
commissioner in the Danube prin­
cipalities (1848); took a leading part 
in suppressing the national liberation 
movement; in later years Minister of 
Foreign Affairs and Grand Vizier.— 
473, 485 
Funk—German democrat, member of 
the Democratic Society of Cologne 
(1848).—176, 585 
G 
Gagern, Heinrich Wilhelm August, Baron 
von (1799-1880) — German politician, 
deputy to and President of the Frank­
furt National Assembly (Right 
Centre), President of the Imperial 
Ministry (December 1848-March 
1849).—232, 358, 368, 394, 424, 439, 
440, 448, 473 
Gagern, Maximilian Ludwig, Baron von 
(1810-1889)—German official; depu­
ty to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
in 1848; brother of Heinrich 
Gagern.— 413 
Ganneron, Auguste Victor Hippolyte ( \792-
1847) — F^nch industrialist, banker 
and politician.—125 

=====第693页=====
Name Index 663 
Geier —Burgomaster of Wesseling.— 
426, 579 l 
Geiger, Wilhelm  Arnold—  Prussian police 
official, examining magistrate (1848) 
and then Police Superintendent of 
Cologne.—178, 384, 390, 391, 393, 
394, 408, 409, 561, 594 
Gervinus, Georg Gottfried (1805-1871) — 
German historian, liberal; editor 
of the Deutsche Zeitung (1847 to 
October 1848); deputy to the Frank­
furt National Assembly (Right Centre) 
in 1848.—29, 154 
Ghika, Basil.— 569 
Gierke—Prussian official; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
Centre) in 1848; Minister of Agricul­
ture in the Auerswald-Hansemann 
Government (June-September 1848). 
—291-95,  328, 331 
Girardin, Emile de (1806-1881) — French 
journalist and politician; between 
1830s and 1860s was editor of the* 
newspaper La Presse several times; 
often changed his political 
views.—  153 
Gladbach, Anton (d. 1873) — German 
democrat; in 1848 deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly from 
Mülheim in the Rhine Province (Left 
wing);  President of the Democratic 
Club in Berlin.—180, 181, 191-93, 
195, 230, 304, 563 
Gneisenau, August Wilhelm Anton, Count 
Neithdrdt von (1760-1831) — Prussian 
field marshal, an organiser of the 
liberation struggle against Napoleon's 
rule;  took part in drawing up and 
carrying out Prussian army re­
forms.—228 
Goeden, Adolf—German physician in 
Posen; deputy to the Frankfurt Na­
tional Assembly (Right wing) in 
1848.—354, 355, 358, 359, 367, 369 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-
1832) —German poet.— 116, 484, 528 
Göschen —Chairman of the German 
League in Leipzig (1848).— 214 Gottschalk, Andreas (1815-1849) — 
German physician, member of the 
Cologne community of the Com­
munist League; President of the 
Cologne Workers' Association (April-
June 1848); exponent of the "Left" 
sectarian tendencies in the German 
working-class movement.— 176, 177, 
186, 325, 326, 542, 582, 595 
Grabow, Wilhelm (1802-1874) —Chief 
Burgomaster of Prenzlau, moderate 
liberal; President of the Prussian Na­
tional Assembly (Right wing) in 
1848.—180-83.  185, 190-92, 193, 197, 
198, 230. 273. 304, 419 
Graff Joseph—Prussian judicial official; 
deputy to the Prussian National As­
sembly (Left wing) in 1848.—95, 243, 
302 
Grebel—Prussian official, justice of the 
peace; deputv to the Prussian National 
Assembly (Left wing) in 1848.—217-
19, 221, 229 
Greven,  Fried.—  butcher, member of the 
Cologne civic militia.— 574 
Griesheim, Karl Gustav von (1798-
1854) — Prussian military official; rep­
resentative of the Ministry of War in 
the Prussian National Assembly 
(1848).—97-99, 192 
Grimm, Jacob Ludwig Carl (1785-
1863) — German philologist, professor 
of Berlin University, liberal; deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Centre) in 1848.—336 
Grolmann, Karl Wilhelm Georg von (Mil-
1843) — Prussian general, took part in 
the liberation struggle against 
Napoleon's rule; in 1806 participated 
in drawing up and carrying out Prus­
sian army reforms.— 228 
Guizot, François Pierre Guillaume (1787-
1874) — French historian and conser­
vative statesman who actually directed 
France's home and foreign policy 
from 1840 until the February revolu­
tion of 1848.—38, 68, 111, 122, 147, 
188, 206, 472, 480, 481, 518 

=====第694页=====
664 Name Index 
H 
Hansemann, David Justus (1790-1864) — 
German capitalist, a leader of the 
Rhenish liberal bourgeoisie; Prussian 
Minister of Finance from March to 
September 1848.—36-38, 54, 55, 59, 
60,67,73,83,  106, 111, 112, 115, 122, 
170-75,  179, 182, 190, 194, 195, 199, 
200, 202, 208, 210,  216-21,  226, 229, 
230, 239, 250-52, 262, 268, 276, 278-
84, 286, 290, 291, 295, 313, 317, 336, 
350, 382, 384,400,416,419,425,427, 
429, 448, 463, 466, 476, 583 
Harney, George Julian (1817-1897)— 
prominent figure in the English 
labour movement, a Chartist leader 
(Left wing); editor of The Northern 
Star.—8, 129 
Harpprecht, Heinrich von (1802-1859) — 
lawyer, President of the Supreme 
Court of Württemberg. — 249 
Hebert, Michel Pierre Alexis (1799-
1887) — French lawyer and statesman, 
Orleanist; Chief Public Prosecutor 
(from 1841), Minister of Justice (1847-
February 1848).—187, 459 
Hecker—Prussian judicial official, Public 
Prosecutor at Cologne (1848).—178, 
186, 187, 208, 239, 314, 450, 451, 
484-88,  513, 554, 593 
Hecker, Friedrich Karl Franz  (1811-
1881) — German democrat, a leader of 
the Baden republican uprising in 
April 1848; emigrated to the 
USA.—485-89 
Heckscher, Johann Gustav Wilhelm Moritz 
(1797-1865) — German lawyer, Im­
perial Minister of Justice (July-August 
1848) and Minister of Foreign Af­
fairs (August-September 1848); depu­
ty to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Right Centre).—413, 414 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-
1831) — German philosopher.— 156, 
364, 486 
Heimsoeth, Heinrich —Prussian official; 
lawyer at the Court of Appeal in 
Cologne (1848).—489 Heine, Heinrich (1797-1856) — German 
revolutionary poet.— 50, 112, 172, 
189, 190, 205, 222, 248,  261,  284, 290, 
304, 397, 457, 480 
Heinrich LXXH ( 1797-185  3) — Prince of 
Reuss-Lobenstein-Ebersdorf, a tiny 
German principality (1822-48).—234 
Henry  V—see  Chamhord,  Henri Charles 
Ferdinand Marie Dieudonne, Comte de 
Hergenhahn, August (1804-1874) — 
German liberal politician; in 1848-
49 Prime Minister of Nassau; deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Right Centre).—19 
Herwegh, Georg Friedrich (1817-
1875) — German democratic poet, a 
leader of the German Democratic 
Society in Paris.—9, 10, 488 
Heyne — Burgomaster of Bromberg 
(Posen); deputy to the Prussian Na­
tional Assembly (Left Centre) in 
1848.—198 
Hildenhagen, Louis—German clergyman; 
deputy to the Prussian National As­
sembly (Left Centre) in 1848.—303 
Hirschfeld,  Alexander Adolf von (1787-
1858) — Prussian general; took part in 
suppressing the insurrection in Posen 
(1848).—210, 313 
Hofer —German peasant; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing) in 1848.—81 
Hohenzollerns—dynasty of Brandenburg 
electors (1415-1701), Prussian kings 
(1701-1918) and German emperors 
(1871-1918).—67 
Holberg, Ludvig, Baron (1684-1754) — 
Danish writer, historian and phi­
losopher.—422 
Homer—semi-legendary epic poet of 
Ancient Greece, author of the Iliad 
and the  Odyssey.—  66 
Hüffer, Johann Hermann (1784-
1855)—Chief Burgomaster of Mün­
ster, moderate liberal; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing) in 1848.—173-75 

=====第695页=====
Name Index 665 
Hünermund,  Eduard — Police Inspector 
in Cologne.— 538 
Hüser, Johann Hans Gustav Heinrich von 
(1782-1857) — Prussian general; com­
mandant of Mainz (1844-49).— 17, 19, 
20, 92, 133 
I 
Imandt, Peter—German teacher, demo­
crat; took part in the 1848-49 revolu­
tion; in later years a political émigré; 
member of the Communist League, 
follower of Marx and Engels. — 587 
Itzenplitz  — a family of Prussian 
counts.— 56 
J 
Jacoby, Johann (1805-1877) — German 
radical writer and politician; a leader 
of the Left wing in the Prussian 
National Assembly (1848); in the 
1870s was close to the Social-
Democratic Party.—82, 232, 233, 235, 
236, 238, 239,  240-41,  242-43, 273 
Janiszewski, Jan Chryzostom (1818-
1891) — Polish theologian and politi­
cian; deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly in 1848.—365, 366, 368, 
369 
Jansen, Johann Joseph (1825-1849) — 
German democrat, member of the 
Communist League; a leader of the 
Workers* Association in Cologne 
(1848),  follower of Gottschalk; shot for 
his participation in the Baden-
Palatinate insurrection of 1849.— 178 
Jellachich (Jellacic),  Josef,  Count  (1801-
1859)—Austrian general, Ban of 
Croatia; took part in suppressing the 
revolution of 1848-49 in Hungary and 
Austria.—458, 473, 477, 491, 499, 503 
Jentzsch—deputy to the Prussian Nation­
al Assembly (Centre) in 1848.—276 
John (Johann) (1782-1859) —Archduke 
of Austria. Imperial Regent from June 1848 until December 1849.—229, 
232, 240, 253, 287, 411, 413, 577 
Jonas, Ludwig (1797-1859) — German 
theologian, clergyman in Berlin; dep­
uty to the Prussian National Assembly 
(Right wing) in 1848.—85 
Jones, Ernest Charles (1819-1869) — 
prominent figure in the English 
labour movement, proletarian poet 
and journalist, a Chartist leader (Left 
wing);  friend of Marx and Engels. — 
8, H 4, 129 
Jordan, Wilhelm (1819-1904) —German 
writer; deputy to the Frankfurt Na­
tional Assembly in 1848; at first be­
longed to the Left wing, but after 
debates on Poland, joined the 
Centre.—351,  359-64, 366, 367, 378, 
395 
Jottrand,  Lucien Leopold (1804-
1877) — Belgian lawyer and writer, 
democrat; President of the Democ­
ratic Association in Brussels (1847).— 
405 
Jung, Georg Gottlob (1814-1886) — 
German writer, Young Hegelian, 
a manager of the Rheinische Zeitung, 
deputy to the Prussian National 
Assembly (Left wing) in 1848.— 
53, 59, 84, 100, 185 
K 
Kaiser— major-general.— 459 
Kalker, Johann Wilhelm —secretary of the 
Workers' Association in Cologne in 
1848.—178,  579 
Kämpf —German teacher; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
Centre) in 1848.—243 
Kamptz, Karl Christoph Albert Heinrich 
von (1769-1849) — Prussian conserva­
tive statesman; Minister of Justice 
(1832-42).—208 
Kanitz, August Wilhelm Karl, Count von 
(1783-1852)—Prussian general; Min­
ister of War (May and June 1848) in 

=====第696页=====
666 Name Index 
the Camphausen Government.— 64, 
74, 96 
Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804) — German 
philosopher.— 486 
Kaunitz-Rietburg, Wenzel Anton, Prince 
von (1711-1794) — Austrian statesman 
and diplomat, a supporter of an "en­
lightened" form of absolutism; took 
part in the first partition of Poland 
(1772);  a bitter enemy of the French 
Revolution.— 92 
Kayser,  C.—  merchant, member of the 
Cologne civic militia.— 574 
Kayser, R.— merchant, member of the 
Cologne civic militia.— 574 
Kersausie, Joachim René Théophile Gaillard 
de (1798-1874) —French revolution­
ary, took part in the July revolution 
of 1830; headed the Committee of 
Action of the Society of the Rights of 
Man and the Citizen (1848); author of 
a military plan implemented by the 
participants in the June uprising in 
Paris;  later joined the Garibaldi move­
ment.—157, 158, 164 
Kerst, Samuel Gottfried (1804-1875) — 
deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Centre) in 1848.—364, 
366-69 
Kohlparzer, Franz Xaver —deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Right 
Centre) in 1848.—110 
Korff,  Hermann— Prussian officer, 
democrat; in 1847 was discharged 
from the army on account of his 
political views; responsible publisher 
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848-
49); subsequently emigrated to the 
USA.—486, 543, 554, 555, 560, 566, 
576, 592 
Korn—German democrat; took part in 
the revolutionary movement in Berlin 
(1848).—97 
Kosch, Raffael Jakob (1803-1872) — 
German physician, moderate liberal; 
deputy to the Prussian National 
Assembly (Left Centre) in 1848.— 
419 Kotzebue, August Friedrich Ferdinand von 
(1761-1819) — German writer and 
journalist, extreme monarchist.— 153 
Krause —deputy to the Prussian Nation­
al Assembly (Centre) in 1848.—217 
Krogh, Gerhard  Christopher  ( 1785-1860) — 
Danish general, commander-in-
chief of the Danish army (from 
July 1848 until April 1849, and in 
1850) during the Schleswig-Holstein 
war.— 434 
Kühlwetter, Friedrich ChristTan Hubert von 
(1809-1882) — Prussian statesman; 
Minister of the Interior in the Auers-
wald-Hansemann Government (June 
to September 1848).—174, 181, 182, 
185, 192, 193, 199, 202-07, 229, 230, 
262, 275-76, 407, 581, 595 
Kusa, Alex.— 569 
Kyll, Ulrich Franz—German lawyer, 
democrat; deputy to the Prussian Na­
tional Assembly (Left wing) in 
1848.—462 
L 
Ladenberg, Adalbert von (1798-1855) — 
member of the Prussian bureaucracy, 
Minister of Religious Worship, Edu­
cation and Medicine (1848-50).— 
188 
Lagerheim, Elias (1791-1864) — Swedish 
diplomat, Ambassador to Denmark 
(1848).—270, 287 
Lamarque, Maximilien, Comte de (1770-
1832) — French general; a leader of 
the liberal opposition during the 
Restoration period and under the 
July monarchy.—158 
Lamartine, Alphonse Marie Louis de (1790-
1869) — French poet, historian and 
politician; a leader of the moderate 
republicans in the 1840s; Minister of 
Foreign Affairs and virtually head of 
the Provisional Government 
(1848).—128, 131, 144,378.404.481, 
494 

=====第697页=====
Name Index 667 
Lamennais, Hugues Félicité Robert de 
(1782-1854) —French abbot, writer, 
Christian socialist.—155 
Lamoricière, Christophe Léori Louis 
Juchault de (1806-1865) — French gen­
eral, moderate republican; partici­
pated in suppressing the June uprising 
of 1848; Minister of War in the 
Cavaignac Government (June to De­
cember 1848); deputy to the Con­
stituent Assembly.—126, 136, 137, 
161, 162, 163 
Larochejaquelein (La Rochejaquelein), 
Henri Auguste  Georges  Du Ver gier, Mar­
quis de (1805-1867) —French politi­
cian, a leader of the legitimist party; 
deputy to the Constituent Assembly 
(1848).—140, 149, 155, 323 
Lassalle, Ferdinand (1825-1864) — 
German writer and lawyer, petty-
bourgeois socialist; participated in 
the democratic movement in the 
Rhine Province (1848-49); founder of 
the General Association of German 
Workers (1863); an initiator of the 
opportunist trend in the German So­
cial-Democratic movement.— 587 
Latour, Theodor, Count Baillet von (  1780-
1848) — Austrian conservative states­
man; Minister of War in 1848; killed 
in October 1848 during the uprising in 
Vienna.—499, 503 
Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre Auguste (1807-
1874) — French writer and politician, 
a leader of the petty-bourgeois demo­
crats;  editor of La Réforme; Minister of 
the Interior in the Provisional Govern­
ment in 1848.—128, 298, 404, 440, 
515 
Lehmann, Peter Martin Orla (1810-
1870) — Danish liberal, editor of the 
newspaper Faedrelandet (1839-42); 
Minister without Portfolio in 
1848.—253 
Leiningen, Karl Friedrich Wilhelm, Prince 
von (1804-1856) — Bavarian general, 
Imperial Prime Minister (August-
September 1848).—377 Lelewel, Joachim (1786-1861) —Polish 
historian and revolutionary; partici­
pant in the Polish uprising of  1830-31; 
a leader of the democratic wing of the 
Polish emigrants; Committee member 
of the Brussels Democratic Association 
in 1847-48.—351, 354, 360, 361, 375 
Lensing (b. 1783) — canon from the 
Rhine Province; deputy to the Prus­
sian National Assembly (Right wing) in 
1848.—207 
Leo, Heinrich  ( 1799-1878) — German his­
torian and writer, extreme monarch­
ist, ideologist of Prussian jun-
kerdom.— 361 
Leonidas— King of Sparta (c. 488-480 
B. C); hero of the battle of Thermo­
pylae during the Greco-Persian war.— 
512 
Leopold I ( 1790-1865) — King of Belgium 
(1831-65).—333,  336, 405, 482 
Leroux,  Pierre  (1797-1871) — French writ­
er, Utopian socialist; deputy to the 
Constituent (1848-49) and Legislative 
(1849) Assemblies.—150 
Leven—German democrat.— 587 
Lichnowski, Felix Maria, Prince von (1814-
1848) — Prussian officer; deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Right wing); killed during the Sep­
tember 1848 uprising in Frank­
furt.—  313,  364,  368-71,  375, 376, 
499, 575 
Ligne, Eugène Lamoral, Prince de (1804-
1880) — Belgian statesman, Ambas­
sador to France from 1843 to 1848, to 
Italy in 1848-49.—461 
Lisiecki—official in Posen; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.—302 
Loe, Maximilian, Baron von—Prussian 
landowner; deputy to the Prussian 
National Assembly (Right wing) in 
1848.—207 
Louis XI (1423-1483) —King of France 
(1461-83).—372 
Louis XIV(1638-1715) — King of France 
(1643-1715).—326, 347 

=====第698页=====
668 Name Index 
Louis XV (1710-1774) —King of France 
(1715-74).—326 
Louis XV7( 1754-1793) — King of France 
(1774-92); guillotined during the 
French Revolution.— 153, 425 
Louis Napoleon—see Napoleon HI 
Louis Philippe I (1773-1850) —Duke of 
Orléans, King of the French (1830-
48).—24,  25, 39, 144, 147, 151, 153, 
187, 252, 261, 296, 279, 315,429,481, 
494, 522, 525 
Low, Hermann (1807-1879) — German 
professor; deputy to the Frankfurt 
National Assembly (Right Centre) in 
1848-49.—381 
Löwenstein, Lipmann Hirsch (d. 1848) — 
German orientalist, democrat; Presi­
dent of the Workers' Association in 
Frankfurt in 1848, delegate to the 
First Democratic Congress held in 
Frankfurt (June 1848).—18 
Löwinsohn, Moritz —German democrat, a 
director of the Berlin People's Club, 
delegate to the Second Democratic 
Congress held in Berlin (October 
1848).—97 
Liittichau, Christian Friedrich Tonne, 
Count von—Prussian official.— 343 
M 
Machiavelli,  Niccold  ( 1469-1527) — 1 taiian 
politician, historian and writer.—212 
Malou, Jules Edouard Xavier (1810-
1886) — Belgian statesman; Minister 
of Finance (1844-47).—483 
Malthus, Thomas Robert (1766-1834) — 
English clergyman and economist, 
advocated the misanthropic theory 
of population.—282, 573 
Mamiani della Rovere, Terenzio, Count 
(1799-1885) —Italian poet and jour­
nalist, philosopher and politician, ad­
vocate of constitutional monarchy; 
Minister of the Interior to Pope Pius 
IX (from May to August 1848).—385 Marat, Jean Paul  ( 1743-1793) — a Jacobin 
leader during the French Revolu­
tion.— 234 
Marie de Saint Georges, Alexandre Pierre 
Thomas Amahle (1795-1870) —French 
lawyer and politician, moderate re­
publican; in 1848 Minister of Public 
Works in the Provisional Government, 
later Minister of Justice in the Cavaig-
nac Government.—168 
Märker, Friedrich August (1804-
1889) — Prussian statesman; Minister 
of Justice in the Auerswald-
Hansemann Government (from June 
to September 1848); deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Centre) 
in 1848.—226, 318, 431 
Marrast, Armand (1801-1852) — French 
writer and politician, leading moder­
ate republican, editor-in-chief of Le 
National; member of the Provisional 
Government and Mayor of Paris 
(1848).—128, 144, 153, 154, 168, 515 
Marx, Jenny (née von Westphalen) (1814-
1881) —wife of Karl Marx.—538 
Marx, Karl (1818-1883).— 7-12, 15, 383, 
407-09,  456, 486, 487, 488, 489, 538, 
541, 554-58, 561-63, 566, 568-73, 576, 
595, 597, 598 
Mathy, Karl (1807-1868) —official, jour­
nalist and politician from Baden, mod­
erate liberal; deputy to the Frankfurt 
National Assembly (Right Centre) in 
1848.—249, 288, 289, 448 
Mätze —German teacher; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.—189, 193, 219 
Maucler, Paul Friedrich Theodor Eugen, 
Baron von (1783-1859) — conservative 
statesman from Württemberg; Minis­
ter of Justice from 1818; Chairman of 
the Privy Council (1831-April 
1848).—249 
Mellinet, François Aimé (1768-
1852) — Belgian general of French 
descent; participant in the democratic 
movement and in the 1830 revolution 
in Belgium; Honorary President of the 

=====第699页=====
Name Index 669 
Democratic Association in Brussels; 
one of the accused at the Risquons-
Tout trial.—335, 405-06, 461 
Mentes, M. — platoon leader in the Co­
logne civic militia.— 574 
Metternich-Winneburg, Clemens Wenzel 
Lothar, Prince (1773-1859) —Austrian 
statesman and diplomat; Foreign 
Minister (1809-21) and Chancellor 
(1821-48); a founder of the Holy 
Alliance.—,92, 387, 396 
Meusebach, von—Prussian official; depu­
ty to the Prussian National Assembly 
(Right wing) in 1848.—58 
Mevissen, Gustav von (1815-1899) 
—German banker; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Right 
Centre) in 1848-49.—194 
Meyendorf,  Pyotr Kazimirovich, Baron 
(1796-1863)—Russian diplomat; en­
voy to Berlin (1839-50).—313 
Mieroslaivski, Ludwik (1814.1878)  — 
prominent figure in the Polish 
national liberation movement; took 
part in the insurrection of  1830-31,  in 
the preparations for the uprising of 
1846 and in the 1848-49 revolution; 
later, a leader of the moderate wing 
of Polish democratic emigrants; 
sympathetic to Bonapartism.— 354, 
375 
Miguel, Maria Evarist (Miguel Maria 
Evaristo de Braganza) (1802-1866) — 
King of Portugal (1828-34).— 
165', 311 
Milde, Karl August (1805-1861) — 
Silesian manufacturer, moderate 
liberal; in 1848 Minister of Trade 
in the Auerswald-Hansemann Min­
istry (from June to September), 
President of the Prussian National 
Assembly (Right wing).—33, 57, 59, 
85, 106, 199. 219, 238, 262, 304, 313, 
400, 418 
Minutoli, Julius, Baron von (1805-
1860) — Prussian official and dip­
lomat; Chief of Police in Berlin in 
1847 and 1848.—46, 47 Mirabeau, Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, Comte 
de (1749-1791) — leading figure in the 
French Revolution, advocate of con­
stitutional monarchy.—102, 237 
Mittermaier, Karl  ( 1787-1867) — German 
lawyer, moderate liberal; a leader of 
the Left Centre in the Frankfurt 
National Assembly in 1848.—239 
Mohl, Robert von (1799-1875) —German 
lawyer, moderate liberal; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Left 
Centre) in 1848; Imperial Minister of 
Justice (1848-49).—473 
Mohr,  C.—  sculptor, corporal in the Co­
logne civic militia.— 574 
Mohr. J.  P.—  roofer, member of the 
Cologne civic militia.— 574 
Moll, Joseph (1813-1849) —prominent 
figure in the German and internation­
al working-class movement, a watch­
maker by trade; a leader of the League 
of the Just, member of the Central 
Authority of the Communist League; 
President of the Cologne Workers' 
Association (from July to September 
1848),  member of the Rhenish District 
Committee of Democrats; killed in 
battle during the Baden-Palatinate 
uprising in 1849.—7, 9, 452, 454, 
463, 533. 542, 558, 579, 580, 585, 
586 
Moltke, Karl, Count von (1798-
1866) — Schleswig-Holstein statesman, 
leader of the Danish counter­
revolutionary party; from September 
1848 head of the Provisional Govern­
ment of Schleswig-Holstein formed 
after the armistice between Prussia 
and Denmark.—412, 413, 447 
Monecke, Edmund—German student, 
democrat.— 176 
Montesquieu, Charles Louis de Secondât, 
Baron de la Bride et de (1689-1755) — 
French philosopher and sociologist, 
Enlightener.— 204, 206, 236, 246, 
336, 430 
Moritz, Daniel Samuel —Prussian judicial 
official; deputv to the Prussian Nation 

=====第700页=====
670 Name Index 
al Assembly (Left Centre) in 
1848.—60, 185, 276, 331, 332 
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus (1756-
1791) — Austrian composer.—385 
Müller —German pastor; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Centre) 
in 1848.—80, 81, 83 
Müller —member of the Workers' As­
sociation in Worringen (the Rhine 
Province) in 1848.—587 
Müller, Friedrich (b. 1811) — Police 
Superintendent in Cologne; deputy to 
the Prussian National Assembly (Right 
Centre) in 1848.—87, 196, 409, 463 
Müller-Tellering, Eduard von (born c. 
1808) — German lawyer and journal­
ist, democrat; Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
correspondent in Vienna in 1848 and 
1849;  after the revolution emigrated 
and made slanderous accusations 
against Marx and Engels.— 457, 503 
Musard,  Philippe (1793-1859) —French 
musician and composer.— 512 
N 
Napoleon I Bonaparte (1769-1821)— ' 
Emperor of the French (1804-14 
and 1815).—80, 153, 161, 228, 237, 
250, 251, 290, 308, 309, 314, 520 
Napoleon III (Charles Louis Napoleon 
Bonaparte) (1808-1873) —Prince, 
nephew of Napoleon I, President of 
the Second Republic (1848-51), Em­
peror of the French (1852-70).—155, 
515, 522, 525 
Natzmer, von (d. 1890) — Prussian of­
ficer, sentenced to 15 years of impris­
onment in a fortress for refusal to 
shoot at the people during the storm­
ing of the arsenal in Berlin on June 14, 
1848;  escaped in 1849.—97-99 
Naunyn—Burgomaster of Berlin in 
1848.—46 
Naut, Stephan Adolph —a co-manager of 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung Com­
pany.— 547 Necker, Jacques (1732-1804) —French 
banker and politician; Minister of 
Finance on several occasions in the 
1770s and 1780s, attempted to carry 
out reforms.—39, 282 
Nesselrode, Karl Vasilyevich, Count  ( 1780-
1862) — Russian statesman and dip­
lomat; Foreign Minister (1816-56), 
Chancellor of State from 1845 on­
wards.—307-12 
Nethe — Prussian official; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Centre) 
in 1848.—303 
Neumann, von—Prussian general, chief 
adjutant of the King of Prussia.— 270 
Nicholas I (1796-1855) —Emperor of 
Russia (1825-55).—103, 191, 308-13, 
363, 505 
Niickel—member of the Cologne Town 
Council.—500 
O 
O'Connell,  Daniel (1775-1847) —Irish 
lawyer and politician, leader of the 
liberal wing of the national liberation 
movement.— 113 
O'Connor,  Feargus Edward (1794-
1855) — a Chartist leader (Left wing), 
editor of The Northern Star.— 113, 114, 
129 
Olberg—Prussian officer; in 1848 took 
part in suppressing the national libera­
tion movement in Posen. — 104 
Olzem,  M.— merchant, member of the 
Cologne civic militia.— 574 
Orange—stadholders of the Nether­
lands from 1572 to 1795 with inter­
vals, royal dvnasty after 1815.—165, 
336 
Ostendorf,  Gottfried Friedrich Johannes 
Julius (1823-1877)—German teacher, 
moderate liberal; deputy to the Frank­
furt National Assembly (Right Centre) 
in 1848-49.—367 
Otto I (1815-1867) —Bavarian prince, 
King of Greece (1832-62).—165 

=====第701页=====
Name Index 671 
p 
Pagnerre, Laurent Antoine (1805-
1854) — French publisher, republican; 
deputy to the Constituent Assembly in 
1848.—360 
Palmerston, Henry John Temple, 3rd Vis­
count (1784-1865) — British statesman, 
Foreign Secretary (1830-34,  1835-41, 
1846-51), Home Secretary (1852-55) 
and Prime Minister (1855-58 and 
1859-65); at the beginning of his 
career a Tory, from 1830 onwards, a 
Whig.—480, 481 
Parrisius, Eduard Rudolf (1818-1905) — 
Prussian officer of justice; deputy 
to the Prussian National Assembly 
(Left Centre) in 1848.—57, 58, 61, 
173, 221-22, 242 
Patow, Erasmus Robert, Baron von (1804-
1890) — Prussian statesman, Minister 
of Trade, Industry and Public Works 
in the Camphausen Ministry (from 
April to June 1848).—106, 111, 117, 
118, 171, 292, 328 
Payer, Jean Baptiste (1818-1860) — 
French scholar; deputy to the Consti­
tuent Assembly (1848).— 155 
Peel, Sir Robert, 1st Baronet (1788-
1850) — British statesman, moderate 
Tory; Prime Minister (1841-46); re­
pealed the Corn Laws in 1846.—281, 
298 
Pellmann, Anton—German lawyer; dep­
uty to the Frankfurt National Assem­
bly in 1848.—87 
Pelz, Eduard (1800-1876) —German 
journalist, democrat; a leader of the 
Workers' Association in Frankfurt 
(1848) and editor of the Deutsche 
Volkszeitung and Allgemeine Arbeiter-
Zeitung. — 18 
Perrot, Benjamin Pierre (1791-1865)—-
French general; took part in sup­
pressing the June 1848 uprising in 
Paris.—68,  163 
Pfahl —Prussian notary; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.—184 Pfuel, Ernst Heinrich Adolf von (1779-
1866) — Prussian general; Governor 
of Neuchâtel in 1832-48; commandant 
of Berlin in March 1848; headed the 
suppression of the uprising in Posen in 
April and May 1848; Prussian Prime 
Minister and Minister of War in Sep­
tember and October 1848.—64, 65, 
104, 116, 251, 313, 347,  463,  466, 473, 
476, 477, 489 
Philipps, Adolf (1813-1877) —Prussian 
official; Vice-President of the Prussian 
National Assembly in 1848.— 216 
Piegsa—Polish teacher; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.—229 
Pillersdorf,  Franz, Baron von (1786-
1862) — Austrian statesman; Prime 
Minister (from May to July 1848). 
— 120 
Finder, Julius Hermann (b. 1805) — Prus­
sian official, moderate liberal; Ober­
präsident of Silesia, deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing) in 1848.—194 
Pinto,  Isaac (1715-1787) —Dutch stock­
jobber and economist.— 279, 281, 419 
Pius IX (Giovanni Maria Mastai-Ferretti) 
( 1792-1878) — Pope  ( 1846-78).— 385 
Plato (c. 427-c. 347 B.C>—Greek phi­
losopher.—244-45, 303 
Plönnis —Prussian official; Vice-
President of the Prussian National 
Assembly in 1848.—84 
Plougoulm, Pierre Ambroise (1796-
1863) — French official, lawyer; 
member of the Chamber of Deputies 
(1846-48).—187 
Pohle—Prussian officer of justice; depu­
ty to the Prussian National Assembly 
(Centre) in 1848.—198 
Pokrzyumicki—Prussian official of Polish 
descent; deputy to the Prussian Na­
tional Assembly (Left wing) in 
1848.—198 
Pourtalès, Albert, Count von (1812-
1861) — Prussian diplomat.— 269 

=====第702页=====
672 Name Index 
Prince of Prussia— see William I 
Proudhon, Pierre Joseph (1809-
1865) — French writer, economist and 
sociologist, a founder of anarchism; 
deputy to the Constituent Assembly in 
1848.—321-24 
Przyluski, Leon (1789-1865)—Arch­
bishop of Gnesen and Posen 
(1845-65).—201,  338 
Puttkamer, Eugen von (1800-1874) 
—Prussian official; Chief of Police 
in Berlin from 1839 to 1847. 
—46,  47 
Q 
Queuing— police-sergeant in Co­
logne.— 390 
R 
Radetzky,  Josef,  Count of Radetz (1766-
1858) — Austrian field marshal; com­
mander-in-chief of the Austrian forces 
in Northern Italy from 1831; headed 
suppression of the Italian national 
liberation movement in 1848 and 
1849.—92, 109, 133, 136, 376, 386, 
387, 395-97, 402, 473, 487 
Radowitz, Joseph Maria von (1797-
1853) — Prussian general, conserva­
tive statesman; a leader of the Right 
wing in the Frankfurt National Assem­
bly in 1848 and 1849.—314, 364-66, 
376, 414, 426-28 
Raimund, Ferdinand (1790-1836) — 
Austrian actor and dramatist.— 107-08 
Raspail, François Vincent (1794-
1878) — French natural scientist, jour­
nalist and socialist; participant in the 
revolutions of 1830 and 1848; deputy 
to the Constituent Assembly.— 157 
Raumer, Friedrich Ludwig Georg von 
(1781-1873) — German historian; in 
1848 Imperial Ambassador to Paris, 
deputy to the Frankfurt National As­
sembly (Right Centre).— 377 Raveaux, Franz (1810-1851) — German 
politician; deputy to the Frankfurt 
National Assembly (Left Centre) in 
1848-49.—17-19 
Reedtz, Holger Christian (1800-
1857) — Danish statesman, diplomat; 
represented the Danish Government 
during the armistice negotiations in 
the Schleswig-Holstein war (1848-50); 
Minister of Foreign Affairs (1850-
51).—270, 446 
Rehfeld—deputy to the Prussian Nation­
al Assembly (Centre, later Right wing) 
in 1848.—54-55 
Reichenbach,  Eduard,  Count von (1812-
1869) — Silesian democrat; deputy to 
the Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848; member of the Central 
Committee of Democrats from Oc­
tober 1848.—82, 100, 184, 220, 276 
Reichensperger I, August (1808-
1895) — German lawyer and politi­
cian; deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Right wing) in 1848-
49.-84,  94, 122 
Reichensperger II, Peter Franz (1818-
1892) — German lawyer and politi­
cian; deputy to the Prussian National 
Assembly (Right wing) in 1848; 
brother of August 
Reichensperger.—94, 174, 196, 202, 
207, 236-38, 302, 418, 436 
Reichhelm — German democrat; member 
of the Cologne Committee of Public 
Safety in 1848.—587 
Reuter (died c. 1860) — Prussian official; 
deputy to the Prussian National As­
sembly (Left wing) in 1848.—58, 60, 
61, 196, 202 
Rhien, Ferdinand—pharmacist, corporal 
in the Cologne civic militia.— 574 
Ricci, Alberto (1795-1876) —Sardinian 
diplomat, Ambassador to France.— 
480 
Richter, Karl (1804-1869) —German 
clergyman, professor of theology; dep­
uty to the Prussian National Assem­
bly (Left wing) in 1848.—45, 201 

=====第703页=====
Name Index 673 
Riedel, Adolf Friedrich Johann (1809-
1872) — Prussian politician; deputy to 
the Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing) in 1848.—84 
Rimpler, O.— Prussian resigned artillery 
officer; commander of the Berlin civic 
militia from July 1848.—476 
Rittinghausen, Moritz (1814-1890) — 
German journalist and politician, 
democrat, contributor to the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, member of the 
Cologne Democratic Society and, later, 
of the German Social-Democratic 
Party.—562, 563 
Ritz—Prussian official; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing) in 1848.—58, 59, 173,  190-91, 
303 
Robespierre, Maximilien François Marie 
Isidore de (1758-1794) — prominent 
figure in the French Revolution, 
leader of the Jacobins, head of the 
revolutionary Government  (1793-
94).—153,  155 
Rochow, Gustav Adolf Rochus von (1792-
1847) — Prussian Minister of the In­
terior (1834-42).—36 
Rodbertus-Jagetzow, Johann Karl (1805-
1875) — German economist; leader of 
the Left Centre in the Prussian Na­
tional Assembly during the 1848-49 
revolution.—Ill, 112, 174, 188, 195, 
273, 419, 425, 427 
Rogier, Charles Latour (1800-1885) — 
Belgian Minister of the Interior 
(1847-52); moderate liberal.—188, 
460, 461, 483 
Rolin,  Hippolyte (1804-1888) —Belgian 
lawyer, politician, leader of the liberal 
party, Minister of Public Works (1848-
50).—335 
Romanovs—dynasty of Russian tsars and 
emperors (1613-1917).—308 
Rosenkranz, Johann Karl Friedrich (1805-
1879) — German Hegelian philoso­
pher and literary historian.—363 
Röser, Peter Gerhard (1814-
1865) — prominent figure in the Ger­man workers' movement, cigar-maker 
by trade; Vice-President of the Co­
logne Workers' Association (1848-49), 
publisher of its newspaper Freiheit, 
Brüderlichkeit, Arbeit, member of the 
Communist League.— 579, 595, 597 
Rothschild, Jacob (James), Baron de (1792-
1868) — head of the Rothschild bank­
ing house in Paris.— 125, 468 
Rotteck, Karl Wenzeslaus Rodecker von 
(1775-1840)— German historian and 
liberal politician.—80 
Rougemont de Lowemberg — French 
banker.—125 
Ruge, Arnold (1802-1880) —German 
radical journalist and philosopher, 
Young Hegelian; deputy to the Frank­
furt National Assembly (Left wing) in 
1848.—371-80 
Russell, John Russell, 1st Earl (1792-
1878) — British statesman, Whig 
leader; Prime Minister (1846-52 and 
1865-66), Foreign Secretary (1852-53 
and 1859-65).—206, 377, 379 
S 
Salget—member of the Committee of 
the Cologne Workers' Associa­
tion.—426, 579 
Sand,  George (pseudonym of Amandine 
Lucie Aurore Dupin, baronne Dudevant) 
(1804-1876) — French novelist, rep­
resentative of the democratic trend in 
romanticism.— 315-16, 360 
Savigny, Friedrich Karl von (1779-
1861) — German lawyer, head of the 
historical school of law; Minister for 
the Revision of Laws (1842-48).—317 
Schaffgotsches—a family of counts in 
Silesia.— 56 
Schapper, Karl (c. 1812-1870) — 
prominent figure in the German 
and international working-class move­
ment, a leader of the League of the 
Just, member of the Central Au­
thority of the Communist League, 

=====第704页=====
674 Name Index 
member of the Rhenish District Com­
mittee of Democrats; a leader (1848-
49), and later President (from Feb­
ruary to May 1849) of the Cologne 
Workers' Association. After the rev­
olution, a leader of the sectarian 
group in the Communist League, later 
a member of the General Council of 
the First International.— 7, 9, 383, 
384, 390-94, 452, 463, 558, 562, 586 
Schapper—wife of Karl Schapper.— 390 
Scharnhorst, Gerhard Johann David von 
(1755-1813) — Prussian general and 
politician; Minister of War (1807-10) 
and Chief of the General Staff (1807-
13); reorganised the Prussian 
army.—228 
Schleiermacher, Friedrich Daniel Ernst 
(1768-1834) —German philosopher, 
theologian and preacher.— 85 
Schleinitz, Alexander, Baron von (1807-
1885) — Prussian statesman; Minister 
of Foreign Affairs (June 1848, 1849-
50, 1858-61).—106, 111, 210 
Schlichting—Prussian officer.— 181 
Schloffel, Friedrich Wilhelm (1800-
1870) — Silesian factory owner, demo­
crat; deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Left wing) in 1848.—18, 
368, 589 
Schmerling, Anton von (1805-1893) — 
Austrian statesman; in 1848 deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Right Centre), Imperial Minis­
ter of the Interior (from July to 
September), Prime Minister and 
Minister of Foreign Affairs (from 
September to December).—  313,  473 
Schmidt, Ernst Friedrich Franz—German 
clergyman; deputy to the Frankfurt 
National Assembly (Left wing) in 
1848.—368 
Schmidt, Jac.—shoemaker, member of 
the Cologne civic militia.— 574 
Schmitz —worker in Cologne.— 594 
Schnabel,  F. — cap-maker, member of the 
Cologne civic militia.— 574 Schnapphahnski —see Lichnowski, Felix 
Maria 
Schneider—Prussian official; deputy to 
the Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing, later Left Centre) in 
1848.—233-35, 257 
Schneider II, Karl—German lawyer, 
democrat; President of the Cologne 
Democratic Society and member of the 
Rhenish District Committee of Demo­
crats (1848).—87, 558, 563 
Scholz —deputy to the Prussian National 
Assembly in 1848.—185 
Schramm, Rudolf (1813-1882) — German 
democratic journalist; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.—99, 219 
Schreckenstein, Ludwig Johann Karl Greg­
ory Eusebius, Baron Roth von (1789-
1858) — Prussian general; Minister of 
War from June to September 
1848.-20,96, 106, 111, 171,  180,181, 
183-84, 191-94,  228-31,  313, 418 
Schröder —prison warder in Co­
logne.—325 
Schücking, Christoph Bernard Levin (1814-
1883) — German writer; contributor 
to the Kölnische Zeitung, author of 
many feuilletons (1845-52).—395-98 
Schultes—German democrat.— 587 
Schulz, Louis— a co-manager of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung Company.— 547 
Schultz(e)  — Prussian officer of justice; 
deputy to the Prussian National As­
sembly (Left wing) in 1848.—82, 190, 
191 
Schulze-Delitzsch, Franz Hermann (1808-
1883) — German economist and politi­
cian; deputy to the Prussian National 
Assembly (Left Centre) in 1848; later 
one of the leaders of the Progressist 
Party and advocate of producer co­
operatives.—78-80, 82, 227, 303 
Schuselka, Franz (1811-1889) — Austrian 
journalist and liberal politician; in 
1848 deputy to the Frankfurt Nation­
al Assembly (Left' wing) and to the 

=====第705页=====
Name Index 675 
Austrian National Assembly.— 365, 
366 
Schütze — Prussian officer of justice; dep­
uty to the Prussian National Assem­
bly (Right wing) in 1848.—304 
Schützendorf — German petty-bourgeois 
democrat, member of the Cologne 
Association for Workers and Em­
ployers in 1848.—558 
Schwanbeck, Eugen Alexis  (1821-
1850) — German journalist, an editor 
of the Kölnische Zeitung.— 497 
Schwarzer, Ernst (1808-1860) — Austrian 
official and journalist; Minister of 
Public Works (July to September 
1848).—570 
Schwerin, Maximilian Heinrich Karl, 
Count von (1804-1872) —Prussian 
statesman; in 1848 Minister of Reli­
gious Worship, Education and Medi­
cine (March to June), deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Right 
wing).—74, 82, 96 
Sebaldt—Prussian official; Landrat and 
Chief Burgomaster of Trier in 
1848.—94, 95 
Sebastiani, Horace François Bastien, Comte 
(1772-1851) —French marshal, dip­
lomat, Orleanist; Minister of Foreign 
Affairs (1830-32), Ambassador to Lon­
don (1835-40).—147 
Senard,  Antoine Marie Jules (1800-
1885) — French lawyer and politician; 
President of the Constituent Assembly 
in June 1848, Minister of the Interior 
in the Cavaignac Government (June to 
October 1848).—137, 140 
Senff,  Emil— Prussian officer of justice 
in Posen; deputy to the Frankfurt 
National Assembly in 1848.—354, 356, 
358, 359, 361, 367, 369 
Shakespeare, William (1564-1616) — 
English dramatist and poet.— 466 
Siebert—deputy to the Prussian National 
Assembly (Left wing) in 1848.—221 
Simons. Ludung (1803-1870) — German 
lawyer; deputy to the Prussian Nation­al Assembly (Right wing) in 1848; 
Minister of Justice (1849-60):—207, 
241, 301, 302 
Smith,  Adam (1723-1790) —Scottish 
economist.— 299 
Sobieski, Jan (John III) (1624-
1696) —King of Poland (1674-96) 
who,  as commander of the combined 
Polish and Austro-German forces, 
achieved a decisive victory over the 
Turks at Vienna in  1683.—  196 
Sobrier, Marie Joseph (c. 1825-1854) — 
French democrat, member of secret 
revolutionary societies during the 
July monarchy; founded the news­
paper Commune de Paris  in March 1848 
as a mouthpiece for the Paris prefec­
ture.—  155 
Solms-Lich und Hohensolms, Ludwig, 
Prince von (1805-1880)—Prussian lib­
eral landowner, advocate of constitu­
tional monarchy; marshal of the 
Rhenish Provincial Diet (1837-45) and 
later of the First United Diet of 
1847.—36 
Sommer, Johann Friedrich Josef  (1793-
1856) — Prussian lawyer and politi­
cian; deputy to the Prussian National 
Assembly (Right wing) in 1848.—196 
Stein,  Heinrich Friedrich Karl, Baron vom 
und zum (1757-1831) —Prussian 
statesman, one of those who initiated 
and helped implement moderate re­
forms.—  246 
Stein,  Julius (1813-1889) —Silesian 
teacher and journalist; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.—100, 233, 417, 418, 
463, 476, 492 
Steinäcker, Christian Karl Anton Friedrich, 
Baron von (1781-1851) — Prussian 
general, commandant of the Posen 
fortress in 1848.—92, 210 
Stenzel, Gustav Adolf Harald  ( 1792-
1854) — German historian; deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly (Left 
wing, later Right Centre) in 
1848.—338,  340-43, 344-48, 349, 353, 
354, 356, 359 

=====第706页=====
676 Name Index 
Stradal—German jurist from Tep-
litz.— 215 
Struben, Joh.—tailor, member of the Co­
logne civic militia.— 574 
Struve, Gustav von (1805-1870) — 
German democrat, journalist by pro­
fession; a leader of the Baden repub­
lican uprisings of 1848 and of the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849.— 
485, 488 
Stupp, Heinrich Joseph (1793-1870) — 
Prussian official, clerical; deputy 
to the Prussian National Assem­
bly (Right wing) in 1848.—101-03, 
302, 336 
Sydow, Karl Leopold Adolf (1800-
1882) — German clergyman and 
theologian; deputy to the Prussian 
National Assembly (Right wing) in 
1848.—83,  84 
T 
Tacitus, Cornelius (c. 55-c. 120) — Roman 
historian and orator.—370 
Talleyrand- Péri gord, Charles Maurice de 
(1754-1838) —French diplomat, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs (1797-99, 
1799-1807, 1814-15), France's rep­
resentative to the Congress of Vienna 
(1814-15).—96 
Tamnau—Prussian officer of justice; 
deputy to the Prussian National As­
sembly in 1848.—418 
Tedesco, Victor André (1821-1897) — 
Belgian lawyer, socialist, a founder 
of the Brussels Democratic Associa­
tion; associate of Marx and Engels 
in 1847-48, member of the Com­
munist League; one of the defendants 
at the Risquons-Tout trial.— 405, 
406 
Temme, Jodocus Donatus Hubertus (1798-
1881) — German lawyer, democrat; 
deputy to the Prussian National As­
sembly (Left wing) in 1848; deputy to the Frankfurt National Assembly in 
1849.—46, 59, 97, 230 
Theux de Meylandt, Barthélémy Théodore, 
Comte de ( 1794-1874) — Belgian states­
man, head of the Catholic party; 
Prime Minister (1846-47).—483 
Thiers, Louis Adolphe (1797-
1877) — French historian and states­
man; Prime Minister (1836, 1840); 
deputy to the Constituent Assembly 
(1848);  head of the Orleanist 
monarchist party after 1848; orga­
nised the suppression of the Paris 
Commune; President of the Republic 
(1871-73).—154, 168, 321, 323, 440, 
467-71,  473, 478 
Thorwaldsen, Bertel (1768-
1844) — Danish sculptor.— 26 
Thun-Hohenstein, Leo, Count von  (1811-
1888) — Austrian statesman of Czech 
descent; one of the most influential 
advisers of Emperor Francis Joseph I; 
Minister of Religious Worship and 
Education from 1849 to I860.—120 
Thurn und Taxis, Karl Alexander, Prince 
von (1770-1827) — German influential 
prince, enjoyed hereditary post-office 
privileges in a number of German 
states.—  349 
Tilly, Johann Tserclaes, Count of (1559-
1632) — commander of the army of 
the Catholic League in the Thirty 
Years'  War.—120 
Trélat, Ulysse (1795-1879) —French 
politician, moderate republican; depu­
ty to the Constituent Assembly (1848), 
Minister of Public Works (May to June 
1848).—148 
Tresckow, Hermann von (1818-
1900) — Prussian officer; fought in the 
war against Denmark in 1848 and 
1849.—348 
Tresckow, Sigismund Otto—German mer­
chant, from 1796 owner of a landed 
estate in Owinsk (Posen).— 343, 348 
Turck, Leopold (1797-1887) —French 
physician and journalist, politician; 

=====第707页=====
Name Index 677 
deputy to the Constituent Assembly in 
1848.—467, 468, 470 
Tihhaus—Prussian official; deputy to 
the Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing) in 1848.—195, 196 
U 
Unruh, Hans Victor von (1806-
1886) — Prussian engineer and politi­
cian; a leader of the Centre in the 
Prussian National Assembly in 1848, 
President of the Assembly from Oc­
tober.—417-19 
Urban—German veterinary; a leader of 
the barricade fighting in Berlin during 
the March events of 1848; took part in 
the storming of the arsenal on June 
14, 1848.—97 
V 
Valdenaire, Victor (1791-1859) — 
Prussian democrat; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.—94, 301, 302 
Venedey, Jakob (1805-1871) —German 
radical writer; deputy to the Frankfurt 
National Assembly (Left wing) in 
1848;  after the 1848-49 revolution, 
liberal.—32, 154, 409 
Vergniaud, Pierre Victurnien  (1753-
1793) — prominent figure in the 
French Revolution, Girondist.— 84 
Verhaegen, Pierre Theodore (1800-
1862) — Belgian liberal politician.— 
336 
Villâny ( Villâni) de  Castello  Pillonico Karel 
Drahotin Marie (1818-1883) —Czech 
baron; representative of the Left wing 
of the national movement (1848), 
member of the Preparatory Commit­
tee for the convocation of the Slav 
Congress, arrested after the June up­
rising in Prague.— 214 
Vincke, Georg, Baron von  (1811-
1875) — Prussian politician; a leader 
of the Right wing in the Frankfurt National Assembly in 1848-49.—194, 
376, 420, 427, 428, 580 
Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro) (70-19. 
B.C.) — Roman poet.— 67 
Vogt, Karl (1817-1895) — German natur­
al scientist, vulgar materialist, petty-
bourgeois democrat; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848-49.—235 
W 
Wachsmuth, Franz Rudolph (b. 1810) — 
Prussian official; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
Centre) in 1848.—246 
Wächter, Karl —German democrat; 
member of the Cologne Committee of 
Public Safety in September 
1848.—587, 594 
Waldeck, Benedikt Franz Leo (1802-
1870) — German lawyer and radical 
politician; Vice-President of the Prus­
sian National Assembly and a leader of 
its Left wing in 1848.—173, 235, 236, 
419, 425, 427-29, 433 
Wallach —Prussian official, Re­
gierungspräsident of Bromberg (Byd­
goszcz).— 357 
Wallau, Karl (1823-1877) —German 
emigrant resident in Brussels; 
member of the Central Authority of 
the Communist League in 1848, 
Chairman of the Workers' Educational 
Association in Mainz.— 535 
Wallmoden-Gimborn, Karl, Count von 
(1792-1883) — Austrian general; took 
part in suppressing the revolutionary 
movement in Bohemia and Hungary 
(1848-49).—120 
Wallraf—  German democrat.— 587 
Wander—German clergyman; deputy to 
the Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.-^226 
Wangenheim, Karl August vo?i  (1773-
1850) — Prussian official; deputy to 

=====第708页=====
678 Name Index 
the Prussian National Assembly (Left 
Centre) in 1848.—276 
Wartensleben, Alexander, Count von (1807-
1883) — Prussian landowner; deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Right Centre) in 1848.—364, 365 
Weber, Carl Maria Friedrich Ernst von 
(1786-1826) — German composer.— 
516 
Weerth, Georg (1822-1856) —German 
poet and writer, member of the Com­
munist League, a founder of pro­
letarian poetry in Germany; an editor 
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in 1848-
49.—15,  575 
Weichsel —Prussian officer of justice; 
deputy to the Prussian National As­
sembly (Left Centre) in 1848.—1.72 
Weitling, Wilhelm Christian (1808-
1871) — one of the early leaders of the 
working-class movement in Germany, 
tailor by trade, a theoretician of Uto­
pian egalitarian communism.— 556 
Welcher, Karl Theodor (1790-
1869) — German lawyer, liberal jour­
nalist; deputy to the Frankfurt Nation­
al Assembly (Right Centre) in 
1848.—424 
Weiden, Franz Ludwig, Baron von (1782-
1853) — Austrian general; took part in 
the campaign against the national 
liberation movement in Italy in 1848; 
commandant of Vienna after the sup­
pression of the October 1848 uprising; 
commander-in-chief of the Austrian 
troops fighting against the Hungarian 
revolution (April to May 1849).— 109, 
386, 387, 397 
Wencelius—deputy to the Prussian Na­
tional Assembly (Left wing) in 
1848.—94, 302 
Werner, Johann Peter—German lawyer; 
deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Left Centre) in 1848.—19 
Weyll, Bartholomäus Joseph—German 
lawyer; member of the Democratic 
Society and the Committee of Public 
Safety in Cologne in 1848; delegate to the Second Democratic Congress in 
Berlin (October 1848).—585, 587 
Wiedenmann, Christian—Prussian offi­
cial; deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Centre) in 1848.—237 
Wieners, Ign.—tailor, member of the 
Cologne civic militia.— 574 
Wigand, Otto (1795-1870) —German 
publisher and bookseller, owner of a 
firm in Leipzig, published works by 
radical writers.— 360 
Wildenbruch, Ludwig von  (1803-
1874) — Prussian diplomat; envoy to 
Copenhagen in 1848.—  191,  267, 310, 
424 
William I (1797-1888) —Prince of Prus­
sia, King of Prussia (1861-88), German 
Emperor (1871-88).—66, 68, 107, 
427, 448, 466, 491 
Willisen, Karl Wilhelm, Baron von (1790-
1879) — Prussian general and military 
theorist; royal commissioner in Posen 
in 1848.—104, 346, 347 
Windischgrätz, Alfred Candidus Ferdinand, 
Prince (1787-1862) —Austrian field 
marshal; commanded the troops 
which crushed the uprisings in Prague 
and Vienna in 1848; led the Austrian 
army against the Hungarian revolu­
tion in 1848-49.—91-93, 120, 133, 
271, 313, 473,  491,  497, 498, 503, 505, 
598 
Windischgrätz, Maria Eleonora (1795-
1848) —wife of Prince Alfred.—92, 
214 
Winkelried, Arnold (d. 1386) — semi-
legendary hero of the Swiss war of 
liberation against the Habsburgs; the 
legend runs that he secured the victory 
over the Austrian Duke Leopold in the 
battle at Sempach at the price of his 
life.—26 
Wittgenstein, Heinrich von (1800-
1868) —Prussian official; in 1848 Re­
gierungspräsident (May to September) 
and commander of the civic militia in 
Cologne.—450, 497, 584, 587 

=====第709页=====
Name Index 679 
Wolfers, Franz Anton von(b. 1813) — Ger­
man journalist of Belgian descent; 
contributor to and member of the 
editorial board of the Kölnische Zeitung 
in 1848.—150, 152-56, 296, 297, 497 
Wolftf),  Ferdinand (1812-1895) — 
German journalist, member of the 
Communist League, an editor of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung in 1848 and 
1849.—15 
Wolff—German official; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
Centre) in 1848.—196 
Wolff,  Wilhelm (Lupus) (1809-
1864) — German proletarian rev­
olutionary, teacher by profession, 
member of the Communist League; an 
editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in 
1848 and 1849; friend and associate of 
Marx and Engels.— 7, 15, 562, 582, 
587 
Woocker, M. — grocer, member of the 
Cologne civic militia.— 574 
Wrangel, Friedrich Heinrich Ernst, Count 
von (1784-1877) — Prussian general; 
took part in the counter-revolutionary 
coup  d'état  in Berlin and in dispersing ' 
the Prussian National Assembly in 
November 1848.—191, 268-69, 411, 
463,  473, 491 
Wuttke, Johann Karl Heinrich (1818-
1876) — German historian and politi­
cian; deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (1849); a founder of the 
Great German party, professor of 
Leipzig University.— 213 
Aeneas (Gr. Myth.) — son of Anchises 
and Aphrodite, a chief defender of 
Troy, legendary ancestor of the Ro­
mans,  the principal character of Vir­
gil's epic poem  Aeneid.—  66,67 
Aeolus (Class. Myth.) — god of the 
winds.— 481 
Anchises (Gr. Myth.) — King of Dardans, 
father of Aeneas.— 66 Wynn, Sir Henry Watkin Williams (  1783-
1856) — British diplomat; Ambas­
sador to Denmark from 1824 to 
1853.—270, 287 
Y 
Y-psilanti,  Alexander, Prince (1792-
1828) — leader of the Greek national 
liberation movement; in 1821 orga­
nised an uprising against the Turkish 
rule and after its defeat fled to Austria 
where he was arrested and kept in 
prison till 1827.—165 
Z 
Zachariä —Prussian officer of justice; 
deputy to the Prussian National As­
sembly (Right Centre) in 1848.—83, 
86, 173, 174, 241 
Zacharias—merchant; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly.— 181 
Zitz, Franz Heinrich  (1803-
1877) — German lawyer, democrat; 
deputy to the Frankfurt National As­
sembly (Left wing) in 1848.—17 
Zweiffel—Prussian official, Chief Public 
Prosecutor at Cologne; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing) in 1848.—94, 179, 187, 207, 
210, 211, 459, 554, 576 
Aphrodite (Gr. Myth.) — goddess of love 
and beauty.— 489 
Ariadne (Gr. Myth.) — daughter of 
Minos, King of Crete; the beloved of 
Theseus.—262 
Castor (Class. Myth.) — one of the Dios­
curi twins, son of Leda and Zeus; the INDEX OF LITERARY AND MYTHOLOGICAL NAMES 

=====第710页=====
680 Name Index 
name of a star in the constellation 
Gemini.— 33 
Christ, Jesus (Bib.).—397 
Circe—an island sorceress in Homer's 
Odyssey who turned Odysseus' com­
panions into swine.— 259 
Dido (Gr. Myth.) — daughter of the King 
of Tyre; she was founder of Carthage 
and fell victim to her tragic love for 
Aeneas.— 6? 
Don Ranudo de Colibrados—the title 
character in the comedy written by the 
Danish writer Ludvig Holberg; an 
impoverished nobleman who re­
tained his arrogance and haughti­
ness.—  344 
Don Quixote—the title character in Cer­
vantes' novel.—360, 380, 448, 467 
Eckart —according to medieval German 
legends, a devoted servant and 
trustworthy guardian.— 257 
Falstaff,  Sir John—a character in the 
Shakespearean tragedy King Henry IV 
and the comedy The Merry Wives of 
Windsor; a sly fat braggart and 
jester.— 466 
Faust—hero of a medieval German 
legend and the title character in 
Goethe's tragedy.— 485 
Figaro—the title character in Beaumar­
chais'  comedy La folle journée, ou le 
mariage de Figaro (The Wild Day or the 
Marriage of Figaro).— 264 
Cahriel (Bib.).—492 
Leda (Gr. Myth.) — wife of Tyndarus, 
King of Sparta; Zeus was enamoured by her exceptional beauty; according 
to legend the children of Zeus and 
Leda were hatched.— 33 
Lycurgus— legendary Spartan lawgiver 
of the 9th-8th centuries B. C.— 472 
Minotaur (Gr. Myth.) — monster living 
on Crete and devouring youths and 
maidens sacrificed to it.— 262 
Moses (Bib.)— 103 
Paul (Bib.).—66 
Priam (Gr. Myth.) — King of Troy.— 66 
Rodomont(e) — a character in Ariosto's 
L'Orlando furioso, a boastful knight.— 
364 
Sancho Panza—a character in Cervantes' 
Don Quixote.—365 
Sibyl—one of the women in ancient 
times believed to possess prophetic 
powers; Sibylline books fabled to have 
been bought from her were burnt in 
405 by Stilicho, an actual ruler of the 
Western Roman Empire.— 152 
Tannhaüser —a character in German 
folk-lore, the title character of Hein­
rich Heine's poem.—190 
Tell, William—legendary hero of the 
Swiss struggle for independence 
against the Habsburgs in the late 
13th-early 14th centuries, the title 
character in Schiller's drama.— 26 
Theseus (Gr. Myth.) — King of Athens; 
helped by Ariadne, he killed the 
Minotaur.— 262 
Wagner—a character in Goethe's 
Faust.—485 

=====第711页=====
681 
INDEX OF QUOTED 
AND MENTIONED LITERATURE 
WORKS BY KARL. MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
Marx, Karl 
The June Revolution (this volume) 
— Die Junirevolution. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 29, June 29, 1848.—478 
Legal Proceedings against the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" (this volume) 
— Gerichtliche Untersuchung gegen die "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". In: Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung No. 37, July 7, 1848.—207, 208 
Legal Proceedings against the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" (this volume) 
— Gerichtliche Untersuchung gegen die "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". In: Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung No. 41, July 11, 1848.—314 
The "Model State" of Belgium (this volume) 
— Der "Musterstaat" Belgien. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 68, August 7, 
1848.—482 
The Poverty of  Philosophy.  Answer to the "Philosophy of  Poverty"  by M. Proudhon (present 
edition, Vol. 6, pp. 105-212) 
— Misère de la philosophic Réponse à la Philosophie de la misère de M. Proudhon. 
Paris-Bruxelles, 1847.—324 
Revolution in Vienna (this volume) 
— Revolution in Wien. In: Neue Rheinische ZeitungNo. 114, October 12, 1848.—496 
Engels, Frederick 
The Agreement Debates on the District Estates (this volume) 
— Vereinbarungsdebatten über die Kreisstände. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 
56, July 26, 1848.—317 
The Berlin Debate on the Revolution (this volume) 
— Die Berliner Debatte über die Revolution. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung Nos. 
14-17,  June 14-17, 1848.—89 
The Danish-Prussian Arrnistice (this volume) 
— Der dänisch-preussische Waffenstillstand. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 99. 
September 10, 1848.—439 

=====第712页=====
682 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Details about the 23rd of June (this volume) 
— Details über den 23. Juni. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 26 (special supple­
ment),  June 26, 1848.—159 
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question (this volume) 
— Die Polendebatte in Frankfurt. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung Nos. 70, 73, 81, 86, 
August 9, 12, 20, 26, 1848.—368, 373, 375, 395 
The German Citizenship and the Prussian Police (this volume) 
— Das deutsche Reichsbürgerrecht und die preussische Polizei. In: Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung.No. 73, August 12, 1848.—393, 407 
Germany's Foreign Policy (this volume) 
— Auswärtige deutsche Politik. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 33, July 3, 
1848.—271 
The "Kölnische Zeitung" about the June Revolution (this volume) 
— Die "Kölnische Zeitung" über die Junirevolution. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
No. 31, July 1, 1848.—479 
The Prague Uprising (this volume) 
— Der Prager Aufstand. In: Neue Rheinische ZeitungNo. 18, June 18, 1848.—119 
Marx, K. or Engels, F. 
Arrests (this volume) 
— Verhaftungen. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 35, July 5, 1848.—186, 208 
The Downfall of the Camphausen Government (this volume) 
— Sturz des Ministeriums Camphausen. In: Neue Rheinische ZeitungNo. 23, June 
23, 1848.—466 
The Hansemann Government (this volume) 
— Das Kabinett Hansemann. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 24, June 24, 
1848.—170 
WORKS BY DIFFERENT AUTHORS 
Ariosto, L. L'Orlando furioso. —364 
Aristoteles. Politico.—264 
Arndt, Ernst Moritz. Des Deutschen Vaterland. —371 
— Der Freudenklang. — 400 
Bakunin, M. Erklärung. In: Ostdeutsches Athenäum, supplement to the Neue Oder-
Zeitung für Kunst, Wissenschaft und Literatur No. 151. 1848; Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
No. 46 (supplement), July 16, 1848.—315 
Beaumarchais, P. A. C. de. La folle journée, ou le mariage de Figaro. — 264 
Becker, N. Der deutsche Rhein. —154 
fBenkert. F. G.] Joseph Bonavita Blank's ... Kurze Lebens-Beschreibung, Würzburg. 
1819.—337 

=====第713页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 683 
Bible 
The Old Testament 
Exodus.—290 
Wisdom of Solomon.— 258 
Daniel.—474 
The New Testament 
Matthew.—108, 281, 282, 329, 363, 465 
Mark.—112 
Luke.—363 
1 Corinthians.—66 
Blanc, L. Histoire de dix ans. 1830-1840, T. 1-5, Paris, 1841-1844, T. 5.-298 
— Histoire de la révolution française, T. 1-2. Paris, 1847.— 298 
Bürger, G. A. Lenore. —45 
Calderön [de la Barca, Pedro]. La vida es sueno. —112 
Cervantes Saavedra, M. de. Novelas ejemplares: Coloquio de los perros.—282, 286 
— Vida y Hechos del ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. —360, 365, 380, 448, 
467 
Chant du départ. —-513 
Cooper, J. F. The Last of the Mohicans.—383 
[Davenant, Ch.] An Essay upon the Probable Methods of making a People Gainers in the 
Ballance of Trade, London, 1699.—477 
Dombasle, C.-J.-A. Mathieu de. Annales agricoles de Roville, ou mélanges d'agriculture, 
d'économie rurale, et de législation agricole, Paris, 1824-1837.—469 
[Dronke, E.] Die preussische Pacificirung und Reorganisation Posens. In: Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung Nos. 38, 39, 40, 43, 45, July 8, 9, 10, 13, 15, 1848.—200, 201 
Ducpétiaux, E. Mémoire sur l'organisation des écoles de réforme, Bruxelles, 1848.—334 
Freiligrath, F. Die Rose.— 395-97 
— Trotz alledem!— 279, 319 
Goethe, J. W. von.  Faust— 31, 116, 317, 364, 378, 485 
— Kriegserklärung. —528 
— Prometheus.— 404, 513 
— Reineke Fuchs. —68 
Harries, H. Lied für den dänischen Unterthan, an seines Königs Geburtstag zu singen. — 78 
Hecker, F. Ein Wort an das deutsche Volk. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 116 (sup­
plement), October 14, 1848.—485-89 
Hegel, G. W. F. Phänomenologie des Geistes. In: Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel's 
Werke, Bd. 2, Berlin, 1832.—156 
— Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie. Vorrede, gesprochen zu Heidelberg den 
28sten Oktober 1816, Bd. 13, Berlin, 1833.—367 

=====第714页=====
684 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Heine, H. Anno 1829.— 234, 464 
— An Georg Herwegh. In: Zeitgedichte. — 248 
— Bei des Nachtwächters Ankunft zu Paris. In: Zeitgedichte. —191 
— Berg-Idylle. In: Die Harzreise. — 261 
— Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen.— 32, 37, 39, 50, 108, 172, 189, 290, 370, 397, 
421,  440, 480 
— Du hast Diamanten und Perlen. In: Die Heimkehr. — 284, 473 
— Kahldorf über den Adel, in Briefen an den Grafen M. von Moltke. Einleitung. — 443 
—" Ritter Olaf.— 112 
— Der Tambourmajor. In: Zeitgedichte. —222 
— Der Tannhäuser. —190, 457 
— Zur Beruhigung. In: Zeitgedichte.— 205, 232, 304 
Homer.  Iliad.—  66 
Jeszcze Polska nie zginela. — 344, 356 
Jordan, W. Glocke und Kanone.— 360, 364 
— Der Schiffer und der Gott. —359, 360 
— Litthauische Volkslieder und Sagen. —360 
Lelewel, J. Histoire de Pologne, Paris, 1844.— 354 
— Geschichte Polens, Leipzig, 1847.— 360 
Leo,  H. Lehrbuch der Universalgeschichte, Bd. 1-4, Halle, 1835-1840.— 361 
Lessing, G. E. Nathan der Weise. —108, 447 
[Malthus, Th. R.] An Essay on the Principle of Population, London, 1798.— 282 
Marseillaise.— 130, 512, 513 
[Mieroslawski, L.] Débat entre la révolution et la contrerévolution en Pologne, Leipzig, 
1848.—354 
Montesquieu, Ch. de. De l'Esprit des loix, Genève, 1748.—204, 206, 246, 430 
Mourir pour la patrie. —130, 513 
Mozart, W. A. Die Hochzeil des Figaro. A comic opera; libretto by Lorenzo da 
Ponte.— 384 
[Müller-Tellering.] Wien, 21. Oktober. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 127, Octo­
ber 27, 1848.—503 
Patow, [E. R. von]. Promemoria, betreffend die Massregeln der Gesetzgebung, durch welche 
die zeitgemässe Reform der guts- und grundherrlichen Verhältnisse und die Beseitigung der 
noch vorhandenen Hemmungen der Landeskultur bezweckt  wird,  Berlin, June 20, 1848. 
In: Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen der zur Vereinbarung der 
preussischen Staats-Verfassung berufenen Versammlung, supplement to the Preussi-
sche Staats-Anzeiger, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1848.—117, 118, 292 
[Pinto, L] Traité de la circidation et du crédit, Amsterdam, 1771.—279 

=====第715页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 685 
Preussische Nationalhymne. —78 
Raimund, F. Das Mädchen aus der Feenwelt oder der Bauer als Millionär. — 107 
Rotteck, K. von. Allgemeine Geschichte vom Anfang der historischen Kenntniss bis auf 
unsere Zeiten. Für denkende Geschichtsfreunde, Freiburg und Konstanz, 1813-
1818.—30, 31, 80 
Rüge, A. Wahl-Manifest der radicalen Reformpartei für Deutschland. In: Die Reform No. 
16, April 16, 1848.—376, 378 
Sand, George. Sämtliche Werke, Leipzig, 1847.—360 
Schiller, F. von. An die Freunde. — 355 
— Die Räuber. —464 
Schücking, L. Unsere Politik in Italien. In: Kölnische Zeitung No. 238, August 26, 1848: 
Köln,  25. August.— 395-98 
Shakespeare, W. Julius Caesar. —29, 153 
— Henry IV — 466 
— Richard III.—32 
Sterne, L. The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman.—30 
Temme [, J. D. H.]. Bekanntmachung, Beflin, June 15, In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
No. 19, June 19, 1848.— 97 
Thiers, A. De la propriété. In: Le Constitutionnel Nos. 272, 273, 274, 276, 285, 286, 287, 
289, 290, 291, September 28, 29, 30 and October 2. 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 
1848.—467 
Virgil.  Aeneid.—  66 
Weber, C. M. von. Euryanthe. A romantic opera; libretto by Helmine von 
Chezy.—516 
Weichsel, F. F. Deutschlands Einheit und der Entwurf des Deutschen Reichsgrundgesetzes, 
Magdeburg, 1848.—18 
Wolfers. Die europäische Revolution und die Handelsfreiheit. In: Kölnische Zeitung 
No. 211, July 29, 1848: Köln, 28. Juli— 296-300 
DOCUMENTS 
[Adresse der Krieger und Wehrmänner des Kreises Hagen vom 19. Juni 1848.] In: Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung No. 25 (special supplement), June 25, 1848.— 171 
Allerhöchste Cabinetsordre vom 13. März 1833 betreffend den Ankauf subhastirter  grösserer 
Besitzungen polnischer Gutsbesitzer in der Provinz  Posen  für Rechnung  des Staats und  deren 
Wiederveräusserung an Erwerber  deutscher  Abkunft. In: Stenographischer Bericht über die 

=====第716页=====
686 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am 
Main,  Frankfurt a. M. und Leipzig, 1848-1849, Bd. 2.-357 
Allgemeine Gewerbeordnung. Vom 17. Januar 1845. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die 
Königlichen Preussischen Staaten No. 5, Berlin, 1845.—332 
Allgemeines Landrecht für die Preussischen Staaten. — 178, 226, 250, 317, 342, 432 
Aufruf an die Deutschen, Kaiisch, March 13(25), 1813.—309 
[Aufruf des demokratischen Kongresses in Berlin an das deutsche Volk,] October 29, 1848. 
In: Volksblätter No. 44, October 31, 1848: An das deutsche Volk.— 490-91 
Bekanntmachung, Berlin, June 1, 1848. In: Königlich privilegirte Berlinische Zeitung von 
Staats- und gelehrten Sachen No. 127, June 3, 1848.—46-47 
Bekanntmachung in Betreff der Demarkationslinie. Posen, 4. Juni. In: Preussischer 
Staats-Anzeiger No. 35, June 6, 1848.—64 
Belgian Constitution of February 7, 1831.—205, 333 
Code civil —see Code Napoleon 
Code Napoleon. Edition originale et seule officielle. Paris, 1808.—103, 187, 250, 290, 
318,  520, 521 
Compte rendu des séances de l'Assemblée nationale, T. 1-10, Paris, 1849-1850, T. 1, 2, 4 
(Marx and Engels did not use this source directly, but through newspaper 
articles).—135, 137, 140, 148, 149, 155, 160, 168, 169, 321-24, 440,  467-71,  525-26 
Declaration wegen Einziehung und künftiger Verwaltung der geistlichen Güter, ingleichen der 
Starosteien und anderer königl. Güter in Südpreussen und der von der ehemaligen Republik 
Polen neuerlich acquirirten Provinzen, Berlin, July 28, 1796.—348 
Le décret relatif aux attroupements armés ou non armés, June 7, 1848. In: Compte rendu des 
séances de l'Assemblée nationale, T. 1, Paris, 1849.—124, 168-69 
Le décret relatif aux crimes et délits commis par la voie de la presse, August 11, 1848. In: 
Compte rendu des séances de l'Assemblée nationale, T. 2, 3, Paris, 1849-1850.— 314 
Edikt den erleichterten Besitz und den freien Gebrauch des Grund-Eigenthums, so wie die 
persönlichen Verhältnisse der Land-Bewohner betreffend, October 9, 1807. In: Sammlung 
der für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten erschienenen Gesetze und Verordnungen von 
1806 bis zum 27sten Oktober 1810, Berlin, 1822.—118, 328 
Edikt die Regulirung der gutsherrlichen und bäuerlichen Verhältnisse betreffend, September 
14, 1811. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1811, 
No. 21.—328 
Edikt über die Einführung einer allgemeinen Gewerbe-Steuer, October 28, 1810. In: 
Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1810, No. 4.—331 

=====第717页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 687 
Edikt wegen der Mühlen-Gerechtigkeit, und Aufhebung des Mühlen-Zwangs, des Bier- und 
Branntwein-Zwangs in der ganzen Monarchie, October 28, 1810. In: Gesetz-Sammlung 
für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1810, No. 4.—331 
Entschädigungsgesetz zur allgemeinen Gewerbeordnung, January 17, 1845. In: Gesetz-
Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1845, No.  5.—332 
Entwurf des Strafgesetzbuchs für die Preussischen Staaten, nebst dem Entwurf des Gesetzes über 
die Einführung des Strafgesetzbuches und dem Entwurf des Gesetzes über die Kompetenz 
und das Verfahren in dem Bezirke des Appellationsgerichtshofes zu Köln, Berlin, 1847.— 
317-18 
Entwurf einer Verordnung über Ehescheidung, vorgelegt von dem Ministerium für Revision 
der Gesetze, im Juli 1842. In: Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe 
No. 293 (supplement), October 20, 1842.—208 
EntiL'urf eines Gesetzes betreffend die Ausschreibung einer Zwangs-Anleihe, July 10, 1848. 
In: Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen der zur Vereinbarung der 
preussischen Staats-Verfassung berufenen Versammlung, supplement to the Preussische 
Staats-Anzeiger, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1848.—278-86 
Entwurf eines Gesetzes über die Errichtung der Bürgerwehr, July 6, 1848. In: Stenographische 
Berichte über die Verhandlungen der zur Vereinbarung der preussischen Staats- Verfassung 
berufenen Versammlung, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1848.— 227, 256-64 
Entwurf eines Gesetzes wegen unentgeltlicher Aufliebung verschiedener Lasten und Abgaben, 
July 10, 1848. In: Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen der zur Vereinba­
rung der preussischen Staats-Verfassung berufenen Versammlung, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1848.— 
290-95 
Entwurf eines interimistischen Pressgesetzes. In: Kölnische Zeitung No. 201 (first supple­
ment),  July 19, 1848.—250-52 
Entumrf eines Verfassungs-Gesetzes für den preussischen Staat, May 20, 1848. In: 
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen der zur Vereinbarung der preussischen 
Staats- Verfassung berufenen Versammlung, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1848.— 72, 89, 96, 252 
Der Erste Vereinigte Landtag in Berlin 1847, Th. 1, Berlin, 1847.—115, 474 
Flott well [, E. H. von]. Denkschrift des Oberpräsidenten Herrn Flottwell ueber die 
Verwaltung des Gross-Herzogthums Posen, vom Dezember 1830 bis zum Beginn des Jahres 
1841,  Strasburg [1841].—357, 368 
Friedrich Wilhelm III. Verordnung über die Organisation der Landwehr, March 17, 1813. 
In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1813, 
No. 7—343, 355, 411, 449, 559 
Friedrich Wilhelm IV. [Ansprache an die Deputation der Frankfurter Nationalversammlung 
beim Kölner Dombaufest,] August 14, 1848. In: Kölnische Zeitung No. 229, August 
16, 1848.—474 
— [Antwort an die Deputation der Berliner Nationalversammlung,] October 15, 1848. 
In: Berliner Zeitungs-Halle No. 241, October 18, 1848.—474 
24-3447 

=====第718页=====
688 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— [Antwort an die Deputation der Bürgerwehr,] October 15, 1848. In: Berliner 
Zeitungs-Halle No. 241, October 18, 1848.—476 
— [Antwort auf das Entlassungsgesuch der Minister,] Sanssouci, September 10, 
1848.  In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 102, September 14, 1848.—430, 436 
Fuad Mehemmed. Manifest an die Bojaren und an Euch Einwohner der Walachei aller 
Klassen, Bucharest, September 13-25, 1848. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 118 
(supplement), October 17, 1848: Bukarest, 28. September. — 473,  485 
Gesetz, betreffend den Schutz der constituirenden Reichsversammlung und der Beamten der 
Centralgewalt, October 9, 1848. In: Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der 
deutschen constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt a. M. 
und Leipzig, 1848-1849, Bd. 4.-473 
Gesetz über die Erwerbung und den Verlust der Eigenschaft als  Preussischer  Unterthan,  so wie 
über den Eintritt in fremde Staatsdienste. Vom 31. Dezember 1842. In: Gesetz-Sammlung 
für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1843, No. 2.—  408,  409 
Gesetzbuch über Strafen, Köln, 1-812.—178,  209-11,  250, 251, 405, 486, 487, 593 
Il Governo provvisorio alla Nazione Germanica, Milano, April 6, 1848. In: Raccolta dei 
decreti, avvisi, proclami, bulletini ec. ec. emanti dal Governo provvisorio, dai diversi 
comitati e da altri dal giorno 18 Mario in avanti, Milano, 1848.—167 
Griesheim [, K. G. von]. Bekanntmachung, Berlin, June 15, 1848. In: Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 19, June 19, 1848.—97 
Grundrechte des deutschen Volkes. In: Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der 
deutschen constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Bd. I-II, 
Frankfurt a. M. und Leipzig, 1848.—249, 252, 288, 368, 384, 391, 443 
Jansen [, J. J.]. [Aufruf an die Mitglieder  des Arbeiter-Vereins und Bürger von Köln.] Köln, 
July 3, 1848. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 35, July 5, 1848.—178 
Kabinettsorder vom 28sten Oktober 1807, betreffend die Aufhebung der Erb-Unterthänigkeit 
auf sämmtlichen Preussischen Domainen. In: Sammlung der für die Königlichen Preussi­
schen Staaten erschienenen Gesetze und Verordnungen von 1806 bis zum 27sten Oktober 
1810, Berlin, 1822.—328 
Kartei-Konvention, unterzeichnet von den Bevollmächtigten Sr. Majestät des Königs von 
Preussen und Sr. Majestät des Kaisers von Russland, Königs von Polen,... ratifizirt und 
ausgewechselt am 3. Juli 1844. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen 
Staaten, Berlin, 1844, No. 22.-53-54 
Königliche Ordre an das Staats-Ministerium, betreffend die nationale Reorganisation des 
Grossherzogthums  Posen,  April 26, 1848. In: Reden, Proklamationen, Botschaften, Erlasse 
und Ordres Sr. Majestät des Königs Friedrich Wilhelm IV., Berlin,  1851.—  346 
Konstytucja 3-go Maja 1791 r. Ustawa Rzadowa. —351, 354, 372 
[Kösliner Adresse,] May 23, 1848. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 14, June 14, 
1848.—181 

=====第719页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 689 
Lamartine, A. Manifeste à l'Europe. Circulaire du ministre  des affaires  étrangères  aux agents 
diplomatiques de la République française, [March 4, 1848,] Paris, 1848.— 378 
Loi sur les crimes, délits et contraventions de la  presse,  et des autres moyens de publications, 
September 9, 1835. In: Lois Déitrots, Ordonnances, Règlements et avis du conseil-d'état, 
T. 35, Paris, 1836.—15, 171, 250 
[Manifest der Linken in der Frankfurter Nationalversammlung] In: Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 7, June 7, 1848.—48-52 
Motivirtes Manifest der radikal-demokratischen Partei in der konstituirenden Nationalversam­
mlung zu Frankfurt am Main. In: Neue Rheinische ZeitungNo. 6, June 6, 1848.—48-52 
Nesselrode. [Circular to All Russian Embassies.] In: Frankfurter Oberpostamts-Zeitung 
No. 210 (second supplement), July 28, 1848: St. Petersburg, 6. Juli. Die russische 
Note.— 307-13 
Patent die ständischen Einrichtungen  betreffend.  Vom 3. Februar 1847. In: Gesetz-Sammlung 
für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1847, No. 4.— 311 
Patent wegen beschleunigter Einberufung des Vereinigten Landtages, March 18, 1848. In: 
Reden, Proklamationen, Botschaften, Erlasse und Ordres Sr. Majestät des Königs Friedrich 
Wilhelm IV, Berlin, 1851.—390-91 
Proclamations of the Vienna Town Council. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 133 (second 
supplement), November 3, 1848: Berlin, 1. Nov. (Über die Kapitulation Wiens).— 
498 
[Programm des Arbeiterkongresses in Berlin.] In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 31, July l, 
1848:  Berlin, 29. Juni. Arbeiterparlament. —271 
Protest mehrerer Vorstands-Mitglieder des Kölner Bürger-Vereins, September 13, 
1848.—584 
Protokolle der Deutschen Bundesversammlung vom Jahre 1848, Frankfurt am Main, 
1848.—408-09 
Przyluski, L. [Die Korrespondenz des Erzbischofs von Posen, Przyluski, mit dem Berliner 
Kabinett] In: Neue Rheinische ZeitungNos. 5, 7, 10, 14, 38, 39, June 5, 7, 10, 14, and 
July 8 and 9, 1848, and also in the book, [Brodowski, Kraszewski und Potworowski.] 
Zur Beurtheilung der polnischen Frage im Grossherzogthum Posen im Jahre 1848, Berlin 
[1848].—201,  338 
Sebaldt. Warnung. In: Trier'sche Zeitung No. 169, June 17, 1848.— 95 
Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der  deutschen  konstituirenden Nationalver­
sammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt a. M. und Leipzig, Bd. 1-9, 1848-1849, 
Bd. 1-4 (Marx and Engels did not use this source directly, but through newspaper 
articles).—16-19, 72, 109, 110, 232, 235, 249, 288, 337, 338, 340-43, 344, 345-48, 
353-58,  360-62, 364-72, 373, 374, 376, 377, 378, 379, 414, 421, 439, 440 
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen der zur Vereinbarung der preussischen 
Staats-Verfassung berufenen Vesammlung, supplement to the Preussische Staats-
Anzeiger, Bd. 1-3, Berlin, 1848 (Marx and Engels did not use this source directly, 
but through newspaper articles).—30-32, 37, 38, 45,  53-61,  66, 67, 72-86, 89, 94, 
96-100, 117, 118, 170-75, 180-85, 189-93, 195-98,201-07,216-23,226-37.238-41. 
24* 

=====第720页=====
690 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
242-45,  256-65, 273, 275-78, 280-84, 285, 291, 294, 301-04, 327, 330, 331, 417-19, 
432, 433, 434, 463, 476, 492 
Struve, G., Hecker, F. Proclamation. In: Kölnische ZeitungNo. 225 (supplement), June 
12, 1848: Bericht des Ausschusses für die Prüfung der in dem Wahlbezirke Thiengen in 
Baden stattgehabten Wahl zur deutschen National-Ver Sammlung. — 485 
Stupp [, H. J.]. Amendements zu dem Gesetz wegen Unverletzlichkeit der Abgeordneten 
No. 23. In: Sammlung sämmtlicher Drucksachen der  Preussischen  National-V'ersammlung 
vom 22.V. bis  5.XII.  1848, Bd. I, No. 23.—101-05 
Telegraphische  Depesche  des Ministers des Innern Eichmann an den Regierungspräsidenten v. 
Möller in Köln über Unruhen in Berlin. In: Kölnische ZeitungNo. 297, November 3, 
1848:  Berlin, 1. November, 2 Uhr nachmittags. —497 
Verfassungs-Urkunde für das Königreich Württemberg, Stuttgart, 1843.—249 
Verhandlungen des Deutschen Parlaments, Frankfurt am Main, 1848.—18, 310, 408 
Verhandlungen des zum 2. April 1848 zusammenberufenen Vereinigten Landtages, Berlin, 
1848.—219 
Verordnung über die Bildung des Vereinigten Landtages, February 3, 1847. In: 
Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1847, No. 4.—310 
Verordnung über die Bildung eines Ausschusses der Stände des Königreichs Preussen. Vom 
21. Juni 1842. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 
1842,  No. 20.—311 
Verordnung über die periodische Zusammenberufung des Vereinigten ständischen Ausschus­
ses und dessen Befugnisse. Vom 3. Februar 1847. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Kö­
niglichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1847, No. 4.— 311 
Verordnung über die zu bildende Repräsentation des Volks. Vom 22sten Mai 1815. In: 
Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1815, No. 9.— 20 
Verordnung wegen der künftigen Behandlung des gesummten Staatsschulden-Wesens. Vom 
17ten Januar 1820. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, 
Berlin, 1820, No. 2.-55 
[Waffenstillstandsvertrag zwischen Preussen und Dänemark.] Malmö, August 26, 1848. In: 
Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der  deutschen  konstituirenden National­
versammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Bd. 3, Frankfurt a. M. und Leipzig, 
1848.—411-15, 421-25, 439 
Wahlgesetz für die zur Vereinbarung der Preussischen Staats-Verfassung zu berufende 
Versammlung. Vom 8. April 1848. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen  Preussischen 
Staaten, Berlin, 1848, No.  12.—33,  37, 285, 429 
Wildenbruch f, Louis]. Note an die dänische Regierung, April 8, 1848. In: Stenographische 
Berichte über die Verhandlungen der zur Vereinbarung der  preussischen  Staats-  Verfassung 
berufenen Versammlung, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1848.—191, 267, 310, 425 

=====第721页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 691 
Windischgrätz 's manifestos. 
In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 121, October 20, 1848: Olmütz. Proklamation 
— No. 129 (second edition), October 29, 1848: Wien, 23. Okt. 
— No. 131, November 1, 1848: Wien, 24. Okt. 
— No. 133, November 3, 1848: Wien, 27. Okt. 
— No. 135, November 5, 1848: Berlin, 2. Nov.^498 
Wrangel [, F. H. E., Graf von]. Armee-Befehl. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 109, 
September 22, 1848.—463 
ANONYMOUS ARTICLES AND REPORTS 
PUBLISHED IN PERIODIC EDITIONS 
Allgemeine Zeitung No. 155 (special supplement), June 3, 1848: Verona, 31. 
Mai— 305 
— No. 156, June 4, 1848: Italien.— 305 
Berliner Zeitungs-Halle No. 128 (supplement), June 4, 1848.' Berliner Tagesgeschi-
chte.—  46 
— No. 143, June 23, 1848: Wien, 20. Juni.— 120 
— No. 194, August 24, 1848: Das Rheinlands Herz zu Preussen. —399 
— No. 213, September 15, 1848: Berlin, 14. September.-^136, 437 
Berlinische Nachrichten von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen No. 258, November 3, 1848: 
Berlin, 3. Novbr. (Telegraphische  Depesche). — 501 
Börsen-Halle. Hamburgische Abend-Zeitung für Handel, Schiffahrt und Politik No. 11224 
(first edition), July 21, 1848: Kopenhagen, den 19. Juli.— 270 
La Concordia No. 161, July 7, 1848.—271 
— No. 168, July 15, 1848.—271 
Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung No. 174 (supplement), June 22, 1848: Aussig, 18. 
Juni.— 223 
Deutsche Zeitung No. 160, June 9, 1848: Vom Rhein, 5. Juni {militärische Vor­
kehrungen). —69 
— No. 172, June 22, 1848: Berlin, 16. Juni.—Üb, 116 
— No. 206, July 26, 1848: Karlsruhe, 23. Juli. Ernst der Regierung, die Aufhebung der 
demokratischen Vereine betreffend. —289 
Faedrelandet No. 179, July 13, 1848.—253, 254, 255, 267 
— No. 180, July 14, 1848.—268 
— September 9, 1848.—434, 435 
— No. 237, September 16, 1848.—446-47 
Frankfurter Oberpostamts-Zeitung No. 280, October 16, 1848: Über die neuesten 
Vorgänge in Wien.— 472 
L'Indépendance belge No. 170, June 18, 1848.—482 
— June 21, 1848.—482 
— No. 179, June 27, 1848.—135, 139, 483 
— July 5 and 10, 1848.—482 

=====第722页=====
692 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— No. 273, September 29, 1848: Nouvelles de Paris d'aujourd'hui.— 467 
— No. 286, October 12, 1848: Bruxelles, le 11  octobre,  Revue Politique.—467 
Le Journal d'Anvers No. 243, August 31, 1848: Affaire de Risquons-Tout. Verdict du 
Jury.—406 
Journal des Débats, July 30, 1848: Paris, 29 juillet. — 168 
Kölnische Zeitung Nos. 281, 285, 290, 293, 294, 300, 301, 303, October 8, 12, 17, 20, 
21, 27, 28, 30, 1847. Series of articles on Proudhon's work Système des contradictions 
économiques ou Philosophie de la  misère. — 324 
— No. 161, June 9, 1848: Berlin, 6. Juni. Versammlung zur Vereinbarung der 
preussischen Verfassung. —66-67 
— No. 175, June 23, 1848: Berlin, 20. Juni.— 116 
— No. 176 (special supplement), June 24, 1848: Köln, Samstag 24. Juni, abends 10 
Uhr.— 152, 154 
— No. 179 (supplement), June 27, 1848: Paris, 24. Juni, 11 Uhr.— 155 
— No. 179 (special supplement), June 27, 1848: Paris, 25. Juni, 10 Uhr mor­
gens.— 134-35 
— No. 179 (special supplement), June 27, 1848: Paris, 25. Juni, 11 Uhr.—152 
— No. 180 (special supplement), June 28, 1848: Paris, 26. Juni. —152 
— No. 181, June 29, 1848: Köln, 28. Juni. Die Pariser Ereignisse.— 152-56, 479 
— No. 182, June 30, 1848: Berlin, 27. Juni.— Ill 
— No. 203, July 21, 1848: Köln, 20. Juli. Die Debatte über den Jacobyschen 
Antrag.— 242, 244, 246 
— No. 211, July 29, 1848: Köln, 28. Juli. Die europäische Revolution und die 
Handelsfreiheit. —296 
— No. 215, August 2, 1848: Köln, 31. Juli.— 319-20 
— No. 256, September 16, 1848: Berlin, 12. Sep«.—436 
— No. 265, September 27, 1848: Köln, 26. Sept.— 462 
— No. 268, September 30, 1848: Köln, 29. September. Die Barrikaden in Köln.— 462, 
464 
— No. 297 (special supplement), November 3, 1848: Köln, 2. November, 10 
Uhr abends. —497 
— No. 299, November 5, 1848: Berlin, 3. Nov.— -501 
— No. 299, November 5, 1848: Breslau, 2. Nov.— 501 
Le Libéral Liégeois No. 218, September 1, 1848: Liège, le 1 er septembre 1848 (leading 
article). —406 
The London Telegraph No. 122, June 26, 1848 (leading article).—150, 151 
Le Moniteur  belge.  Journal officiel No. 212, July 30, 1848: Emigration aux Etats-Unis de 
l'Amérique du  Nord. — 333 
— No. 213, July 31, 1848: Exportations. —Marchandises belges. —335 
Morgenbladet No. 322 (supplement), November 18, 1846: Skandinavisme og Dan-
mark. —423 
La Nation, October 7, 1848.—459-60 
— October 10, 1848.—461 
Neue Berliner ZeitungNo. I (supplement), June 20, 1848: London, 15. Juni. — 113, 114 

=====第723页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 693 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie No. 1, June 1, 1848: Wien, 25. Mai, 
Morgens 7 Uhr.—457 
— No. 1, June 1, 1848: Brüssel, 30. Mai.— 460 
— No. 25 (special $upplement), June 25, 1848: Berncastel, 18. Juni. —122 
— No. 29, June 29, 1848: Paris, Schluss der Sitzung der Nationalversammlung vom 25. 
Juni. —140 
— No. 30, June 30, 1848: Paris, 27. Juni— 156 
— No. 31 (supplement), July 1, 1848: Paris, 28. Juni— 169 
— No. 33, July 3, 1848: Französische Republik— 167, 169 
— No. 40, July 10, 1848: Berlin, 7. Juli— 199 
— No. 47, July 17, 1848: Berlin, 14. Juli (Pressgesetz).— 250 
— No. 49, July 19, 1848: Stuttgart, 15. Juli— 249 
— No. 50, July 20, 1848: Heidelberg, 17. Juli— 249 
— No. 62, August 1, 1848: Mailand, 25. Juli— 305, 327 
— No. 62, August 1, 1848: Mailand, 26. Juli. Mittags.— 305, 327 
— No. 64, August 3, 1848: Paris, 31. Juli... — National-Ver Sammlung. — 321 
— No. 72, August 11, 1848: Kopenhagen, 5. August. —382 
— No. 92, September 2, 1848: Köln, 1. Sept. (Die Debatte über Aufhebung der 
Standesprivilegien. Schluss). —575 
— No. 103, September 15, 1848: Köln, 14. Sept.— 450 
— No. 127, October 27, 1848: Wien, 21. Oktober.— 503 
The Northern Star No. 558, July 1, 1848: Liberty, Equality, Fraternity.—478 
— No. 559, July 8, 1848: The Counter-Revolution.—478 
L'Observateur Belge No. 272, September 30, 1848.—467 
La Presse  No. 4499, October 19, 1848: Question italienne. Dernière phase de la médiation 
anglo-française (Communication). —480 
Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger No. 90, August 2, 1848: Berlin, 1. August. —317 
La Réforme, July 2, 1848: Paris 1 er juillet. La conspiration de la calomnie. —478 
— No. 289, October 18, 1848: Paris, 17 octobre.  La Conciliation et l'amnistie. —478-79 
The Times No. 19383, October 2, 1848: London, Monday, October 2, 1848. The perfect 
tranquillity...— 460 

=====第724页=====

=====第725页=====
695 
INDEX OF PERIODICALS 
L'Alba.  Giornale politico-letterario—an Italian democratic newspaper published in 
Florence in 1847-49.—11, 12, 167, 271 
Allgemeine Oderzeitung —a German newspaper published in Breslau (Wroclaw) jn 
1846-49; in 1848 voiced democratic views.—501 
Allgemeine Zeitung —a German conservative daily founded in 1798; from 1810 to 1882 
it was published in Augsburg.— 154, 305, 464 
Arbeiter-Zeitung —see Zeitung des Arbeiter-Vereines zu Köln 
Die begriffene Welt. Blätter für wissenschaftliche Unterhaltung —a monthly published by 
Wilhelm Jordan in Leipzig in 1845-46.— 360 
Berliner Zeitungs-Halle —a German daily published by Gustav Julius in Berlin from 
1846;  in 1848-49 it was a leading democratic newspaper.—7, 119, 399, 401, 436, 
437, 448 
Berlinische Nachrichten von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen— a German newspaper 
published in Berlin from 1740 to 1874. In 1848-49 it took a constitutional-
monarchist stand.— 436 
Börsen-Halle. Hamburgische Abendzeitung für Handel, Schiffahrt und Politik —a German 
daily published from 1805.—270 
Breslauer Zeitung —a German daily founded in Breslau in 1820; in the 1840s voiced 
liberal views.— 497, 501, 575 
La Concordia—an Italian liberal daily published in Turin in 1848-49.—271, 272 
Die Constitution. Tagblatt für constitutionelles Volksleben und Belehrung— a democratic 
newspaper which appeared in Vienna from March to October 1848; its editor was 
L. Hafner.— 572, 573 
Le Constitutionnel —a French daily published in Paris from 1815 to 1817 and from 
1819 to 1870; in the 1840s it voiced the views of the moderate wing of the Orleanists 

=====第726页=====
696 Index of Periodicals 
and during the 1848 revolution became the mouthpiece for the monarchist 
bourgeoisie (the Thiers party).—154, 156, 187, 467, 479 
Daily News—an English liberal newspaper, which appeared under this title in London 
from 1846 to 1930 as an organ of the industrial bourgeoisie.—461 
Débats —see Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires 
Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung —a German newspaper published under this title in 
Leipzig from 1843 to 1879; until the summer of 1848 it voiced conservative views 
and later liberal ones.—213 
Deutsche Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft und Kunst —a Young Hegelian literary and 
philosophical journal published under this title in Leipzig from July 1841 under the 
editorship of Arnold Ruge. In January 1843 it was closed down and prohibited 
throughout Germany.—380 
Deutsche Volkszeitung —a German democratic daily published in Mannheim in April 
1848 under the editorship of Julius Fröbel and Eduard Pelz.— 488, 536 
Deutsche Zeitung —a German daily published in Heidelberg under the editorship of 
Georg Gervinus from 1847 to September 1848; then, up to 1850, it appeared in 
Frankfurt am Main; it supported constitutional monarchy and unification of 
Germany under Prussian hegemony.—69, 115, 116, 325, 464 
Düsseldorfer Zeitung —a German daily published under this title in Düsseldorf from 
1826 to 1926.—575 
L'Emancipation —a Belgian daily founded in Brussels in 1830.—188 
Faedrelandet—a Danish newspaper published in Copenhagen from 1834 to 1839 
weekly, and then daily; in 1848 it was the semi-official organ of the Danish 
Government.—253, 254, 267, 268, 269, 434, 435, 446-47 
Frankfurter Journal—a German daily published in Frankfurt am Main from the 
seventeenth century up to 1903.—213 
Frankfurter Oberpostamts-Zeitung—a German newspaper published in Frankfurt am 
Main from 1619 up to 1866; it was owned by Thurn und Taxis princes; during the 
1848-49 revolution it was the organ of the Imperial Regent and Imperial 
Ministry.—307, 472, 473 
La Fraternité de 1845. Organe du communisme —a workers' monthly of the Babouvist 
trend, published in Paris from January 1845 to February 1848.—298 
Freiheit, Brüderlichkeit, Arbeit—a German newspaper, organ of the Cologne Workers' 
Association, published in Cologne from October 26, 1848, twice a week. On January 
14, 1849, Gottschalk's followers made an attempt to substitute it by the Freiheit, 
Arbeit, a newspaper disavowed by the leaders of the Association; the paper resumed 
publication on February 8, 1849, and appeared up to the middle of 1849.—597, 598 
Gazzetta di Milano—an Italian newspaper published from 1816 to 1875; until the late 
1850s it was the official organ of the Austrian authorities in Northern Italy.— 487 
Gervinus Zeitung —see Deutsche Zeitung 

=====第727页=====
Index of Periodicals 697 
Hallische Jahrbücher für deutsche Wissenschaft und Kunst —a literary and philosophical 
journal of the Young Hegelians published in Leipzig from January 1838 to June 
1841.  In July 1841 it began to appear under the tide Deutsche Jahrbücher für 
Wissenschaft und Kunst. Until June 1841 the journal was edited by Arnold Ruge and 
Theodor Echtermeyer in Halle and from July 1841, by Arnold Ruge in 
Dresden.—380 
L'Indépendance  belge —a Belgian liberal daily founded in Brussels in 1831.—139, 154, 
156, 335, 461, 467, 479 
Le Journal d'Anvers—a Belgian conservative Catholic newspaper published in Antwerp 
from 1848 to 1878.—406 
Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires —a French daily founded in Paris in 1789; a 
government organ during the JVily monarchy; during the 1848 revolution it voiced 
monarchist views.—154, 168, 463, 526 
Kölnische Zeitung —a German daily published under this title from 1802 to 1945; in the 
1840s organ of the liberal bourgeoisie; in 1848-49 advocated anti-revolutionary 
tendencies and fought against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.— 116, 134, 150, 152-55, 
171, 188, 296-300, 319, 320, 324, 333-36, 395-98, 430, 436, 461, 462, 464, 479, 
487, 496, 501, 584, 587, 595 
Königlich privilegirte Berlinische Zeitung von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen —a German 
daily published in Berlin from 1785; in the 1840s advocated moderate liberal views; 
also known as the  Vossische  Zeitung after its owner Christian Friedrich Voss.— 436 
Le Libéral Liégeois —a Belgian daily of a radical trend published in Liege from 1845 to 
1848.—406 
The London Telegraph—an English daily published in London in 1848.—150-52, 153 
The Manchester Guardian—an English daily, organ of the free traders; from the middle 
of the 19th century organ of the Liberal Party; founded in Manchester in 
1821.—151 
Mannheimer Abendzeitung —a German radical daily founded in 1842 by Karl Grün; 
ceased publication at the close of 1848.— 536 
Le Messager de Gand et des Pays-Bas —a daily published in Ghent from 1830; it was 
subsidised by the Dutch Orangists and the local Flemish bourgeoisie associated with 
them; in 1848 it came out in support of the demands advanced by the 
workers.—460 
Le Moniteur  belge.  Journal officiel —a Belgian daily founded in Brussels in 1831, official 
organ of the Government.—333, 483 
Le Moniteur universel —a French daily, official organ of the Government, published in 
Paris from 1789.—153-56, 216, 472 
Morgenbladet—a Norwegian newspaper founded in Christiania (Oslo) in 1819; in the 
1830s and 1840s was an organ of what was known as the "people's party".—422 
The Morning Chronicle—an English daily published in London from 1769 to 1865; ia 
the 1840s became the organ of the Whigs.—191 

=====第728页=====
698 Index of Periodicals 
La Nation, organe quotidien démocrate socialiste —a Belgian democratic newspaper 
published in Brussels from 1848 to 1856.—459, 460 
Le National—a French daily published in Paris from 1830 to 1851; in the 1840s, organ 
of the moderate republicans.—144, 154, 155, 168, 480, 481 
Neue Berliner Zeitung —a German conservative and monarchist daily published in 
Berlin from June to October 1848.—113, 114 
Neue Kölnische Zeitung für Bürger, Bauern und Soldaten —a German revolutionary-
democratic newspaper published in Cologne in 1848-49 by Friedrich Anneke and 
Friedrich Beust. —455 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie —a German daily published in Cologne 
under the editorship of Marx from June 1, 1848, to May 19, 1849 (with an interval 
between September 27 and October 12, 1848); organ of the revolutionary 
proletarian wing among the democrats during the revolution of 1848-49 in 
Germany—11,  12, 15, 19, 23, 26, 29, 33, 35, 38, 40, 41, 44, 45, 47, 52, 56, 61, 63, 65, 
67, 71, 72,86,88,90,93,95,99, 105, 106, 108, 110, 112, 114, 116,118, 119, 120-23, 
127-29,  133, 138, 143, 149, 156, 158, 164, 167-69, 172, 175, 176,, 179, 185, 186, 187, 
188, 193, 194, 198-99, 207, 208, 211, 212, 215, 222, 225, 231, 235, 238, 242, 247, 
249, 252, 255, 265, 269, 270, 271, 272, 277, 286, 287, 289, 300, 304-06, 313, 314, 
318, 320, 324, 326, 332, 336, 371, 376, 379, 381-84, 387, 389, 391-94, 398, 401,403, 
406, 407, 409, 410, 415, 416, 419, 420, 425, 426, 433, 435, 438, 440, 445, 447, 450, 
451-53,  458, 459, 460, 465, 466, 471, 473, 475, 477-79, 481, 482, 484-89, 492, 
495-97,  499, 500, 502, 506, 539-53, 554-56,  559-61,  565-68, 570, 572, 574-75, 578, 
585, 587 589-92, 594, 595 
Neu'-York Daily Tribune—an American paper founded by Horace Greeley and 
published from 1841 to 1924. Until the mid-1850s, it was an organ of the Left wing 
of the American Whigs, later—organ of the Republican Party. In the 1840s and 
1850s it took a progressive stand against the slave-owning system; Marx and Engels 
began to contribute to the paper in August 1851.— :587 
The Northern Star—an English weekly, central organ of the Chartists; published from 
1837 to 1852, first in Leeds, then in London. Its founder and editor was Feargus 
O'Connor, George Harney being one of its co-editors. Engels contributed to the 
paper from 1843 to 1850.—129, 151, 298, 478 
L'Observateur belge —a Belgian liberal daily published in Brussels from 1835 to 
I860.—187, 336, 467 
Le Peuple constituant —a French republican daily published in Paris from February to 
July 1848; its editor was Hugues Lamennais.— 155 
Le Politique—a Belgian daily published in Brussels in 1847 and 1848, organ of the 
constitutionalists.—187 
Le Populaire de 1841—a French newspaper published in Paris from 1841 to 1852; it 
propagated peaceful Utopian communism; up to 1849 it was edited by Eiienne 
Cabet.—298 
La Presse—a  French daily published in Paris from 1836; in the 1840s, mouthpiece for 
the opposition to the July monarchy; organ of moderate republicans in 1848-49, 
later a Bonapartist paper.—187 

=====第729页=====
Index of Periodicals 699 
Preussischer  Staats-Anzeiger —a paper founded in Berlin in 1819; from 1819 to April 
1848 it was a semi-official organ of the Prussian Government.—30, 216, 316, 497 
Der Radikale. Deutsche Zeitung für In- und Ausland —an Austrian democratic paper 
published in Vienna in 1848.—570 
La Réforme—a French daily, organ of the republican democrats and petty-bourgeois 
socialists, published in Paris from 1843 to 1850. Several of Engels' articles were 
published in this paper between October 1847 and January 1848.—144, 298, 478, 
493-95 
Le Représentant du Peuple. Journal quotidien des travailleurs —a French newspaper 
published in Paris between April and August 1848 under the editorship of 
Proudhon.—322 
Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe —a German daily founded on 
January 1, 1842, as an organ of the Rhenish bourgeois opposition, and published in 
Cologne till March 31, 1843. When edited by Marx (from October 15, 1842, to 
March 17, 1843), the paper became a mouthpiece of revolutionary-democratic ideas 
which led to its suppression. Engels was one of its contributors.—208, 497 
La Ruche populaire—a French workers' monthly published in Paris from 1839 to 1849; 
it was associated with Utopian socialists.—298 
Schlesische  Zeitung —a German daily published in Breslau (Wroclaw) from 1742; organ 
of the constitutional monarchists on the eve and during the revolution of 
1848-49.—501 
Schleswig-Holsteinische Zeitung (Altona). — 34 
Seeblätter —a German paper published in Constance from 1837 to 1849; it 
voiced moderately liberal ideas until 1848, when it assumed a democratic 
trend.—536 
Severnaya pchela (Northern Bee)—a Russian political and literary newspaper, semi­
official organ of the Tsarist Government, published in St. Petersburg from 1825 to 
1864.—191 
Le Siècle —a French daily published in Paris from 1836 to 1939. In the 1840s it was an 
oppositional organ which demanded electoral and other reforms.—187 
Le Spectateur républicain —a French journal published in Paris from July to September 
1848.—402 
Spenersche Zeitung —see Berlinische Nachrichten von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen 
Staats-Anzeiger —see Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger 
Staats-Zeitung —see Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger 
The Times —an English conservative daily founded in London in 1785.—151, 216, 
460, 461 
L'Union.  Bulletin des ouvriers rédigé et publié par eux-mêmes —a French monthly 
published in Paris from December 1843 to September 1846 by a group of workers 
influenced by Saint-Simon's ideas.—298 

=====第730页=====
700 Index of Periodicals 
Der Volksfreund. Zeitschrift für Aufklärung und Erheiterung des Volkes —an Austrian 
democratic newspaper published in Vienna.—572 
Vossische  Zeitung —see Königlich privilegirte Berlinische Zeitung von Staats- und gelehrten 
Sachen 
Der Wächter am Rhein —a German democratic newspaper published in Cologne in 
1848 and 1849 under the editorship of Kramer.—455, 563 
Wiener Zeitung —an official daily published in Vienna from 1780 to  1931.—  569, 571 
Zeitung des Arbeiter-Vereines zu Köln —a German newspaper, organ of the Cologne 
Workers' Association, published from April to October 1848; edited by Andreas 
Gottschalk (till July 1848) and by Joseph Moll (from July to September).—325, 455, 
596 
Zeitungs-Halle —see Berliner Zeitungs-Halle 

=====第731页=====
701 
SUBJECT INDEX 
A 
Absolutism—see Monarchy, absolute 
Academic Legion—503 
Agitation— 239, 298, 423 
Agricultural  chemistry—  470 
Agriculture—  3, 342, 363, 468-71 
See also Agricultural chemistry 
Alsace— 423 
Analogy, historical—51, 351 
Anti-Corn Law League—238, 299 
Aristocracy, landed—55, 118, 119, 298, 
299, 351, 354, 363, 373, 433, 520 
Arming,  arms—S,  73, 96, 180, 260, 437 
Army 
— its organisation after victorious 
democratic revolution — 3 
— as component part of state ap­
paratus— 77, 437 
— mercenaries —  25, 26, 165 
— Austrian—11, 109, 257, 387, 395, 
396 
— Danish —42, 436 
— Prussian—34, 43, 69, 85, 107-09, 
227-28,  257, 258, 262-63, 264-65, 
283, 355, 383, 400, 431, 433, 438 
— of German states—42, 165 
— of the Two Sicilies—25, 388 
See also Arming, arms; Artillery; 
Military, the; Military art 
Articles of consumption—4 
Artillery—161 
Associations of  workers—  297 
Athens— 512 
Austria—  92-93,  109 
— political system — 350 — history —396 
— national question — 11 
— and Germany—11, 396, 400 
— and Hungary—165 
— and  Italy—11,  92, 165, 167, 386, 
387, 396, 397, 400, 403, 421, 487 
— and Portugal—165 
— and Russia — 350 
— and Polish  lands—11,  92,  350-51, 
373 
— and Slavs —91-93 
See also Austro-Italian War of 1848-49; 
Bourgeoisie, Austrian; Hungary, Rev­
olution of 1848-49 in Austrian Empire; 
Working class of Austria 
Austro-Italian war of 1848-49—109-10, 
212, 305-06, 376, 385-89, 395-97, 400, 
402, 421, 473 
Autocracy—116, 363 
B 
Baden republican uprising (April 
1848) —  68, 239, 245, 368 
Banks— 4, 118, 470, 484, 485 
Barbarism— 116, 351, 423 
See also Feudalism 
Belgium—165, 333-36, 404, 405, 423, 
483-85 
— social and political system — 333, 
484-85 
— economic conditions — 333-35. 
483-84 
— foreign trade —334 

=====第732页=====
702 Subject Index 
— pauperism — 333-35 
— revolution of 1830-31—405 
— before European revolution of 
1848 — 333-35 
— in 1848 — 404-06, 460-62, 484-85 
— the press—187-88, 406, 461 
— democratic movement, democrats, 
radicals — 404-05 
— home policy and situation—-283-
84 
— political parties of ruling 
classes — 485 
See also Bourgeoisie, Belgian; Working 
class of Belgium 
Berlin—399-401 
Bills of exchange—55, 470 
Bohemia, Bohemians  (Czechs)  — 92, 93, 
339, 457, 498, 504 
See also Prague uprising in July 1848; 
Slav Congress in Prague; Slovanskâ Lipa; 
Svornost 
Bonapartism—520, 522 
Borders—  341,  348-49, 350-53 
Bourgeoisie—4, 55, 465, 497 
— general characteristics — 497 
— struggle against feudal no­
bility—262 
— economic domination—299 
— big bourgeoisie —  73, 166, 234, 
279, 445 
— industrial bourgeoisie — 299, 300 
— political rule —262, 299, 300, 352-
53, 378, 444, 445, 495, 505 
— republican bourgeoisie— 147 
— democratic bourgeoisie — 74 
— and absolute monarchy —495 
— deals with reactionaries — 74, 402, 
414-15,  458, 497, 500, 503-06 
— and peasantry — 295, 519-22 
— its theoreticians and ideolog­
ists—378-79 
— and national question—166, 349, 
377 
— "middle class" — 497 
— "medieval"—245, 338, 344, 350, 
372, 519 
Bourgeoisie, Austrian—504, 505 
Bourgeoisie, Belgian—334, 405, 484 
Bourgeoisie, English— 150, 296-300, 377, 
379, 381, 482, 497 
Bourgeoisie, French— 133, 138, 139, 140, 
147, 295,298, 300,378,379,380,401, 403,  481,  493, 494, 496, 504, 513, 519, 
520 
— establishment of military dictator­
ship and massacres of the pro­
letariat in June 1848—125-26, 
133, 135-44, 148-49, 161-62, 170, 
378, 458 
Bourgeoisie, German—53, 295, 300, 
379, 380, 381, 425, 427,  431,  496, 500, 
503-06 
See also Burghers 
Bourgeoisie, Italian—300, 380 
Bourgeoisie, Polish—339, 350 
Bourgeoisie, Prussian—245, 260, 295, 
350 
Bourgeoisie, Spanish— 380 
Burdens imposed upon peasants—3, 117, 
118, 291, 309, 328-29, 351, 363 
See also Corvée; Dues 
Bureaucracy—4, 74, 77, 104, 194, 202-
05, 209, 210, 236, 251, 259, 261. 
274-76,  283, 342-43, 355, 366, 381, 
383, 431, 445 
Burghers— 79, 81, 150, 189, 235, 245, 
338, 340, 349, 351, 352, 372,  381,  405, 
423, 520 
C 
Capital— 573 
Capitalists—521 
Carbonari— 26, 386, 389 
Castilia— 372 
Censorship— 258 
Centralisation of the  state—51,  237, 273, 
274, 339-40,  400-01,  440 
Chartism—68, 113, 114, 129, 153, 297, 
473, 478, 572 
Cherusci— 290 
Church—4, 85 
See also Clergy 
Civilisation—116, 212, 379, 423, 528, 
573 
See also Society, bourgeois 
Classes—  556 
— class contradictions—-299, 494-95 
— in antiquity—153 
— in feudal society—153, 351, 519 
— class rule —73-74, 147-48, 293, 
378, 414, 444, 482, 495, 497. 556 
— exploiting classes—147, 300 

=====第733页=====
Subject Index 703 
— exploited, oppressed industrious 
classes  —3,  147, 171, 330, 520-22 
—- middle classes, strata and es­
tates—166, 497 
— conservative — 55 
— reactionary, counter-revolutiona­
ry—55,  108, 504-05 
— revolutionary — 520-21 
— progressive — 373 
— class hatred — 298 
— abolition of classes in future com­
munist society — 495 
See also Bourgeoisie; Interests; Nobility; 
Peasantry; Working class 
Class struggle—152, 495 
— in antiquity—130, 153 
— in feudal society—477, 494, 520 
— between proletariat and bour­
geoisie—147, 153, 265, 296-300, 
324, 489, 495, 496, 522, 570 
— and revolution—147, 152, 297 
— as political struggle — 489 
— abolition of classes as condition for 
its cessation — 495 
See also Chartism; June uprising of 
Paris proletariat in 1848; Revolution; 
Working-class movement (in Austria, 
etc.) 
Clergy— 4, 77, 348, 380, 519 
Cologne Democratic Society—87, 562-65, 
582-87 
Cologne Workers'Association—4, 18, 178-
79, 384, 393, 394, 464, 465, 558, 
579-80, 586-88, 595^97 
Colonisation of Slav lands by Ger­
mans—  65, 338-41,  343-44, 347, 350 
Commerce, trade—  65, 334, 338, 340, 341, 
342, 344, 372, 379, 468, 469, 513 
Committee of Public Safety in Co­
logne—  450,  582-88 
Communist League—3-4, 11-12, 15, 271, 
272, 533-34, 535, 542, 552, 558, 
582-89 
— tactical principles in 1848-49 rev­
olution— 3-4 
— critique of Stephan Born's tac­
tics—271-72 
— critique of Gottschalk's sectarian 
position — 542 
— and petty-bourgeois demo­
crats—27-29, 48-52, 74-78, 82, 
490-92 — associations in Belgium—406 
— associations in Germany—535, 542 
Competition— 573 
Constitution 
— constitutional issue in Prussia — 73, 
74, 103, 431 
— and division of powers — 204-05, 
430-32 
— constitutionalism of Prussian liber­
al bourgeoisie — 87, 116 
— constitutionalism of German 
bourgeoisie — 289, 445 
— constitutionalism of French 
bourgeoisie—445 
Contradictions, social—148-49 
Convention of Jaroslawiec—346 
Co-operation, co-operative movement—3 
Corn Laws— 238, 281, 299 
Corvée—  3, 245, 293, 308, 309, 
328-29 
Counter-revolution—108, 373, 377 
Courts and  legal  procedure— 265, 325, 437 
Cracow, Cracow Republic (1846)—166, 
310, 339, 351, 374 
Credit— 4, 224-25, 322-23 
Crime— 334, 335 
Crime, political— 96-97 
Customs Union—236 
D 
Danish-Prussian war of 1848-50—34, 42, 
43, 69, 107, 267-69, 389, 400, 421, 424 
— and stand taken by Frankfurt 
National Assembly —34, 72, 389, 
414, 425, 439, 440, 577-78 
— and policy of Prussian Govern­
ment—43,  44, 191, 265, 267, 411, 
425, 442 
— and European powers —  43, 69, 
253, 268, 310-77, 378, 425 
See also Malm'6, negotiations and armi­
stice; Schleswig-Holstein question 
Danube principalities—311, 474 
Democracy—  55, 73, 76, 87-88, 108, 116, 
129, 149, 167, 288, 324, 352, 354, 355, 
373, 375, 400, 421, 440, 473, 562-65 
— East-European—351, 363, 373, 
375 
— bourgeois —27-30, 74, 75, 262, 
365, 378, 403, 406 
— petty-bourgeois —27-29, 403, 430 

=====第734页=====
704 Subject Index 
— revolutionary—119, 149, 403, 
437, 453, 558, 564-65, 586-90, 592 
—- as form of social order and political 
system—167, 373, 400 
— noblemen's — 363 
— peasant—351, 363, 364, 375 
Democratic  congresses  in Germany 
— in Frankfurt am Main —288-89 
— in Berlin —490-92 
Democratic liberties—11, 73, 248-49 
Democratic Society in Cologne—87-88, 
384, 463, 556-57, 562-65, 582-88, 597 
Denmark—  34, 42, 43, 422, 423, 424, 
435, 446-47 
See also Army (Danish); Danish-Prus­
sian war of 1848-50 
Despotism—11,  71, 209, 251, 321, 358, 
372, 400, 494 
Dialect—  372,  524 
Dictatorship 
— in accordance with a system de­
vised by a single brain — 556 
— military—125-26, 133, 135-44, 
148-49,  161-62, 170, 234, 376,429, 
459, 482, 497, 513 
— counter-revolutionary—168 
— revolutionary-democratic—4, 50, 
205, 237, 431-33 
Diplomacy— 165, 307, 308, 310, 481 
Division of labour— 573 
Doctrinairism, doctrinaires—39, 147 
Dues—3,  117 
E 
Economic relations—51, 488, 494, 495 
Economics and politics—329, 505 
Education— 4 
Emigration— 53-54, 65, 369-75, 408-09 
England—  511 
— English nation, national charac­
ter—300, 378, 405 
— as leading capitalist power — 298, 
379-80 
— historical development, its 
peculiarities  —298,  299, 300, 477 
— in 1848 —  68, 108, 113-14, 296, 
297, 377, 424-25, 481 
— industry — 469 
— agriculture —  469,  470 
— landed aristocracy—298-99 — finances, budget, taxes — 224, 
468-70 
— Parliament—61, 216, 227, 381 
— the press—114, 129 
— class contradictions — 488 
— law on associations of workers 
(1825)—297 
— pauperism — 296 
— workhouses (Poor Law Bastilles) — 
296, 573 
— foreign policy—108, 377 
— and France  —25,  372, 481 
— and Germany—165, 377, 425 
— and Russia  —308,  379 
— and Schleswig-Holstein question — 
424-25 
— and preconditions and prospects 
for social revolution — 572 
See also Anti-Corn Law League; 
Bourgeoisie, English; Chartism; Corn 
laws; English revolution of 1640-60; 
Free Trade; London;  Scotland;  Trade 
unions in  England;  Working class of 
England;  Working-class movement in 
England 
English revolution of 1640-60—49, 206, 
237, 437, 439 
Epoch, bourgeois—262, 304 
Equality— 334, 556 
Estates, social— 39, 111, 166, 203, 260, 
274, 566 
Europe—  51, 52, 165, 237 
Exchange— 339, 496 
Exploitation—147, 148 
F 
Family— 4, 324, 519 
Fatherland—  130 
Federal Diet— 18, 49, 72, 109, 232-34 
Federalism— 51 
Feudalism—  3, 89, 245, 260, 268, 373, 
444, 504 
— feudal law —292 
— and monarchy — 494 
— towns, townspeople — 520 
— classes, class contradictions — 519 
— feudal barons — 260 
— bourgeoisified feudalism — 51 
— its downfall—117-18, 290, 291, 
292-95,  329-30, 350-53, 468 
See also Aristocracy,  landed;  Burghers, 

=====第735页=====
Subject Index 705 
Estates,  social;  Guilds, guild  system;  Juris­
diction, patrimonial; Knights; Landed 
property; Liege money; Monarchy, abso­
lute; Nobility; Peasantry; Serfdom; State, 
the 
Flanders, the Flemish—406, 423 
Foreign policy— 166, 167, 377, 481 
France— 206, 236, 298 
— territory, borders — 511-19, 524, 
529 
— natural conditions—511-18, 525-
29 
— population —516, 524, 525, 528, 
529 
— formation of French nation — 372-
74 
— national character —  92, 405, 519 
— economy —330, 468, 469, 512, 
513, 515, 519, 520, 521 
— agriculture —  468,  469 
— vine-growing—511-13 
— legislation—68, 124, 148,251,252, 
308, 314 
— usury —330 
— finances — 224 
— taxes — 469 
— social and political system — 216, 
227 
— classes and class struggle — 493-95 
— in the Middle Ages —326, 347, 
372, 520 
— under absolutism in 17th and 18th 
centuries—347, 520 
— during Thermidorian reaction and 
Directory—161,  520 
— during Consulate and First Em­
pire — 209, 237, 250, 290, 308, 
309, 396, 520, 521 
— during Restoration — 96, 165, 178, 
188, 262, 378-80, 493, 521 
— foreign policy and diplomacy — 26, 
110, 116, 165, 290, 308, 311, 377-
80, 396,  480-81,  524 
See also Bourgeoisie, French; French 
Revolution of 1789-94; French revolution 
of 1830 (July); July monarchy in France 
(1830);  Napoleonic wars; Peasants, 
French; Revolution in France. Second 
Republic (1848-51); Working class of 
France; Working-class movement in 
France; Wars against Albigenses (1209-
29); Wars of First French Republic Frankfurt am Main—49-50, 443 
Frankfurt National Assembly—16-19, 48-
51, 72, 76, 92, 108, 109-10, 116, 232, 
236-37,  239-41,  248, 249, 253, 288, 
313, 383, 397, 472-73, 504-05, 565, 
577-78 
— and Imperial Regent  —232,  253, 
411, 413, 472-73, 504-06 
— and democratic party — 27-29, 49-
51, 87, 288-89, 364-65, 421, 490-
92, 558, 582-85 
— and petty-bourgeois democrats' 
policy—27-29, 50-52, 74, 79, 82, 
99, 179, 235-36, 288-89,  358-61, 
371-81,  430, 439-40, 488, 490-92 
— and democratic illusions — 248, 
401, 488 
— attitude to Mainz incident— 17, 50 
— and stand on Polish ques­
tion—310, 337-81 
— and armistice at Malmö — 413-15, 
439-40, 421-25 
— and Frankfurt uprising — 442-47 
— and Vienna uprising — 457, 504 
Freedom— 15, 20, 73, 92, 165-67, 209, 
212, 248, 251, 260, 338, 375, 397, 496, 
513, 564 
— and the state—289 
— political  —73,  239, 366, 377 
— of speech —436, 438 
— of assembly  —437,  443 
— of association  —73,  239, 288 
— of the press —77, 239 
— of property — 293 
— personal —264, 293 
— constitutional — 264 
— social — 366 
— and working class—74 
See also Liberty, civil 
Free Trade— 272, 298, 300, 334, 377, 
378 
See^also Anti-Corn Law League; Protec­
tionism 
French Revolution of 1789-94—26, 75, 
147, 235, 376, 405-06, 495 
— its character—130, 147, 205, 237, 
327 
— abolition of feudal landowner-
ship—89,  118, 294, 520 
— political groupings—161, 425 
— role of masses —  49, 437 
— and peasantry — 295, 519-20 

=====第736页=====
706 Subject Index 
— revolutionary wars, army, strategy 
and tactics — 396 
— national (constituent, legislative) 
assemblies and their policy — 39, 
49, 373, 438 
— Convention  —373,  432, 520 
— and royal power—425 
— and Germany—165, 309, 396 
— and Switzerland — 26 
See also Jacobin dictatorship, Jacobins 
French revolution of 1830 (July)—26, 
39-40,  128, 143, 147, 262, 311, 380, 
430,  493 
See also July monarchy in France (1830) 
G 
Galicia—  396,  500 
German Confederation (1815-66) — 20,42, 
64, 77, 109, 266-68, 349, 353, 367 
— and Federal Diet—18, 49, 68, 72, 
109, 232-34, 236, 249, 308, 312, 
337, 408, 409, 413, 565 
German Democratic Society  (Paris)  — 8 
German philosophy—  29, 373, 375, 380 
See also Hegelianism; Kantianism 
Germans—  28, 64-65, 92, 110, 166, 212, 
339-40, 344-45, 349, 362, 378, 422 
German Workers' Association in Brussels 
(1847) —  406,  572 
German Workers' Association in 
Paris— 572 
German Workers' Club in Paris—9 
Germany 
— geographical situation and natural 
conditions — 513 
— peculiarities of social develop 
ment — 339, 340, 352, 556 
— political development — 49, 51 
— peculiarities of intellectual de­
velopment — 373 
— German national character—166 
— survivals of feudalism —  3, 51, 290-
95, 309, 331-32, 352 
— serfdom—118, 245 
— history  —51,  99, 245,  290-91,  339 
— and American War of Indepen­
dence—165 
— French revolution of 1789-94 and 
Napoleonic wars—165, 290, 308-
09, 396, 425 — between 1815 and early 1848  — 20, 
235-36,  237, 308-09 
— and July revolution of 1830 in 
France — 311 
— handicrafts — 339 
— agriculture —  51, 274 
— protective tariffs — 377, 378 
— inland trade—338 
— foreign trade —  51, 339 
— German philistines — 79, 81, 150, 
189, 235, 339, 340, 352, 381, 423 
— political system — 351 
— suffrage — 3 
— and unification problem —  3, 49, 
51, 73, 77, 116, 235, 237-38, 269, 
308, 312, 352, 377,  400-01,  414, 
425,  440 
— and Prussia—286, 383, 392, 
576-78 
— political parties — 365 
— bourgeois liberalism — 378 
— democrats, democratic move­
ments—249, 365, 378, 462-65, 
490-92,  558, 562-65, 570 
— the press —270, 478, 575 
— foreign policy—165-67, 237, 287, 
308, 345 
— national policy—92, 165-67 
— and Denmark —422, 446, 577-78 
— and England —165, 166, 377, 379, 
424, 446 
— and France—116, 237, 341, 377, 
378 
— and Greece—165 
— and Holland—165 
— and Italy—92, 166, 377, 396-98, 
577 
— and Poland  —64-65,  92, 166-67, 
338-59,  367, 577 
— and Russia—51-54, 93, 116, 167, 
212, 237, 307-13, 345, 350-53, 424, 
446 
— and Slavs  —91-93,  338, 400, 577 
— and Spain—165 
— and Switzerland —165 
See also Berlin; Bourgeoisie, German; 
Frankfurt am Main; Frankfurt National 
Assembly; German Confederation (1815-
66); Germans; Holy Roman Empire of 
the German nation (962-1806); Litera­
ture; Nobility (German); Peasants, 
German; Petty bourgeoisie. German: 

=====第737页=====
Subject Index 707 
Prussia; Revolution of 1848-49 in Ger­
many, Schleswig-Holstein question; 
Working class of Germany 
Government securities—224-25, 580-82 
Greece— 165, 307 
Greece, ancient—512 
Guilds, guild system—235, 331, 339 
H 
Handicrafts, handicraftsmen—235, 339, 
349, 580 
Hegelianism—156, 362-64, 487 
History— 79, 372, 378 
See also Analogy, historical 
Holland—  165 
Holy Alliance— 165, 308, 309, 350 
Holy Roman Empire of the German nation 
(962-1806)—50, 253 
Home policy—166, 167 
Humanism, abstract—493 
Hungary— 54, 165, 457, 458 
See also Pest; Revolution of 1848-49 in 
Hungary 
Huns— 387 
I 
Icarian communism  (Cabet)  — 8, 298 
Icelanders—422 
Ideas—  487,  494-95 
Ideology, ideologists— 112, 375, 378, 496 
Immigration— 339 
Income— 282, 328-29 
Industry—  296,  300, 334-35, 340, 342, 
372, 379, 469, 482, 513 
Insurrection of weavers at Lyons in 
1834—130 
Interests—3, 147, 345 
— class —40, 55, 378, 494 
— material— 166, 376, 377, 484, 522, 
535 
Internationalism—11,  12, 166-67 
— proletarian—129, 444, 478, 572 
Ireland—  68, 572 
Italy—  388-89,  527 
— economy—372, 400, 511 
— industry — 372 
— commerce — 372, 511 
— lumpenproletariat — 25, 142 
— struggle for independence and un­ification —  41, 306, 385, 387, 388, 
396 
— revolutions of 1820-21 and 
1831  — 165,  389 
— the press—11-12 
— the duchies of Tuscany, Parma and 
Modena —387 
— and Austria —  41, 165 
— and France — 110 
— and Germany—166, 167, 395-98 
— and Switzerland — 305 
See also Austro-Italian war of 1848-49, 
Carbonari; Lazzaroni; Lombardy and 
Venice; Revolutions of 1848-49 in 
Italian states; Sardinia (Piedmont); 
Sicilies, the Two (Naples) 
J 
facobin dictatorship, Jacobins—46, 130, 
221,  376, 405-06, 495, 520 
Jews, Jewish question—65, 197, 203, 338, 
341-42,  347, 354, 371 
July monarchy in France (1830) — 39-40 
— its bourgeois character— 147, 262, 
297, 513, 520-22 
— industry — 513 
— agriculture and agrarian rela­
tions—469, 520-22 
— finance —323 
— commerce — 513 
— home policy, internal situa­
tion—38,  68, 111-12, 188 
— Paris municipal guard—138 
— corruption of ruling classes — 323 
— Parliament, Chamber of Dep­
uties—-38,  111-12, 297 
— the press—187-88, 216 
— September Laws on the press 
(1835)—15,  171, 250 
— republican movement—133, 158 
— bourgeois republicans (National 
party)—144, 481 
— Réforme party— 144 
— dynastic opposition—147, 168 
— party of Thiers— 168 
See also Insurrection of weavers at Lyons 
in 1834; Society of the Rights of Man 
and the Citizen 
June uprising of Paris proletariat in 
1848—124, 125, 127-28,  130-31,  132-

=====第738页=====
708 Subject Index 
33, 143-48, 149, 151-54, 157, 163, 164, 
170, 297, 427, 458, 522, 572 
— as first decisive battle of working 
class against bourgeoisie—143 
— causes of uprising—124, 148 
— heroism of working class— 140-43, 
163-64 
— course of uprising—121, 124-27, 
130-43,  157-64 
— and petty-bourgeois demo­
crats—144, 478, 493-95 
— and peasantry — 524-25 
— and German bourgeoisie—151-54, 
156, 297-98 
— massacre of insurgents by bour­
geoisie—125-26, 132-33, 135-
44, 147-49, 161-62, 170, 235, 376, 
458, 481, 496, 514 
— role of national and mobile guards 
in suppression of uprising—125-
26, 136-38, 140, 142, 143, 154, 505 
— and the press—155-56, 478-79 
— and the proletarian press — 479 
— influence on revolutions in France 
and Europe—234, 440, 444, 445, 
458, 504-05 
— significance of its experience for 
development of art of war­
fare — 164 
— its evaluation in the democratic 
press—149, 480 
Jurisdiction, patrimonial—118 
Jurists— 94, 103, 196, 210, 301, 339 
K 
Kantianism—487 
King, royal power— 380, 429, 474, 477, 
494 
Knights— 370-73 
L 
Landed property—A, 274, 322, 347-48, 
467-70, 518-23 
See also Mortgage 
Landowner—3,  4, 329 
Landownership— 3 
— petty peasant—295, 470, 520, 521 
— big —55 Language—  65, 341, 372 
Law, laws—  68, 94, 97, 118, 171, 177, 
196, 203, 209, 239, 240, 248,  249-51, 
257-58,  293, 331, 427, 429, 431, 437 
— feudal—118, 292, 293, 295 
— bourgeois  —293,  330 
— constitutional — 204, 428 
— private—103, 104, 318, 520-21 
— civil—103, 104, 292 
— criminal—102-03, 178, 187, 
208-11 
— Prussian—183, 226, 250-52, 290, 
318, 331, 342, 431 
— public—103, 104 
See also Right, rights 
Lazzaroni—  325,  142, 259 
Legislation—171,  299 
Legitimism—147, 380 
See also Monarchy 
Liberalism—  28, 87, 289, 329, 378, 445, 
483-84 
Liberty, civil—  258,  264, 437, 503-04 
Liege money—117, 293 
Literature— 153, 372, 422 
Loans— 280, 319, 320, 483-84 
Logic— 59, 60, 113, 114, 243, 298, 302 
Lombardy and Venice—377 
London— 49 
London Communist Educational Society of 
German Workers (1840-1918) — 572 
Lorraine—423 
Luddites— 297 
Lumpenproletariat —25, 142, 505 
M 
Machinery— 573 
Malmö, negotiations and armistice—253-
55, 266-70, 287, 382, 411-14, 424, 425, 
434-35,  439, 440, 442, 446-47, 577-78 
Malthusianism—282, 573 
Materialism, English—405 
Material relations 
— as economic relations — 51 
— as basis of political system — 335 
— material conditions of life — 495 
Mercantile system—470 
Military, the— 77, 197, 203, 261, 353, 
376, 387, 430, 438, 445 
Military  art—161,  164 
Mines, demand for their nationalisation— 3 
Mode of production—495 

=====第739页=====
Subject Index 709 
Moldavia  ( Moldova)  — 311 
Monarchy—116, 468 
— bourgeois — 494 
— bureaucratic —  36, 47, 205 
See also Monarchy, absolute; Monarchy, 
constitutional 
Monarchy, absolute—  26, 39, 63, 165, 202, 
205, 257, 262, 308, 353, 378, 386, 
494 
— in Prussia and Germany—32, 55, 
74, 80, 115, 202, 205, 234, 257, 
262, 345-46,  350-51,  401, 503-04 
See also Despotism 
Monarchy, constitutional—116, 204, 445, 
476-77,  481, 484, 494 
— in France —  481,  494 
— in Prussia  —37,  70, 74, 77, 116, 
258. 401, 430, 476-77 
Money, money circulation—4, 223, 225, 
279, 322, 469-71 
Monopoly 
— political  —298,  299, 473 
— of capital —299 
Morality, morals— 75, 81, 318, 324, 495 
Moravia— 339 
Mortgage—  467-71,  521, 523 
N 
Napoleonic wars—  42, 98, 131, 135, 308, 
342-43,  380-81,  396, 425, 520 
— and England —308 
— and Germany—98, 290, 308-09, 
425 
— and Russia — 308 
See also Vienna Congress of 1814-15 
Nation, nationality 
— distinct language —339, 372, 375 
— national character —  344-45,  423 
— revolutionary — 92 
— absorption of weaker by stronger 
nationalities — 372-73 
— national feelings — 495 
National debt— 54, 224, 319-20 
National guard in France—124-27, 130-
31, 136, 140, 142-43, 153, 154, 161, 
478 
— in Naples —24-25 
Nationalisation in programme of  democratic 
revolution— 3-4 Nationalism, nationalist ideology—504 
See also Scandinavia, Scandinavianism 
National liberation war of 1848-49 in 
Hungary—503 
National question—92, 166, 351 
— national oppression, its social roots 
and consequences —  92, 165-66, 
196-98,  212-13, 350, 351, 353, 369 
— fomenting of national hatred by 
ruling classes —  65, 104-05, 165-
66, 212, 342, 400 
— liberation of oppressed nations as 
component part of struggle for 
démocratisation —11,  92, 166-67, 
212-13,  350-52, 363, 375, 387, 403, 
424, 564 
— independence and equality of 
nations as condition for working 
class'  liberation— 166-67 
— and bourgeoisie—166, 349, 402-
03 
— and working class —166-67, 403, 
565 
— and proletarian  party—11,  212 
National workshops—4, 68, 148, 580 
Natural science—488 
Nineteenth century—299 
Nobility— 153, 275, 343, 351, 353, 363, 
369, 371, 373, 380 
— its world outlook — 372 
— in bourgeois society — 56, 380 
— German  —55,  56, 77, 118, 234, 
262, 291-95, 425, 431, 445 
— Prussian junkers — 74, 117, 327, 
343-44, 351, 354, 368-70, 400, 412, 
427, 448 
— and Polish question —  343-45,  354 
Normans— 372, 422 
Norwegians— 422-24 
P 
Palatinate, the—330 
Pandours— 109 
Panellation—  343,  344, 468,521 
See also Mortgage 
Paris—  49, 142, 153, 465-67, 512-14 
Parliament—?,, 49-50, 174, 187, 193, 
204, 227, 322, 324, 381, 437-38 
Parliament, British—  61, 193, 216, 227, 
381 

=====第740页=====
710 Subject Index 
Party, political  —27,  75, 81, 400 
Party, proletarian—297, 575 
Patriotism—116, 166, 167, 236, 242, 
279-80, 286, 494-95 
Pauperism— 116, 259, 296, 321, 333-35, 
482,  483 
Peasantry— 354, 396 
— serfs —260, 328 
— in feudal society — 3-4, 353 
— in bourgeois revolution—119, 
291-95,  444, 519-23 
— under capitalism — 469 
— peasant democracy — 363-65 
— their conservatism — 519-23 
— small peasants —  4, 330 
— and bourgeoisie — 519-22 
— and Bonapartist demagogy — 520, 
522 
See also Burdens imposed upon  peasants; 
Peasants, French; Peasants, German 
Peasants, French—  294,  330, 351,  519-21, 
522, 525 
Peasants, German—3, 4, 51, 117-18, 275, 
328-32,  342, 343, 344 
Peasants' anti-feudal movements during 
1848 revolution— 117, 118, 444 
People, popular masses—79, 119, 375, 
387, 564 
— as decisive force in revolu­
tion—16,  73-74, 77, 79, 89, 96, 
97-100, 118, 128, 136, 144-45, 149, 
166, 169, 180, 212, 238, 262, 294, 
430, 437, 438, 444, 488, 496-97, 
504, 570 
— popular sovereignty, rule of the 
people—11,  16, 62, 73, 103, 245, 
312, 376, 428 
Pest— 339 
Petty bourgeoisie— 300, 339, 423, 432, 
445, 518-19 
— German —4, 73-74, 274, 339-40, 
344, 443 
— French — 513 
Piedmont—see Sardinia (Piedmont) 
Pits, demand for their nationalisation—3 
Poland—  350, 351, 373, 375 
— population  —65,  339, 340 
— Polish nation  —350-51,  366, 372-
73, 499 
— social and political system —  351, 
363 
— economy —339, 356, 357 — agriculture — 363 
— handicrafts, manufacture — 340 
— landownership—357 
— serfdom — 356, 363 
— aristocracy —  351,  355, 363 
— nobility —342-44, 351, 353, 357, 
363, 369, 373 
— peasants —342, 343, 351,354, 357, 
363, 364 
— historical development — 339-40, 
351, 373 
— partitions of Poland —  64-65,  166, 
196, 337-38,  340-41,  346, 348-54, 
361, 363 
— Constitution of 1791—351, 372 
— and national question — 339-41 
— classes, class struggle —  351,  375 
— revolutionary, democratic move­
ments—312, 350, 351, 363 
— participation of Poles in European 
revolutionary movement — 499 
— interconnection between national 
and social questions — 350, 351, 
352, 363, 366, 373, 375, 425 
— agrarian revolution as precondi­
tion for success of national move­
ment—351,  363, 364, 375 
— upsurge of liberation movement as 
a result of Prussia's defeat in 
1806 — 342 
— uprising of 1830-31 — 147, 196, 
311, 351 
— emigration — 375 
— oppression and robbery by Ger­
man ruling classes — 92, 104-05, 
166, 196, 212, 258, 337-53, 354-57, 
367, 435 
See also Bourgeoisie, Polish; Cracow, 
Cracow Republic {1846); Polish question; 
Posen 
Police—111,  437 
Polish question—  11, 166, 345, 350, 352, 
363, 373, 379, 564 
Politics— 148, 210, 363, 377, 381, 395, 
444, 488 
Portugal— 165, 311, 511 
Posen— 47, 197, 338, 344, 356, 358, 361, 
363 
— Prussian colonisation — 342-43, 
349, 357, 369 
— Posen question in 1848-49 revolu­
tion—64-65,  104-05, 195-98. 200. 

=====第741页=====
Subject Index 711 
201, 203-04, 210, 259, 311, 337-38, 
339-43,  344-50, 352-76, 379-81 
— uprising of 1848—65, 104-05, 107, 
196, 200, 201, 215, 312, 320, 346, 
351, 376 
— reprisals of Prussian authorities 
against Polish insurgents—  180-81, 
196, 251, 312, 345 
— reorganisation of Posen — 64-65, 
104-05,  345, 348, 349, 354 
— proletarian party's stand on Posen 
question —212, 350, 352, 366 
See also Convention of Jaroslawiec 
Practice— 345 
Prague uprising in July 1848—91-93, 
107, 119-20, 212, 271, 313, 376, 421, 
444 
Preparliament—18, 68, 234, 239, 310, 
408, 564 
Press, the 
— its essence and social role—187, 
252 
— freedom  of—15,  20, 27, 73, 77, 
248, 250, 251, 397, 437, 443, 
486-88 
— democratic—129, 147, 167, 314 
— of proletarian party—575 
— Neue Rheinische Zeitung, organ of 
democracy—11-12, 129, 143-49, 
163-64, 167, 271, 337, 364, 365, 
496, 592 
— police persecutions—186, 188, 
208-11,  383-84, 390-94, 455, 456, 
485-89,  554, 555, 560, 566, 576, 
590, 592 
Principles and practice—28 
Privileges— 245, 260, 274, 275, 291, 293, 
309, 321, 331, 477 
Production—3 
Production costs—477, 573 
Progress—  293,  350, 423 
Property—292-95, 297, 322-24, 329, 
468-69 
See also Landed property 
Proprietors (small) in countryside—274 
Protectionism—297, 299 
Proudhonism, Proudhonists— 321 -24 
Provence— 372-73 
Prussia— 336, 424 
— Prussianism —20, 70, 74, 78-79, 
241, 258-59, 274, 275, 337-59, 361, 
363, 367, 431, 435, 567 
— history — 94 — during the French revolution of 
1789-94 and Napoleonic wars — 
94, 290, 342 
— reforms of 1807-11 — 118, 328 
— between 1815 and 1847—311,339 
— survivals of feudalism—117-18, 
262, 290-95, 327-32, 408, 409 
— political system and constitu­
tion—89,  170, 202, 203, 204-05, 
235, 248, 261, 332, 350, 400, 409, 
435 
— rule of the military, militar­
ism—85-86, 258, 260, 262, 264, 
284, 355 
— legislation  —73.  94, 97, 118, 171, 
258-59,  274, 275, 318, 328, 332, 
408, 409 
— bureaucracy, officialdom — 74, 77, 
104, 122, 200, 202-04, 209, 210, 
236, 251, 259, 261, 274-76, 283, 
342, 346, 354-56, 374, 383 
— corruption — 122 
— police system— 171, 248, 326, 392, 
409 
— finance, budget, taxes —  55, 219, 
224-25,  296, 320, 326, 416 
— District and Provincial Estates 
(diets) —274, 275 
— electoral rights — 408 
— question of Constitution —  73, 205, 
311, 474 
— the press  —73,  239, 309, 314 
— petty bourgeoisie — 260, 274 
— peasantry—117-18, 328-32, 343-
44 
— and Germany  —77,  235, 242, 286, 
383, 400-01,  414, 425, 439, 477 
— claims to hegemony in Ger­
many— 235 
— and Poland —92, 166, 259, 320, 
337-51,  354-58, 361, 363, 367, 373, 
435 
— and Russia—115-16, 311, 350, 
356, 446 
See also Berlin; Prussian National 
Assembly of 1848,Rhine  Province;  Schles­
wig-Holstein question; Seehandlung 
Prussian National Assembly of 1848 
— Right  —53,  59-60, 68, 85-86, 99, 
182, 183-85, 187-88, 190, 191, 192. 
207, 230, 233, 241, 427-29, 430 
— Left Centre and Right Centre — 

=====第742页=====
712 Subject Index 
107, 111, 174, 179, 183-85, 188, 
191, 193, 417-19, 436-38, 466 
— Left  —75,  76, 78, 99, 188, 193, 
199, 233, 240, 417-19, 436-38 
— Agreement Assembly, theory of 
agreement with the Crown—36-38, 
45, 53-57,  59-61,  65, 66-72, 73-75, 
76, 78, 83, 89, 96, 97, 117, 170, 
180, 189, 194, 195, 199, 200, 216, 
223, 232, 250, 273, 301, 428, 429, 
431, 432, 466 
Publicity— 209, 270, 325 
Punishment— 318, 404-06 
See also Crime 
R 
Railways, demand for their nationalisa­
tion—  4 
Reaction— 379, 387, 480 
Red flag— 131, 133, 235, 432, 444 
Reform— 3-4, 39, 324 
Reformation (in Germany) — 339 
Religion—324 
Rent of land—3, 322, 329, 469 
Repealers (in Ireland) — 68 
Republic 
— as form of state organisation— 149 
— of nobles —372 
— bourgeois, democratic —  3, 51, 
116, 144-47, 149, 164,. 234-35, 386, 
432, 469, 481, 484, 488 
— proletarian ("red")—144, 440, 
505, 586 
— social  —403,  522, 586 
Republicanism, republican movement— 
144-48,  444-45, 481, 488, 493, 495 
Revolution— 118, 127, 237, 480, 523, 573 
See also Revolution, agrarian; Revolu­
tion, bourgeois; Revolution, permanent; 
Revolution, proletarian; Revolution, 
social 
Revolution, agrarian—351, 363, 373 
Revolution, bourgeois—16, 39, 90, 98, 
233, 431, 444, 496-97 
— significance — 494 
— motive forces  —73,  262, 494 
— and working class — 3-4, 147, 403, 
494, 522, 595 
— task of proletarian party — 3-4, 
535, 594, 597 — and the state—167 
— and survivals of feudalism in coun­
tryside—89, 117-18, 290-95, 327-
32 
— need for uniting democrats — 556-
57, 592 
— as preparation of conditions for 
proletarian revolution — 4, 494 
— and peasantry—117-18, 291, 295, 
351, 519, 520, 522 
See also Bourgeoisie; Class Struggle; 
Revolution, social 
Revolution, permanent—3-4, 73-75, 444 
Revolution, proletarian—128, 147, 444 
— its historical necessity—148-49 
— proletarian uprising as highest 
form of class struggle—152-53, 
297 
— its radical difference from 
bourgeois revolution —  130-31, 
147-48,  444 
— as culmination of permanent rev­
olution—  4, 444 
— and need for revolutionary vio­
lence— 505 
— its humane character—139 
See also Class struggle; June uprising of 
Paris proletariat in 1848; Revolution, 
social 
Revolution, social—152, 573 
Revolutionary adventurism—8, 10, 404, 
405, 487-89 
Revolution in France. Second Republic 
(1848-57) — 128, 147, 488 
— February revolution of 1848—68, 
117, 128, 131, 137-38, 143, 144, 
148, 429, 493, 513, 521 
— Provisional Government—124, 
148, 202,  377-81,  473, 556 
— Luxembourg Commission—124 
— Executive Committee—144 
— national guard — 121 
— national workshops—124, 148, 
517 
— popular uprising on May 15, 
1848 — 513 
— mobile guard—125 
— municipal guard of republic— 126 
— dictatorship of Cavaignac (moder­
ate republicans) —  402,  440-41, 
444-45,  458, 473, 513-14 

=====第743页=====
Subject Index 713 
— National Assembly  —68,  69, 138, 
148, 149, 440 
— Odilon Barrot Ministry — 480 
— National party (moderate republi­
cans)—168,  481 
— Réforme party (Mountain of 
1848)  —375,  478, 493-95, 522 
— petty-bourgeois Utopian socialist 
trends —321-24 
— bourgeoisie —68-69, 128, 378, 
379, 479-81,  503-04 
— and working class, its role in rev­
olution—403,  570 
' — and peasantry —519-20, 520-23 
— lumpenproletariat—142, 505 
— foreign policy of Second Repub­
lic—110, 402, 480-81 
— influence on European coun­
tries—403,  441, 443, 445 
— and prospects for revolution's de­
velopment—440-41, 499, 505 
See also June uprising of Paris proletariat 
in 1848; Proudhonism, Proudhonists 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Austrian Empire 
— uprising in Vienna on March 13, 
1848—13,  440, 491 
— revolutionary action of Viennese 
on May 15 and 26, 1848 —  79, 119, 
120, 457 
— revolutionary action of Viennese 
on August 23, 1848 — 402, 477, 
571 
— camarilla —498-99, 504 
— development of class contradic­
tions — 444 
— bourgeoisie —442, 457, 496-97, 
503-04, 570, 598 
— peasantry — 505 
— working class — 570, 572 
— students — 503 
_ army  —91-93,  119-20, 376, 387, 
396 
— national guard — 503 
— liberal Government — 92-93 
— Imperial Diet—79, 503, 570 
— national question  —92-93,  119-20, 
396, 503-06 
— and  Italy—41,  92, 136, 376, 385-
87, 395-97, 402-03, 427, 457, 487, 
496 
— and Hungary  —457-58,  496, 498-
99, 503 — and Slavs —474, 498-99, 504. 505 
— and Poles — 501 
— and Czechs  —91-93,  107, 119-20, 
212, 271, 313, 376, 421, 444, 457, 
498, 504 
— and Russian Tsarism —  313,  505 
See also Austro-Italian war of 1848-49; 
Vienna Uprising in October 1848 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Europe—441, 
445 
— its preconditions and character — 
445 
— its beginning—26 
— conditions for its victory — 403 
— and working class — 443-44 
— counter-revolution and reac­
tion—376, 403, 443-45, 472-73, 
503-05 
— and Russia  —93,  104-05, 107, 112, 
115-16,  212, 307-13, 351-58 
— and England—108, 377 
— and world war  —93,  116, 212-13, 
237-38,  352-53, 421-22 
— and shedding of democratic delu­
sions—-131 
— and destinies of Utopian social­
ism—147 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Germany— 
294 
— its preconditions — 73-75 
— March revolution—16, 117-18, 
248, 253, 294, 377, 395, 407, 408, 
409, 445, 474, 476, 489, 494, 504 
— adventurist march of German le­
gion—8,  10, 487-89 
— bourgeoisie's position —  40, 108, 
262, 288-89, 293, 425, 444, 496 
— big bourgeoisie's policy — 74, 77, 
108 
— liberals in power  —28,  344-50, 414 
— role of working class in its develop­
ment—47, 271, 272, 462-64, 535-
36, 572, 595, 596 
— and peasantry — 294, 440, 441 
— and peasant movement — 308,440, 
441 
— and liberals' agrarian policy — 441 
-— and petty bourgeoisie—19, 273 
— and national policy of German 
governments —82, 166-67,212-13, 
409-12 
— and national unification of the 

=====第744页=====
714 Subject Index 
country  —3,  51, 116, 233-38, 287, 
399-400, 464 
— and Poland  —64-65,  92, 196, 212, 
272, 339-80, 409-13, 419-23, 499, 
562, 564-65 
— and national movement in Schles­
wig-Holstein— 42, 253-55, 265-68, 
419-23,  437 
— influence of workers' June uprising 
in Paris—152-56, 170 
— influence of October uprising in 
Vienna  —458-59,  470-71, 473, 
490-92,  496, 499, 504, 505 
— and Russia —53-54, 90, 106, 110, 
115-16,  212, 306-12, 350-52, 422 
— and England — 422 
— and Italy —92, 109-10 
— and Prussia's role—115-16, 236, 
266-67,  273-74, 285, 236-37, 382-
83, 398-400, 409-13, 419, 423 
— counter-revolutionary offensive — 
15, 16-18, 20-23, 28, 68, 240, 
248-49,  287-88, 351, 353, 402, 
425-26,  429, 441, 442, 443, 455, 
470-71,  503 
— causes for revolutionary forces' de­
feat—294, 438, 441-43, 455 
See also Baden republican uprising 
(April 1848); Communist League;  Fed­
eral Diet; Frankfurt National Assembly; 
Preparliament; Revolution of 1848-49 in 
Austrian Empire; Revolution of 1848-49 
in Prussia; Schleswig-Holstein question 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Hungary—457-
58, 473, 496, 498-500, 503, 505 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Prussia 
— its preconditions — 73-75 
— March revolution—16, 27, 31, 36, 
39-40,  45, 71-78,  80-81,  89, 97, 
179, 202, 209-12, 240, 294, 302, 
307, 318, 399-404, 422, 463, 515 
— Berlin uprising of March 18, 
1848 — 399-401 
— Mainz incident— 17-19, 20-23, 249 
— storming of Berlin arsenal (June 
14, 1848)—89, 96-100, 400 
— bourgeoisie's position —  28, 40, 
74, 80, 107, 108, 262, 294, 427, 
431 
— big bourgeoisie's policy—55, 73-
75, 77, 85 
— liberals in power  —30-33,  36-40, 42-45,  53-55, 66-67, 82, 85-86, 
96-97,  107-08, 111-12, 118, 170-74, 
176, 187-94, 199, 216-22, 226-31, 
250-52,  256-65, 278-86, 290-94, 
316-20, 329, 417-21, 427-33, 436-
38, 466 
— Camphausen Ministry — 30-40,43-
45, 57, 62-63, 66-67, 73-75, 79-80, 
89, 96-97, 104-08, 194, 202, 419, 
. 431-32, 466 
— Hansemann-Auerswald Ministry— 
111, 112, 170-76, 179-85, 194-95, 
199, 201-07, 216-22, 257, 259, 
261, 265, 275-76, 277, 279-81, 
284-86,  291-92, 317-18, 320, 382, 
416, 417-19 
— Pfuel Ministry  —448,  466, 473, 
476-77 
— role of working class in its develop­
ment—46, 271, 272, 462-64, 535-
36, 572-95, 596 
— and peasantry —  295,  320 
— and peasant movement—118,291, 
292, 293, 309, 432 
— liberals' agrarian policy —  89, 117-
18, 290-95, 327-32 
— nobility, junkerdom — 97-100, 
107, 108, 262, 289, 425, 427, 431, 
458 
— and Rhine Province —  399-401, 
567 
— and Poland —47, 57-58, 92, 104-
05, 107, 195, 196, 197, 198, 200-03, 
210, 212, 259, 311, 319-20, 341-81, 
435 
— and national movement in Schles­
wig-Holstein— 42-44, 266-69, 411-
15, 421-25, 435, 439 
— influence of Vienna uprising — 
390-91,  475, 477, 499, 500 
— counter-revolutionary offensive — 
15, 17-18, 20-23, 28, 45, 46-47, 
68-71,  74, 94-95, 107-08, 112, 
177-79,  186-88, 194, 208-11, 250-
52, 274, 275, 355, 383-84, 393-94, 
420, 426-28, 430-33, 458, 473, 474, 
499, 504, 505 
— events in Cologne in September 
1848 —  427-28,  *450-55, 462-65, 
591 
— and the Prussian military—17-19, 
20-23,  46, 47,  69-71,  104-05, 107, 

=====第745页=====
Subject Index 715 
166, 180-81,  183-84, 227-30, 257-
58, 400, 442, 443 
— and demand for refusal to pay 
taxes —286, 416, 477 
See also Cologne Workers' Associa­
tion: Democratic Society in Cologne; 
Prussian National Assembly of 1848; 
United Diet 
Revolutions of 1848-49 in Italian states 
— tasks—11,  167, 387, 403 
— and lumpenproletariat —  25, 143, 
259 
— in the Two Sicilies — 24, 26, 68, 
473, 480 
— in Lombardy and Venice—109, 
110, 386, 397, 487 
— events in Milan—130, 136, 376, 
385, 387, 395, 396, 481 
— and Charles Albert's policy —  41, 
385-89,  395-96, 402 
— in Tuscany—385 
— in papal state — 385 
— in Parma and Modena — 386-87 
— and Europe —402-03 
— and Austria—136, 376, 395-97, 
402 
— and England —402, 480, 481 
— and Germany  —92,  109-10, 167, 
212, 395-98, 403, 421, 424 
— and German people—11, 167 
— influence of Vienna uprising in 
October 1848 —  457,  473, 487, 496 
— and France  —25,  26, 110, 402, 
403, 480, 481 
See also Austro-Italian war of 1848-49; 
Lazzaroni 
Rhine Province—  71, 122, 290, 309, 317, 
325, 330, 342, 367, 390-92, 401, 500, 
558, 567 
Right, rights 
— feudal—118, 292, 293, 295 
— bourgeois  —293,  330 
— historical—355, 370, 379, 380 
— patrimonial — 4, 520 
— right to property —  292-95,  520 
— of citizenship — 407-09 
— of historical evolution — 423 
— of association —73-74, 239, 248, 
288, 289 
— electoral  —3,  408, 424 
— political — 257 
See also Law, laius Right to  work—  321-24 
Rome, ancient—  33, 75, 130, 142, 153, 
235, 259, 304 
Russia 
— internal situation, home poli­
cy—53,  312 
— foreign policy, diplomacy — 308, 
350, 505 
— and Austria — 350 
— and England —379, 424 
— and Germany  —34,  51, 68, 90, 
104-05,  107, 110, 112, 166, 191, 
212, 237-38, 307-13, 345, 351-53, 
425 
— and Prussia—115-16, 356, 425, 
432 
See also Holy Alliance; Napoleonic  wars; 
Slavs, Slavonic question; Tsarism 
S 
Sanfedists— 25 
Sardinia (Piedmont) —  41, 385-89, 395-
96, 402 
Scandinavia, Scandinavianism— 422-23 
Schleswig-Holstein — 424 
Schleswig-Holstein question—377, 424, 
446, 577-78 
Schools, educational system—357 
Science—  3, 144, 152, 156, 323, 324 
Scotland—  329-30 
Seehandlung —54, 55-56, 229 
Serfdom— 118, 153, 245, 260, 292, 293, 
294, 328, 329, 330, 350, 363, 519 
Sicilies, the Two (Naples) — 24, 26, 68-69, 
473, 480 
Silesia— 117, 328 
Slav Congress in Prague—91 
Slavery— 130, 153, 259 
Slavs, Slavonic question—351-53, 373 
— peculiarities of socio-economic de­
velopment—338, 375 
— revolutionary-democratic move­
ment—91-93,  107, 119-20, 212, 
271, 313, 376, 421, 444, 498 
— conservative national movements— 
474 
— assimilation and centralisation — 
93 
See also Colonisation of Slav lands by 
Germans; Poland 

=====第746页=====
716 Subject Index 
Slovanskâ Lipa —498 
Socialism, Utopian— 147, 298 
See also Proudhonism, Proudhonists; 
Weitling's principles 
Social relations—342, 363 
— and production —  470,  495 
— and property relations — 469 
— and classes, relations between 
classes — 495 
— and family relations — 519 
— and social consciousness —  494, 
495 
— their historical character — 468 
— bourgeois —468-70, 494-95 
Society, bourgeois— 108, 139, 147-49, 152, 
153, 279, 297, 303, 444, 471, 506 
See also Social relations 
Society of the Rights of Man and the 
Citizen—133 
Sonderbund — 396 
Sophistry— 196 
Southern French, the—372 
Spain 
— geographical position and natural 
conditions — 511 
— finance — 224 
— classes and class struggle — 380 
— history—135, 166, 311 
— and France—135, 166 
— and Germany—165 
— and Russia — 311 
See also Castilia 
Sparta— 512 
Speculative ideas (speculative philosophy) — 
486 
State, the—  3, 4, 20, 73, 171, 229, 234, 
248, 261, 279, 280,  281, 401,  410, 432, 
437, 445 
— and society — 471 
— and class struggle—151 
— and revolution  —201,  204-05, 428, 
444 
— bourgeois  state—151,  167, 202, 
203-06,  279, 297, 330,  430-31,  477 
State power— 204, 432 
State property—3-4 
Stock Exchange— 223-25, 279 
Strikes and strike movement—297 
Strikes as form of proletarian class 
struggle—297 
Svornost— 213 
Swedes—422 Switzerland—  25, 26, 165, 235, 377, 527 
See also Sonderbund 
T 
Tariffs—  299,  334, 377, 378, 573 
Tax«—3,  118, 283, 286, 323, 416, 469, 
477, 573 
Tenant system, tenant farmers—3, 521 
Ten-hour working day—299 
Territorial question (dispute over fron­
tiers)—  340, 346 
Terror— 432 
— revolutionary — 506 
— in French Revolution of 1789-
94_376,  405-06, 520 
— of ruling classes—138, 505 
Theory of agreement (of Prussian liber­
als)—  62-63,  72-75, 77-79, 83, 107-08, 
430-33 
Thirty Years' War— 120, 202, 212, 237, 
238, 346 
Tithes—  3, 309 
Town and country—46, 56, 65, 235, 268, 
275, 339, 340, 353, 520, 527-29 
Trades—  65, 331, 338 
Trade unions in England—297 
Transport, demand for its nationalisa­
tion—  4 
Trier—171 
Trieste— 109 
Truth—156 
Tsarism— 54, 166, 308, 311, 349-50 
Turkey— 307 
Tyrol— 397 
U 
United Diet—  32-33,  36-37, 39, 74, 220, 
238, 311, 422, 429 
Universal suffrage—3, 48, 424 
Uprising, armed—144, 163, 164 
See also June uprising of Paris  proletariat 
in 1848 
Usury— 330 
V 
Vienna Congress of 1814-15—  338,  339, 
343, 380, 565 

=====第747页=====
Subject Index 717 
Vienna uprising in October 1848—457-
58, 472-73, 477, 480, 487, 490-92, 
496-505,  595, 598 
W 
Wage labour—573 
Wages— 573 
Wallachia— 311 
Wars 
— and bourgeoisie — 414-15 
— and revolution — 237, 424, 444 
— and working class —  421,  424 
— revolutionary wars—147. 200, 
237, 297, 352, 414, 421 
— civil wars—147, 200, 237, 297, 
352, 404, 405 
— national liberation wars—352 
— wars of conquest, aggressive 
wars —339 
— colonial wars—161 
— and revolutions of 1848—47, 50-
51, 116, 237, 239, 352-53, 379, 
424, 428, 432 
See also Austro-Italian war of 1848-49; 
Danish-Prussian war of 1848-50  \ 
Napoleonic wars; Wars of First French 
Republic 
Wars against Albigenses (1209-29) — 372 
Warsaw— 339 
Wars of First French Republic—42, 1'65, 
396, 404, 425, 520 
Weitling's principles—558-59 
Wends—  82, 497, 500 
Workers' Congress (Berlin, August-
September 1848) — 271 Working class—4, 518, 573 
— monopoly of capital as main cause 
of its struggle against 
bourgeoisie — 299 
— significance of its concentration in 
industrial centres — 296 
— as motive force of revolution — 73, 
74, 143, 147, 444, 494, 521 
— and national liberation move­
ment—11,  166-67 
— and peasantry — 523 
Working class of Austria—457 
Working class of Belgium—334 
Working  class  of Bohemia— 119 
Working class of  England—  296-98 
Working class of France— 132, 133, 140, 
141, 143, 148, 149, 163-64, 297, 493, 
495, 513, 517 
Working class of Germany—4, 73-74, 
166-67,  271, 426, 573, 595 
Working class of Prussia—84-86, 260, 
274, 500 
Working-class movement in Austria—401 
Working-class movement in Bohemia—91-
93, 107, 119-20, 212, 271, 313, 376, 
421, 444, 457, 498, 504 
Working-class movement in England  — 
297-99 
See also Chartism; Luddites; Trade 
unions in England 
Working-class movement in France—130-
31, 158, 298 
Working-class movement in Germany—47, 
89, 271, 289, 580 
World market—224 
Y 
Youth,  bourgeois— 144, 334, 335, 513 

=====第748页=====
